21492316
Treatment of Multiple Periungual Pyogenic Granulomata from Pincer Nails with Pulsed Dye Laser.
The authors have indicated no significant interest with commercial supporters.

21482534
Oral Ivermectin is more effective than topical malathion in difficult-to-treat head lice infestation.


20666192
Type B follicular lymphomatoid papulosis.
We report a 48-year-old woman who presented with waxing and waning papulovesicles of 4 years' duration. Histologic examination revealed a folliculotropic, small cell dominant, T cell lymphocytic infiltrate unaccompanied by follicular mucin deposition and with scattered intrafollicular and perifollicular CD30+ cells. A diagnosis of type B follicular lymphomatoid papulosis (LyP), rather than mycosis fungoides (MF), was made on the basis of her clinical presentation, which included spontaneously resolving, waxing and waning papules that healed with scarring. Type B follicular LyP is a rare form of LyP.

20404225
Treatment of porokeratosis of mibelli with combined use of photodynamic therapy and Fluorouracil cream.


18717607
Cosmetic acceptability of six 40-50% urea preparations: a single-blind, pilot study.
Urea 40-50% is widely used in the treatment of hyperkeratotic dermatoses. Compliance with topical therapy is directly related to the esthetic and sensory acceptability of a topical agent. To assess the spreadability, odor, and post-application residue of 0.1 mL of six different urea 40-50% preparations administered in single-blind fashion to 12 trained female panelists. Spreadability was assessed at time 0, and odor and residue were assessed at 30 minutes post-application. The scores for a novel emollient preparation were compared with the composite scores of five existing preparations. The novel emollient preparation was found to be the most spreadable and to leave the least residue. Odor scores were comparable and low overall. Urea 40-50% preparations may vary considerably in odor, spreadability, and post-application residue. The novel emollient preparation was the most cosmetically acceptable.

18405792
Assessing retinol stability in a hydroquinone 4%/retinol 0.3% cream in the presence of antioxidants and sunscreen under simulated-use conditions: a pilot study.
Retinol (ie,vitamin A) is commonly used in dermatology as an adjunct to treat rhytids, acne,and dyschromia. However, vitamin A and many of its derivatives have poor photostability and are unstable in the presence of oxygen. We aimed to assess the stability of retinol under simulated patient application conditions in a commercially available hydroquinone 4% cream containing retinol 0.3%, avobenzone (ultraviolet-A sunscreen), octinoxate (ultraviolet-B sunscreen), vitamins C and E (antioxidants), and moisturizers. One gram of the preparation was applied as a thin film to the inside base of 4 groups of four 100-mL wide-mouthed beakers, incubated in a 37+/-2 degrees C water bath. Each experimental group consisted of 4 beakers for assays at 0.5,1,2,and 4 hours. The samples were exposed to varying combinations of full spectrum light and headspace gas (air or inert nitrogen gas [N2 ]). Retinol content was assayed via high-pressure liquid chromatography using a 1:9 water:methanol solvent system. The control group (group 5) was not exposed to full-spectrum light or headspace gas but served for comparative purposes. On exposure to light and room air, retinol stability was 94.4% at 0.5 hour, 94.8% at 1 hour, 92.4% at 2 hours, and 91.5% at 4 hours. The retinol contained in the preparation was stable for >or=4 hours. Samples exposed to light and N 2 gas demonstrated 96.5% and 91.3% stability at 0.5 hour and 4 hours exposure times, respectively. Samples that were not exposed to light had a stability of 99.2% (group 3, exposed to air) and 96.9% (group 4, exposed to N(2)) of the initial retinol present after 4 hours. The retinol in the hydroquinone 4%/ retinol 0.3% cream with antioxidants and sunscreens underwent <10% degradation under simulated-use conditions, including exposure to UV light, oxygen, and body temperature.

17473098
Therapy for head lice based on life cycle, resistance, and safety considerations.
The timing of head lice maturation most favorable to their survival in the presence of anti-lice agents is the maximum time as an ovum (12 days) and the shortest possible time of maturing from newly hatched nymph to egg-laying adult (8.5 days). Pediculicides that are not reliably ovicidal (pyrethroids and lindane) require 2 to 3 treatment cycles to eradicate lice. Ovicidal therapies (malathion) require 1 to 2 treatments. Treatment with an agent to which there is genetic resistance is unproductive. In the United States, lice have become increasingly resistant to pyrethroids and lindane but not to malathion. Treatment with malathion has favorable efficacy and safety profiles and enables the immediate, safe return to school. Nit combing can be performed adjunctively. No-nit policies should be rendered obsolete.

17467115
The safety of hydroquinone: a dermatologist's response to the 2006 Federal Register.
Recently, the US Food and Drug Administration proposed a ban on over-the-counter hydroquinone mainly on the basis of high absorption, reports of exogenous ochronosis in humans, and murine hepatic adenomas, renal adenomas, and leukemia with large doses over extended time periods. Systemic exposure to hydroquinone from routine topical application is no greater than that from quantities present in common foods. While murine hepatic adenomas increased, murine hepatocellular carcinomas decreased, suggesting a protective effect. Renal tumors are sex, species, and age specific and therefore do not appear relevant to humans after decades of widespread use. Murine leukemia has not been reproducible and would not be expected from small topical doses. Finally, a literature review of exogenous ochronosis and clinical studies employing hydroquinone (involving over 10,000 exposures under careful clinical supervision) reveal an incidence of exogenous ochronosis in the United States of 22 cases in more than 50 years. Therefore, the proposed ban appears to be unnecessarily extreme.

