21225816
Traumatic wound breakdown following baha™ implant.
To highlight the importance of recognizing and managing severe peri-operative and post-operative soft tissue complications of baha™ osseointegrated implants. To discuss a patient with severe post-traumatic peri-operative and post-operative scalp complications following baha™ surgery, including management options. STUDY DEsign: Case report and literature review of post-operative soft tissue complications of baha™ osseointegrated implants. METHODS (CASE SUMMARY): A patient presented with a severe right sided mixed hearing loss and was treated with a baha™ osseointegrated implant. Post-operatively, the patient suffered trauma to the site and developed a severe traumatic wound infection, with complete dehiscence of the split thickness skin graft. The patient was treated with oral antibiotics and meticulous, aggressive local wound care. Operative management was considered but not implemented. Full healing with ability to use the device successfully was achieved. The patient healed completely and did not require revision surgery. He now has serviceable hearing after benefiting from the baha™ implant. Although post-operative complications following baha™ surgery are infrequent and commonly mild, the surgeon will rarely be encountered by a severe soft tissue complication as described. Aggressive local wound care included culture-guided antibiotic therapy is indicated prior to performing revision surgery.

21225806
Neuromonics™ Tinnitus Treatment: preliminary experience in a private practice setting.
At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to identify the principles behind the Neuromonics™ Tinnitus Treatment (NTT) and understand its strengths and potential shortfalls. To describe the preliminary experience and efficacy of the NTT in an independent, non-industry sponsored private otology practice clinical study. Case series with retrospective chart review and post-intervention quality of life questionnaire. Tinnitus Reaction Questionnaire (TRQ) scores, and awareness and disturbance scores, were obtained pre- and post-treatment. A posttreatment questionnaire based on the Glasgow Benefit Inventory (GBI) was conducted over the telephone. Eleven patients had completed the six-month program at the time of the study. Nine of the eleven patients completing therapy were considered "highly suitable". TRQ scores were universally improved (ranging from a 3 to 78% decrease in the TRQ score). However, only two of the seven (29%) had achieved a decrease in the TRQ score by 40% or more. Seven of ten patients (70%), and four of ten (40%) patients reported a reduction in the percentage of the time they were aware of and disturbed by their tinnitus, respectively. Eight of ten patients (80%) exhibited positive scores on the GBI (mean 17.39, median 7.81, range -3.1 to 67.6). When asked whether they thought the device was worth the cost, responses were divided equally between positive and negative responses. Neuromonics ™ Tinnitus Treatment appears to be a practical and promising treatment for tinnitus.

20489530
Successful implantation of a deep brain stimulator for essential tremor in a patient with a preexisting cochlear implant: surgical technique: technical case report.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has become routine for the treatment of Parkinson's disease and essential tremor. Because both of these disorders are common in patients older than the age of 60, neurosurgeons are likely to encounter increasing numbers of patients who require DBS surgery but who already have another electronic medical implant such as a cardiac pacemaker/defibrillator or intrathecal infusion pump, raising the concern that one device might interfere with the performance of the other. Herein we report a modification of surgical technique resulting in the successful use of thalamic DBS to treat disabling essential tremor in a man with a previously implanted cochlear implant. INTERVENTION AND TECHNIQUE: The presence of the cochlear implant necessitated a number of modifications to our standard surgical technique including surgical removal of the subgaleal magnet that holds the receiver to the scalp and the use of computed tomography instead of magnetic resonance imaging to target the thalamus. More than a year after surgery, the patient is enjoying continued tremor suppression and an enhanced quality of life. The presence of the DBS device has not interfered with the proper functioning of his cochlear implant. DBS can be used successfully in patients with a previously implanted cochlear implant. The operating neurosurgeon should be aware of the limitations of intraoperative imaging and the need to coordinate with an otologic surgeon for maximum patient benefit.

21457592
Soft tissue overgrowth in bone-anchored hearing aid patients: use of 8.5 mm abutment.
Objective:To review outcomes following implantation of an 8.5 mm bone-anchored hearing aid abutment, as regards post-operative management of scalp soft tissue overgrowth.Study design:Retrospective chart review of paediatric and adult patients implanted with bone-anchored hearing aids between 2003 and 2008 who subsequently underwent revision surgery for excessive soft tissue growth.Setting:A tertiary referral centre and a private otology and neurotology clinic.Subjects:A total of 80 patients underwent bone-anchored hearing aid placement between 2003 and 2008. Of these patients, 14 had significant scalp soft tissue overgrowth unresponsive to first-line, nonsurgical local wound care.Results:Fourteen patients underwent an average of 2.1 surgical procedures each for soft tissue overgrowth around their bone-anchored hearing aid abutment. The mean time between initial implantation and revision surgery was 13.6 months. Of these 14 patients, 11 were eventually fitted with an 8.5 mm abutment. Following placement of the longer abutment, only one patient required additional surgical reduction of soft tissue overgrowth (mean follow-up time 11.8 months). All patients were able to use their bone-anchored hearing aid.Conclusion:The 8.5 mm bone-anchored hearing aid abutment is successful in preventing the need for additional surgical intervention in the small but significant number of patients with post-implantation soft tissue overgrowth. Early consideration should be given to this option when first-line soft tissue care is inadequate.

