21563203
Carcinogen-induced hepatic tumors in KLF6+/- mice recapitulate aggressive human hepatocellular carcinoma, associated with p53 pathway deregulation.
Inactivation of KLF6 is common in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) associated with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, thereby abrogating its normal anti-proliferative activity in liver cells. The aim of the study was to evaluate the impact of KLF6 depletion on human HCC and experimental hepatocarcinogenesis in vivo. In patients with surgically resected HCC, reduced tumor expression of KLF6 was associated with decreased survival. Consistent with its role as a tumor suppressor, KLF6 +/- mice developed significantly more tumors in response to the chemical carcinogen DEN than wild type animals. Gene expression signatures in both surrounding tissue and tumors of KLF6+/- mice closely recapitulated those associated with aggressive human HCCs. Expression microarray profiling also revealed an increase in mdm2 mRNA in tumors from KLF6 +/- compared to KLF6 +/+ mice, which was validated by real-time qPCR and Western blot in both human HCC and DEN-induced murine tumors. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation and co-transfection assays established the P2 intronic promoter of mdm2 as a bona fide transcriptional target repressed by KLF6. Whereas KLF6 over-expression in HCC cell lines and primary hepatocytes led to reduced MDM2 levels and increased p53 protein and transcriptional activity, reduction in KLF6 by siRNA led to increased MDM2 and reduced p53. Conclusions: Our findings indicate that KLF6 deficiency contributes significantly to the carcinogenic milieu in human and murine HCC, and uncover a novel tumor suppressor activity of KLF6 in HCC, by linking its transcriptional repression of MDM2 to stabilizing p53. (HEPATOLOGY 2011.).

21105123
Lung adenocarcinoma: lessons in translation from bench to bedside.
Lung cancer is currently the leading cause of cancer-related death in the United States and worldwide, accounting for approximately a third of all cancer diagnoses and deaths. The American Cancer Society estimates 159,390 deaths from lung cancer in the United States for 2009 alone. The high mortality rate associated with lung cancer has prompted numerous exhaustive efforts to identify novel therapeutic targets and treatment modalities for this deadly disease. The characterization of signaling pathways underlying the development and progression of lung cancer, particularly lung adenocarcinoma, has been instrumental in developing novel therapeutic strategies to target aggressive metastatic disease. This paradigm is best illustrated in lung adenocarcinoma by recent studies of the epidermal growth factor receptor, which has been identified to be a critical diagnostic and therapeutic target. Our understanding of the central role of epidermal growth factor receptor in the development and progression of lung adenocarcinoma has led to the development of molecular agents against this key oncogene that have demonstrated significant clinical efficacy against the disease. Despite these successes, de novo or acquired resistance to these anti-epidermal growth factor receptor agents invariably develops, either through additional mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor, or abnormal regulation of downstream signaling pathways. Thus, it is necessary to further investigate the molecular determinants of treatment resistance and to develop novel therapeutic strategies directed specifically against the molecular drivers of metastatic chemoresistant lung cancer. Given the heterogeneity and convergence of signaling pathways underlying both disease etiology and chemoresistance, future efforts to administer rationally designed agents against multiple molecular targets could serve to improve both first-line and second-line therapies for patients with lung adenocarcinoma.

20563750
Loss of matrix metalloproteinase-2 amplifies murine toxin-induced liver fibrosis by upregulating collagen I expression.
Matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), a type IV collagenase secreted by activated hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), is upregulated in chronic liver disease and is considered a profibrotic mediator due to its proliferative effect on cultured HSCs and ability to degrade normal liver matrix. Although associative studies and cell culture findings suggest that MMP-2 promotes hepatic fibrogenesis, no in vivo model has definitively established a pathologic role for MMP-2 in the development and progression of liver fibrosis. We therefore examined the impact of MMP-2 deficiency on liver fibrosis development during chronic CCl(4) liver injury and explored the effect of MMP-2 deficiency and overexpression on collagen I expression. Following chronic CCl(4) administration, liver fibrosis was analyzed using Sirius Red staining with quantitative morphometry and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in MMP-2-/- mice and age-matched MMP-2+/+ controls. These studies were complemented by analyses of cultured human stellate cells. MMP-2-/- mice demonstrated an almost twofold increase in fibrosis which was not secondary to significant differences in hepatocellular injury, HSC activation or type I collagenase activity; however, type I collagen messenger RNA (mRNA) expression was increased threefold in the MMP-2-/- group by real-time PCR. Furthermore, targeted reduction of MMP-2 in cultured HSCs using RNA interference significantly increased collagen I mRNA and protein, while overexpression of MMP-2 resulted in decreased collagen I mRNA. These findings suggest that increased MMP-2 during the progression of liver fibrosis may be an important mechanism for inhibiting type I collagen synthesis by activated HSCs, thereby providing a protective rather than pathologic role.

20116377
Tumor suppressor activity of KLF6 mediated by downregulation of the PTTG1 oncogene.
The tumor suppressor Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) is frequently inactivated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To unearth downstream transcriptional targets of KLF6, cDNA microarray analysis of whole liver was compared between KLF6+/+ and KLF6+/- mice. Pituitary tumor transforming gene 1 (PTTG1), an oncogene, was the most up-regulated transcript in KLF6+/- liver. In human HCCs, KLF6 mRNA was significantly decreased, associated with increased PTTG1. In HepG2, KLF6 transcriptionally repressed PTTG1 by direct promoter interaction. Whereas KLF6 downregulation by siRNA increased HepG2 proliferation, siRNA to PTTG1 was anti-proliferative. PTTG1 downregulation represents a novel tumor suppressor pathway of KLF6.

20014424
Emerging roles of Kruppel-like factor 6 and Kruppel-like factor 6 splice variant 1 in ovarian cancer progression and treatment.
Epithelial ovarian cancer is one of the most lethal gynecologic cancers and the fifth most frequent cause of female cancer deaths in the United States. Despite dramatic treatment successes in other cancers through the use of molecular agents targeted against genetically defined events driving cancer development and progression, very few insights into epithelial ovarian cancer have been translated from the laboratory to the clinic. If advances are to be made in the early diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of this disease, it will be critical to characterize the common and private (personalized) genetic defects underlying the development and spread of epithelial ovarian cancer. The tumor suppressor Kruppel-like factor 6 and its alternatively spliced, oncogenic isoform, Kruppel-like factor 6 splice variant 1, are members of the Kruppel-like zinc finger transcription factor family of proteins, which have diverse roles in cellular differentiation, development, proliferation, growth-related signal transduction, and apoptosis. Inactivation of Kruppel-like factor 6 and overexpression of Kruppel-like factor 6 splice variant 1 have been associated with the progression of a number of human cancers and even with patient survival. This article summarizes our recent findings demonstrating that a majority of epithelial ovarian cancer tumors have Kruppel-like factor 6 allelic loss and decreased expression coupled with increased expression of Kruppel-like factor 6 splice variant 1. The targeted reduction of Kruppel-like factor 6 in ovarian cancer cell lines results in marked increases in cell proliferation, invasion, tumor growth, angiogenesis, and intraperitoneal dissemination in vivo. In contrast, the inhibition of Kruppel-like factor 6 splice variant 1 decreases cellular proliferation, invasion, angiogenesis, and tumorigenicity; this provides the rationale for its potential therapeutic application. These results and our recent demonstration that the inhibition of Kruppel-like factor 6 splice variant 1 can dramatically prolong survival in a preclinical mouse model of ovarian cancer are reviewed and discussed.

19435908
KLF6-SV1 is a novel antiapoptotic protein that targets the BH3-only protein NOXA for degradation and whose inhibition extends survival in an ovarian cancer model.
Defects in apoptosis are not only a hallmark of cancer initiation and progression but can also underlie the development of chemoresistance. How the tightly regulated cascade of protein-protein interactions between members of three competing protein families regulating the apoptotic cascade is subverted in tumor cells is incompletely understood. Here, we show that KLF6-SV1, whose overexpression is associated with poor survival in several different cancers and is an alternatively spliced isoform of the Krüppel-like tumor suppressor KLF6, is a critical prosurvival/antiapoptotic protein. KLF6-SV1 binds the proapoptotic BH3-only protein NOXA, which results in their mutual HDM2-dependent degradation. In turn, this increases the intracellular concentration of the prosurvival binding partner of NOXA, Mcl-1, and effectively blocks apoptosis. In an ovarian cancer model, systemically delivered small interfering RNA against KLF6-SV1 induces spontaneous apoptosis of tumor cells, decreases tumor burden, and restores cisplatin sensitivity in vivo. Moreover, i.p. delivery of siKLF6-SV1 RNA halts ovarian tumor progression and improves median and overall survival (progression-free for >15 months; P < 0.0002) in mice in a dose-dependent manner. Thus, KLF6-SV1 represents a novel regulator of protein interactions in the apoptotic cascade and a therapeutically targetable control point.

19328586
Targeted reduction of KLF6-SV1 restores chemotherapy sensitivity in resistant lung adenocarcinoma.
Kruppel-like factor 6 splice variant 1 (KLF6-SV1) is an oncogenic splice variant of the KLF6 tumor suppressor gene that is specifically overexpressed in a number of human cancers. Previously, we have demonstrated that increased expression of KLF6-SV1 is associated with decreased survival in lung adenocarcinoma patient samples and that targeted reduction of KLF6-SV1 using siRNA induced apoptosis both alone and in combination with the chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin. Here, we demonstrate that chemoresistant lung cancer cells express increased levels of KLF6-SV1. Furthermore, targeted reduction of KLF6-SV1 using RNA interference restores chemotherapy sensitivity to lung cancer cells both in culture and in vivo through induction of apoptosis. Conversely, overexpression of KLF6-SV1 resulted in a marked reduction in chemotherapy sensitivity in a tumor xenograft model. Combined, these findings highlight a functional role for the KLF6-SV1 splice variant in the regulation of chemotherapy response in lung cancer and could provide novel insight into lung cancer therapy.

19101139
Functional role of the KLF6 tumour suppressor gene in gastric cancer.
Gastric cancer is the second most common cancer and a leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. The Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) tumour suppressor gene had been previously shown to be inactivated in a number of human cancers through loss of heterozygosity (LOH), somatic mutation, decreased expression and increased alternative splicing into a dominant negative oncogenic splice variant, KLF6-SV1. In the present study, 37 gastric cancer samples were analysed for the presence of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the KLF6 locus and somatic mutation. In total, 18 of 34 (53%) of the gastric cancer samples analysed demonstrated KLF6 locus specific loss. Four missense mutations, such as T179I, R198G, R71Q and S180L, were detected. Interestingly, two of these mutations R71Q and S180L have been identified independently by several groups in various malignancies including prostate, colorectal and gastric cancers. In addition, decreased wild-type KLF6 (wtKLF6) expression was associated with loss of the KLF6 locus and was present in 48% of primary gastric tumour samples analysed. Functional studies confirmed that wtKLF6 suppressed proliferation of gastric cancer cells via transcriptional regulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 and the oncogene c-myc. Functional characterisation of the common tumour-derived mutants demonstrated that the mutant proteins fail to suppress proliferation and function as dominant negative regulators of wtKLF6 function. Furthermore, stable overexpression of the R71Q and S180L tumour-derived mutants in the gastric cancer cell line, Hs746T, resulted in an increased tumourigenicity in vivo. Combined, these findings suggest an important role for the KLF6 tumour suppressor gene in gastric cancer development and progression and identify several highly cancer-relevant signalling pathways regulated by the KLF6 tumour suppressor gene.

19097929
The role of KLF6 and its splice variants in cancer therapy.
The Krüppel-like zinc finger transcription factor (KLF6) gene encodes a family of proteins generated through alternative splicing involved in the regulation of cancer development and progression. Alternative splicing of the KLF6 gene results in the production of at least four alternatively spliced isoforms, two of which are extensively discussed in this review. The full length form of the KLF6 gene is a tumor suppressor gene that is frequently inactivated by loss of heterozygozity (LOH), somatic mutation, and/or decreased expression in human cancer. While the exact mechanisms underlying KLF6's tumor suppressor roles are not completely known, a number of highly relevant, overlapping pathways have been described: transactivation of p21 in a p53-independent manner, reduction of cyclin D1/cdk4 complexes via interaction with cyclin D1, inhibition of c-Jun proto-oncoprotein activities, decreased VEGF expression, and induction of apoptosis. Kruppel-like factor 6 splice variant 1 (KLF6-SV1) is an oncogenic splice variant of the KLF6 tumor suppressor gene that is specifically overexpressed in a number of human cancers. Increased KLF6-SV1 expression is associated with poor prognosis in prostate, lung, and ovarian cancer. Furthermore, KLF6-SV1 has been shown to be biologically active, antagonizing the tumor suppressor function of KLF6 and promoting tumor growth and dissemination in both ovarian and prostate cancer models. In addition, a common germline polymorphism in the KLF6 gene associated with increased prostate cancer risk in a large multi-institutional study of 3411 men results in increased expression of KLF6-SV1. Furthermore, recent studies have demonstrated that targeted reduction of KLF6-SV1 results in the induction of spontaneous apoptosis in cell culture, synergizes with chemotherapeutic agents like cisplatin, and results in significant tumor regression in vivo. Combined, these data make the KLF6 gene family a compelling therapeutic target for both the treatment of localized as well as metastatic cancer.

18596922
KLF6-SV1 overexpression accelerates human and mouse prostate cancer progression and metastasis.
Metastatic prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the leading causes of death from cancer in men. The molecular mechanisms underlying the transition from localized tumor to hormone-refractory metastatic PCa remain largely unknown, and their identification is key for predicting prognosis and targeted therapy. Here we demonstrated that increased expression of a splice variant of the Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) tumor suppressor gene, known as KLF6-SV1, in tumors from men after prostatectomy predicted markedly poorer survival and disease recurrence profiles. Analysis of tumor samples revealed that KLF6-SV1 levels were specifically upregulated in hormone-refractory metastatic PCa. In 2 complementary mouse models of metastatic PCa, KLF6-SV1-overexpressing PCa cells were shown by in vivo and ex vivo bioluminescent imaging to metastasize more rapidly and to disseminate to lymph nodes, bone, and brain more often. Interestingly, while KLF6-SV1 overexpression increased metastasis, it did not affect localized tumor growth. KLF6-SV1 inhibition using RNAi induced spontaneous apoptosis in cultured PCa cell lines and suppressed tumor growth in mice. Together, these findings demonstrate that KLF6-SV1 expression levels in PCa tumors at the time of diagnosis can predict the metastatic behavior of the tumor; thus, KLF-SV1 may represent a novel therapeutic target.

18471523
Ras promotes growth by alternative splicing-mediated inactivation of the KLF6 tumor suppressor in hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most prevalent cancer worldwide and the third most lethal. Dysregulation of alternative splicing underlies a number of human diseases, yet its contribution to liver cancer has not been explored fully. The Krüppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) gene is a zinc finger transcription factor that inhibits cellular growth in part by transcriptional activation of p21. KLF6 function is abrogated in human cancers owing to increased alternative splicing that yields a dominant-negative isoform, KLF6 splice variant 1 (SV1), which antagonizes full-length KLF6-mediated growth suppression. The molecular basis for stimulation of KLF6 splicing is unknown. In human HCC samples and cell lines, we functionally link oncogenic Ras signaling to increased alternative splicing of KLF6 through signaling by phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and Akt, mediated by the splice regulatory protein ASF/SF2. In 67 human HCCs, there is a significant correlation between activated Ras signaling and increased KLF6 alternative splicing. In cultured cells, Ras signaling increases the expression of KLF6 SV1, relative to full-length KLF6, thereby enhancing proliferation. Abrogation of oncogenic Ras signaling by small interfering RNA (siRNA) or a farnesyl-transferase inhibitor decreases KLF6 SV1 and suppresses growth. Growth inhibition by farnesyl-transferase inhibitor in transformed cell lines is overcome by ectopic expression of KLF6 SV1. Down-regulation of the splice factor ASF/SF2 by siRNA increases KLF6 SV1 messenger RNA levels. KLF6 alternative splicing is not coupled to its transcriptional regulation. Our findings expand the role of Ras in human HCC by identifying a novel mechanism of tumor-suppressor inactivation through increased alternative splicing mediated by an oncogenic signaling cascade.

18250346
A functional role for KLF6-SV1 in lung adenocarcinoma prognosis and chemotherapy response.
Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) is a tumor suppressor gene that is functionally inactivated in human cancer by loss of heterozygosity, somatic mutation, decreased expression, and increased alternative splicing into an oncogenic splice variant, KLF6-SV1. Here we show that increased expression of KLF6-SV1 is associated with decreased survival in patients with lung adenocarcinoma. In addition, KLF6-SV1 is a novel antiapoptotic protein in lung cancer cell lines, and targeted reduction of KLF6-SV1 using siRNA induces apoptosis both alone and in combination with the chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin. Together, these findings highlight a critical role for KLF6-SV1 in lung cancer, and show a potential novel therapeutic strategy for the treatment of lung cancer.

17621627
KLF6 allelic loss is associated with tumor recurrence and markedly decreased survival in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
The Krüppel-like transcription factor (KLF6) gene is a tumor suppressor gene (TSG) reported to be dysregulated and inactivated through loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and/or somatic mutation in a number of major human cancers. The aim of the present study was to examine KLF6 gene status and expression in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). A collection of 81 well-characterized oral and oropharyngeal HNSCC samples were analyzed for evidence of KLF6 LOH and mutation and differences in expression patterns between normal and cancerous tissues and these findings were correlated with clinicopathological variables. We also tested the effect of KLF6 inhibition in HNSCC cell lines on proliferation and p21 expression. LOH was found in approximately 30% of cases and was strongly correlated with cancer progression, tumor recurrence and decreased patient survival. Overall, median survival of patients with LOH was less than half (19 vs. 41 months, p=0.036, stratified on stage) than those without loss. Risk of death for patients with LOH was 8 times greater independent of tumor size, nodal status, tobacco smoking or treatment modality (HR 7.89, 95% CI: 1.9-32.4). Subsequent analyses revealed KLF6 mutations in only 2 of 20 samples, but altered subcellular protein localization in 64% of tumors. Targeted stable reduction of KLF6 in HNSCC cell lines increased cellular proliferation while decreasing p21 expression. Taken together, these findings suggest that KLF6 LOH represents a clinically-relevant biomarker predicting patient survival and tumor recurrence and that dysregulation of KLF6 function plays an important role in HNSCC progression.

17514651
Functional inactivation of the KLF6 tumor suppressor gene by loss of heterozygosity and increased alternative splicing in glioblastoma.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary brain tumor and possesses a high incidence of 10p loss. The KLF6 (Kruppel-like transcription factor) tumor suppressor gene on 10p15 is inactivated by loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and/or somatic mutation in a number of human cancers and forced expression of KLF6 in GBM lines inhibits their growth and transformation. In addition, increased expression of its alternatively spliced, cytoplasmic isoform KLF6-SV1 has now been shown to play a role in cancer pathogenesis. On the basis of these findings we examined the role of KLF6 and KLF6-SV1 in the development and progression of GBM. LOH analysis of 17 primary GBM patient samples using KLF6-specific microsatellite markers revealed that 88.2% (15/17) had LOH of the KLF6 locus. Interestingly, no KLF6 somatic mutations were identified. RNA analysis revealed concomitant decreases in all primary GBM tumors (n = 11) by approximately 80% in KLF6 expression (p < 0.001) coupled with increased KLF6-SV1 expression (p < 0.001) when compared to normal astrocytes. To determine the biological relevance of these findings, we examined the effect of KLF6 expression and KLF6-SV1 knockdown in A235 and CRL2020 cell lines. Reconstitution of KLF6 decreased cell proliferation by almost 50%, whereas targeted KLF6 reduction increased cell proliferation 2.5-4.5 fold. Conversely, targeted KLF6-SV1 reduction decreased cell proliferation by 50%. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that KLF6 allelic imbalance and decreased KLF6 and increased KLF6-SV1 expression are common findings in primary GBM tumors, and these changes have antagonistic effects on the regulation of cellular proliferation in GBM cell lines.

17196295
Downregulation of KLF6 is an early event in hepatocarcinogenesis, and stimulates proliferation while reducing differentiation.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has the most rapidly rising cancer incidence in the US and Europe. The KLF6 tumor suppressor is frequently inactivated in HCC by loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) and/or mutation. Here we have analyzed 33 HBV- and 40 HCV-related HCCs for mRNA expression of wildtype KLF6 (wtKLF6) as well as the KLF6 variant 1 (SV1), a truncated, growth-promoting variant that antagonizes wtKLF6 function. The HCV-related tumors analyzed represented the full histologic spectrum from cirrhosis and dysplasia to metastatic cancer. Expression of KLF6 mRNA is decreased in 73% of HBV-associated HCCs compared to matched surrounding tissue (ST), with reductions of approximately 80% in one-third of the patients. KLF6 mRNA expression is also reduced in dysplastic nodules from patients with HCV compared to cirrhotic livers (p<0.005), with an additional, marked decrease in the very advanced, metastatic stage (p<0.05). An increased ratio of KLF6SV1/wt KLF6 is present in a subset (6/33, 18%) of the HBV-related HCCs compared to matched ST. Reconstituting KLF6 in HepG2 cells by retroviral infection decreased proliferation and related markers including cyclin D1 and beta-catenin, increased cellular differentiation based on induction of albumin, E-cadherin, and decreased alpha fetoprotein. We conclude that reduced KLF6 expression is common in both HBV- and HCV-related HCCs and occurs at critical stages during cancer progression. Effects of KLF6 are attributable to regulation of genes controlling hepatocyte growth and differentiation.

17297474
In vivo regulation of p21 by the Kruppel-like factor 6 tumor-suppressor gene in mouse liver and human hepatocellular carcinoma.
Kruppel-like factor (KLF) 6 is a tumor-suppressor gene functionally inactivated by loss of heterozygosity, somatic mutation and/or alternative splicing that generates a dominant-negative splice form, KLF6-SV1. Wild-type KLF6 (wtKLF6) expression is decreased in many human malignancies, which correlates with reduced patient survival. Additionally, loss of the KLF6 locus in the absence of somatic mutation in the remaining allele occurs in a number of human cancers, raising the possibility that haploinsufficiency of the KLF6 gene alone contributes to cellular growth dysregulation and tumorigenesis. Our earlier studies identified the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 as a transcriptional target of the KLF6 gene in cultured cells, but not in vivo. To address this issue, we have generated two genetic mouse models to define the in vivo role of KLF6 in regulating cell proliferation and p21 expression. Transgenic overexpression of KLF6 in the liver resulted in a runted phenotype with decreased body and liver size, with evidence of decreased hepatocyte proliferation, increased p21 and reduced proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression. In contrast, mice with targeted deletion of one KLF6 allele (KLF6+/-) display increased liver mass with reduced p21 expression, compared to wild type littermates. Moreover, in primary hepatocellular carcinoma samples, there is a significant correlation between wtKLF6 and p21 mRNA expression. Combined, these data suggest that haploinsufficiency of the KLF6 gene may regulate cellular proliferation in vivo through decreased transcriptional activation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21.

