19944277
Critical care issues in oncological surgery patients.
As life expectancy increases and advances in cancer treatment more often convert deadly conditions into more chronic diseases, the surgical intensivist can expect to be faced with greater numbers of oncology patients undergoing aggressive surgical treatments for curative intent, prolonging survival, or primarily palliation by alleviating obstruction, infection, bleeding, or pain. Cytoreductive surgery (CRS) and heated intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) are a paradigm for the emerging field of multimodal aggressive oncological surgery. This article describes the CRS/HIPEC technique, and discusses the most common postoperative complications and critical care issues in these patients, including anastomotic leaks, intestinal perforation, abscesses, and intra-abdominal bleeding. The leading cause of mortality is sepsis leading to multiple organ failure, and such patients are at particularly higher risk due to the extensive CRS and HIPEC. The intensivist must be vigilant to ensure that source control is not overlooked. This process is a very difficult one, made even more challenging by the blunting of physiologic responses and the frequent absence of the classic acute abdomen.

17711969
The pulmonary artery catheter in anesthesia practice in 2007: an historical overview with emphasis on the past 6 years.
The pulmonary artery catheter has been widely used in anesthesiology and critical care medicine. Until recently, only retrospective or relatively weak prospective studies examining its effect on outcome had been performed. Over the past 6 years, however, a number of well-designed prospective trials and statistically sound retrospective studies have been completed. All of these show no benefit and some even reveal a potential for increased morbidity. Reasons for this device's inability to improve outcome are numerous, including wrong patient selection and misinterpretation, but the most impressive and convincing evidence is that filling pressures measured from the catheter, particularly the pulmonary artery "wedge" pressure, have no physiologic value. The wedge pressure has been shown to not correlate with other accepted methods of determining left ventricular filling or volume or intravascular volume and also does not help to generate cardiac function curves. Therefore, knowledge of it may actually lead to incorrect management more frequently than not.

17414727
Effect of lower limb compression devices on thermodilution cardiac output measurement.
The aim of this study was to determine whether lower limb (calf) sequential compression devices (SCDs) have a significant effect on thermodilution cardiac output measurements using a pulmonary artery catheter. Prospective clinical investigation. Surgical and neurosurgical intensive care units in a university hospital. A total of 43 patients with pulmonary artery catheters and bilateral lower limb SCDs. Cardiac output was measured (average of three) when the SCDs were off (T1), during the first 2-4 secs of the inflation cycle (T2), during seconds 4-8 of the inflation cycle (T3), and when the SCDs were off again (T4). Cardiac output measurements were consistently lower when measured during the SCD inflation cycle. The decrease in cardiac output ranged from 7.58% to 49.5%, with a mean reduction of 24.51% in the first 2-4 seconds and 20.61% during seconds 4-8 (p < .001). Two patients displayed an increase in cardiac output during the inflation cycle; one patient had an increase of 2.78% and the other an increase of 13.5%. In 11 patients, measurements were also made using a pulse contour-analysis cardiac output device, but no changes in pulse contour-analysis cardiac output were observed during the same time period. Thermodilution cardiac output measurements via a pulmonary artery catheter should not be done during the inflation cycle of lower limb SCDs because they produce a falsely low cardiac output.

