21028895
Multimodal clinical imaging to longitudinally assess a nanomedical anti-inflammatory treatment in experimental atherosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease causing great morbidity and mortality in the Western world. To increase the anti-inflammatory action and decrease adverse effects of glucocorticoids (PLP), a nanomedicinal liposomal formulation of this drug (L-PLP) was developed and intravenously applied at a dose of 15 mg/kg PLP to a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Since atherosclerosis is a systemic disease, emerging imaging modalities for assessing atherosclerotic plaque are being developed. (18)F-Fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography and dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging, methods commonly used in oncology, were applied to longitudinally assess therapeutic efficacy. Significant anti-inflammatory effects were observed as early as 2 days that lasted up to at least 7 days after administration of a single dose of L-PLP. No significant changes were found for the free PLP treated animals. These findings were corroborated by immunohistochemical analysis of macrophage density in the vessel wall. In conclusion, this study evaluates a powerful two-pronged strategy for efficient treatment of atherosclerosis that includes nanomedical therapy of atherosclerotic plaques and the application of noninvasive and clinically approved imaging techniques to monitor delivery and therapeutic responses. Importantly, we demonstrate unprecedented rapid anti-inflammatory effects in atherosclerotic lesions after the nanomedical therapy.

20179201
Vascular endothelial growth factor-C induces lymphangitic carcinomatosis, an extremely aggressive form of lung metastases.
The lymphatic system is an important pathway for tumor dissemination to the lymph nodes, but to which extent it contributes to the formation of distant metastases remains unknown. We report that induction of lymphangiogenesis by vascular endothelial growth factor-C (VEGF-C) at the secondary site, in the lung, facilitates expansion of already disseminated cancer cells throughout the lung tissue. By using orthotopic spontaneous metastasis models in nude mice, we show that VEGF-C expression by tumor cells altered the pattern of pulmonary metastases from nodular to diffuse and facilitated disease progression. Metastases expressing VEGF-C were tightly associated with the airways, in contrast to the control cells that were scattered in the lung parenchyma, throughout the alveolar region. VEGF-C induced lung lymphangiogenesis and promoted intralymphatic spread of metastases in the lung and formation of tumor emboli in the pulmonary arteries. This pattern of metastasis corresponds to lymphangitic carcinomatosis metastatic phenotype in human cancer patients, an extremely aggressive pattern of pulmonary metastases. In accordance, pulmonary breast cancer metastases from patients which were classified as lymphangitic carcinomatosis showed high levels of VEGF-C expression in cancer cells. These data show that VEGF-C promotes late steps of the metastatic process and identify the VEGF-C/VEGF receptor-3 pathway as the target not only for prevention of metastases, but also for treatment of established metastatic disease.

18848136
Haptoglobin genotype is a major determinant of the amount of iron in the human atherosclerotic plaque.
We sought to test the hypothesis that haptoglobin (Hp) genotype is a determinant of the amount of iron in the atherosclerotic plaque. In atherosclerotic lesions, intraplaque hemorrhage releases free hemoglobin (Hb), whose incorporated iron can act as an oxidant and inflammatory stimulus. These effects are antagonized by Hp, which binds free Hb and facilitates its clearance from the plaque. The Hp gene has 2 alleles (1 and 2), giving rise to 3 genotypes: Hp 1-1, Hp 2-1, and Hp 2-2. We previously hypothesized that Hp 2-2 individuals with diabetes mellitus (DM) have impaired clearance of Hb and its iron cargo from the plaque. We identified the presence or absence of Perl's iron stain in 189 plaques obtained from 37 decedents at autopsy. Among DM, the prevalence of Perl's iron stain was increased in Hp 2-2 compared with that seen in Hp 1-1 or 2-1 (46.2% vs. 11.8%). After accounting for the within-decedent correlation of plaques, the prevalence ratio of Perl's iron stain associated with Hp 2-2 was 3.97 (95% confidence interval: 1.38 to 11.5; p = 0.025). In non-DM plaques, there was a nonsignificant trend towards a higher prevalence of iron staining in Hp 2-2 compared with that in Hp 1-1 or 2-1 (26.8% vs. 11.1%; prevalence ratio =2.40 [95% confidence interval: 0.81 to 7.09]; p = 0.114). These data support an impaired clearance of Hb from plaques in Hp 2-2 individuals, particularly in DM. The higher prevalence of plaque iron in Hp 2-2 DM individuals may contribute to the increased incidence of atherothrombotic events in these patients.

18417368
Intravascular epithelioid hemangioendothelioma of the inferior vena cava: case report of an unusual and unpredictable vascular tumor.
Vascular neoplasms are uncommon and pose a diagnostic and treatment challenge to the pathologist and surgeon, respectively. Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma is a rare neoplasm of vascular origin with an unknown etiology. Its biologic behavior lies somewhere between that of a benign hemangioma and that of a malignant angiosarcoma; however, it is unpredictable at best. Intravascular epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas have been described more often in veins than arteries, and there are only about 30 reports in the English literature. We report here the case of an epithelioid hemangioendothelioma of the inferior vena cava, which presented with abdominal pain, ascites and pedal edema.

18332609
Statin therapy alone and in combination with an acyl-CoA:cholesterol O-acyltransferase inhibitor on experimental atherosclerosis.
The ability to modify the enzymatic processes involved in promoting atherosclerotic plaque disruption and to serially monitor atherosclerotic evolution could provide novel information in the management of patients with atherosclerosis. We studied the effects of a statin (atorvastatin) and its combination with an acyl-CoA:cholesterol O-acyltransferase (ACAT) inhibitor (avasimibe) on atherosclerotic regression and plaque stability as measured by matrix metalloproteinase 1 and 3 (MMP-1 and MMP-3) levels. Watanabe Heritable Hyperlipidemic (WHHL) rabbits treated with atorvastatin alone experienced an attenuated increase in atherosclerotic burden versus controls as determined by MR imaging. The mean vessel wall area (VWA) prior to drug therapy was 5.57 +/- 0.01 mm2. The VWA increased to 6.71 +/- 0.03 and 7.16 +/- 0.03 mm2, respectively, in atorvastatin-treated and control groups (p < 0.0001 for both). The combination of atorvastatin and avasimibe induced a significant regression of the previously established atherosclerotic lesions, with the VWA decreasing to 4.54 +/- 0.04 mm2 (p = 0.009). Atorvastatin alone induced a nonsignificant reduction in the percent staining of MMP-1 in atherosclerotic lesions, but the combination treatment with avasimibe led to a significant reduction versus controls (p = 0.005). However, a reduction in MMP-3 staining was significant for rabbits treated with both atorvastatin alone (p = 0.007) and in combination with avasimibe (p = 0.04) versus controls. In this animal model, the addition of avasimibe to atorvastatin has beneficial effects on both atherosclerotic plaque regression and stabilization.

19545762
Tumor lysis syndrome occurring after the administration of rituximab for posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder.
Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS) may occur after the administration of rituximab for lymphoproliferative disorders. We describe the case of a heart transplant recipient who developed TLS after a single dose of rituximab for the treatment of posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder. Because rituximab is being used more frequently, it is important for transplant physicians to be aware of this potential complication particularly after administering the first dose.

