21149834
Proposal for medical school nutrition education: topics and recommendations.
The mission of increasing the number of physician nutrition experts requires focused nutrition education directed at medical students across the 4-year curriculum and into postgraduate training. Courses should be horizontally and vertically integrated, bridging the basic sciences and clinical medicine. It is anticipated that the Liaison Committee on Medical Education and Association of American Medical Colleges will require competency in nutrition with emphasis on preventive and therapeutic applications. Barriers to implementation of nutrition courses can be overcome by using innovative teaching in association with cooperative course directors. Analysis of prior governmental efforts, through the Nutrition Academic Award, provides a basis for targeting fundamental knowledge and creative methods for achieving educational goals. Recommendations for short-term and long-term ideas for increasing the number of adequate physician nutrition experts are offered.

18769213
Microecology, obesity, and probiotics.
Description of the role that the microbiota may play in human health, energy harvest, and obesity. The adult human gut may contain up to 100 trillion microbial organisms, known as the microbiota. Major advances in defining the quality, quantity, and physiologic activity of the intestinal microbiota were precipitated by the conversion from culture-based techniques to metagenomics. The microbiota may serve various functions including promoting development of the human immune system, modulating inflammation, and affecting calorie extraction. Recent evidence, in humans and animal models, supports a role for the microbiota in obesity. Not only is the presence of bacteria important, but also the relative proportions of microbial communities, specifically Firmicutes and Bacteriodetes, appear to be important in energy homeostasis. The microbiota may also affect the immune and inflammatory response in human organisms. Although there is limited data supporting the manipulation of the gut microbiota, using probiotics, antibiotics, and/or prebiotics to treat obesity, novel therapeutic agents may be developed.

