21192256
The economics of glycemic control in the ICU in the United States.
Currently the USA has an aging population, with increasing deficits and a healthcare system that most would agree is in need of repair. Finding ways to curtail costs is urgently needed. Attention to glycemic control and metabolic care offers a cost-effective method of treatment to reduce complications. Healthcare-related expenses occupy an expanding portion of gross domestic product in the US and are a driver of the deficit. Despite all of this spending, the US receives average marks on outcomes and is not obtaining value in its healthcare. Any movements toward healthcare reform must focus on improving outcomes per healthcare dollar spent, and increasing value. The Affordable Care Act will place greater emphasis on preventing complications and reducing hospital-acquired infections. The original Leuven trial demonstrated that proper implementation of glycemic control can reduce morbidity and mortality. More recent studies have shown that there is a cost-benefit to glycemic control as well, through reduction of hospital stay and prevention of complications. On the basis of these changes, physicians who practice metabolic care and provide glycemic control are well positioned to add value in this era of healthcare reform. Glycemic control is inherently valuable in the care of ICU patients as it decreases infectious complications, reduces lengths of stay, and has a positive effect on morbidity and mortality. Further studies should be completed to delineate the exact amount of cost-savings that can be obtained by proper implementation of glycemic control in the ICU.

21167457
Glycemic control and nutritional strategies in the cardiothoracic surgical intensive care unit--2010: state of the art.
Patients in the cardiothoracic surgical intensive care unit are generally critically ill and undergoing a systemic inflammatory response to cardiopulmonary bypass, ischemia/reperfusion, and hypothermia. This presents several metabolic challenges: hyperglycemia in need of intensive insulin therapy, catabolism, and uncertain gastrointestinal tract function in need of nutritional strategies. Currently, there are controversies surrounding the standard use of intensive insulin therapy and appropriate glycemic targets as well as the use of early enteral nutrition ± parenteral nutrition. In this review, an approach for intensive metabolic support in the cardiothoracic surgical intensive care unit is presented incorporating the most recent clinical evidence. This approach advocates an IIT blood glucose target of 80-110 mg/dL if, it can be implemented safely, with early nutrition support (using parenteral nutrition as needed) to prevent a critical energy debt.

20952252
Adjuvant therapy with methylene blue in the treatment of right ventricular failure after pulmonary embolectomy.
Severe pulmonary embolism often leads to right ventricular failure after surgical embolectomy secondary to ischaemia reperfusion injury and acute lung injury (ALI). Acute right ventricular dysfunction is traditionally treated with inotropes and vasopressors to maintain cardiac output and coronary perfusion as well as selective pulmonary vasodilators to provide right ventricular afterload reduction. We report the first case of utilisation of methylene (MB) in a patient with acute right ventricular failure and vasoplegic shock after surgical pulmonary embolectomy.

20841364
The efficacy of post-cardiopulmonary bypass dosing of vancomycin in cardiac surgery.
Objective. Vancomycin is administered widely to patients undergoing cardiac surgery as prophylaxis against resistant Gram-positive sternal wound and venous donor site infections. The purpose of this study was to determine the efficacy of a standardized prebypass and postbypass dosing regimen of vancomycin by assessing plasma concentrations in the immediate postoperative period and postoperative surgical site infections (SSIs). Design. Retrospective cohort study. Setting . Cardiothoracic surgical intensive care unit in a tertiary care academic medical center. Methods. A total of 34 consecutive adult patients who had undergone cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) were analyzed retrospectively. Each patient received 1000 mg of vancomycin administered over 1 hour around the time of induction of anesthesia and 500 mg after discontinuation of CPB. Trough vancomycin levels were sampled in the intensive care unit 12 hours after the last dose given in the operating room. Along with patient characteristics, postoperative readmission rates and SSIs were recorded for 1 year after surgery. Results. The nadir serum vancomycin level before the next dose was 9.3 ± 4.5 µg/mL (mean ± standard deviation). One superficial SSI was noted. Readmission rate for SSIs was 2.94%. Conclusion . Vancomycin concentrations in the serum were greater than the minimum inhibitory concentration for most staphylococci ranging from 4 to 19.3 µg/mL producing acceptable therapeutic serum concentrations and low rate of infectious complications. Thus postbypass dosing is acceptable in vancomycin cardiac surgical prophylaxis.

20647262
Predictive model for postoperative delirium in cardiac surgical patients.
Delirium is a common complication following cardiac surgery, and the predictors of delirium remain unclear. The authors performed a prospective observational analysis to develop a predictive model for postoperative delirium using demographic and procedural parameters. A total of 112 adult postoperative cardiac surgical patients were evaluated twice daily for delirium using the Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS) and Confusion Assessment Model for the ICU (CAM-ICU). The incidence of delirium was 34% (n = 38). Increased age (odds ratio [OR] = 2.5; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.6-3.9; P < .0001, per 10 years) and increased duration of surgery (OR = 1.3; 95% CI = 1.1-1.5; P = .0002, per 30 minutes) were independently associated with postoperative delirium. Gender, BMI, diabetes mellitus, preoperative ejection fraction, surgery type, length of cardiopulmonary bypass, intraoperative blood component administration, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II score, Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score, and Charlson Comorbidity Index, were not independently associated with postoperative delirium.

20609797
Extracorporeal peritoneovenous shunt for the management of postaneurysmectomy chylous ascites in a Marfan patient.
Chylous ascites is an uncommon complication after aortic and other retroperitoneal surgeries. The management is very specific to the etiology and clinical status of the patient. The mortality from chylous ascites is not negligible, and aggressive measures are often needed. A voluminous chylous ascites developed in a 38-year-old woman after an open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair that was refractive to initial therapeutic interventions. We used an extracorporeal peritoneovenous shunt to control the abdominal ascites and improve the patient's immunologic and nutritional status.

20338339
Invited commentary.


20338298
Chronic mitral stenosis.


20010098
Critique of normoglycemia in intensive care evaluation: survival using glucose algorithm regulation (NICE-SUGAR)--a review of recent literature.
The publication of the long awaited results of the Normoglycaemia in Intensive Care Evaluation - Survival Using Glucose Algorithm Regulation (NICE-SUGAR) trial generated intense controversy in the area of glycemic control in the critically ill. NICE-SUGAR reported results in direct contrast to the original Leuven study and challenged the legitimacy of a mortality benefit of tight glycemic control in the intensive care unit (ICU). This review of the recent literature critically examines the salient differences between NICE-SUGAR and the original Leuven study. Differences in glycemic targets within the control and intervention groups, variability with patients reaching these set targets, and the disparity in study execution and nutritional strategies are some of the methodological differences explaining the observed differences in mortality and morbidity between the two studies. The Leuven study should be viewed as a 'proof-of-concept' study with future studies aimed at confirming its finding and optimizing clinical algorithms to safely implement it in various 'real world' settings. Discrepancies in implementation and nutrition make direct comparison of NICE-SUGAR and the original Leuven study impracticable. Accurate replication of the original Leuven methodology may be the limiting factor for achieving the benefits gained by intensive insulin therapy (IIT). Determination of ICU capability (physicians, nurses, standardization of equipment, etc.) is crucial to implementing tight glycemic targets. If IIT is not achievable due to adverse outcomes such as hypoglycemia, more lax and reachable glucose control should be sought.

19700348
Pheochromocytoma presenting as severe biventricular failure requiring insertion of a biventricular assist device.


19202391
Impact of new technologies on metabolic care in the intensive care unit.
Technological innovations in the ICU have lead to extraordinary advances in modern critical care. Renal replacement therapy (RRT) innovations and ventricular assist devices (VAD) are now becoming common interventions in the ICU environment. The purpose of this article is to describe the impact of RRT and VAD on critical care medicine with particular reference to metabolic care. Continuous venovenous hemofiltration and slow low efficient daily dialysis are effective modalities of RRT in hemodynamically unstable patients. These continuous forms of RRT can result in accentuated protein and nutrient losses but also provide an opportunity for intradialytic parenteral nutrition support. VAD patients typically have cardiac cachexia and develop chronic critical illness syndrome. Intensive metabolic support, incorporating trophic, concentrated, semielemental enteral nutrition, supplemental parenteral nutrition, and intensive insulin therapy is a rational strategy to implement in VAD patients. Unfortunately, there is insufficient evidence at this time to support the routine use of these nutritional interventions with RRT and VAD. Patients requiring RRT or VAD are at high nutritional risk, which negatively affects ICU outcome. Prompt nutritional risk assessment and early optimization of metabolic care is crucial in this patient population.

19095608
Intensive metabolic support: evolution and revolution.
To describe a new aspect of critical care termed intensive metabolic support. We performed a MEDLINE search of the English-language literature published between 1995 and 2008 for studies regarding the metabolic stages of critical illness, intensive insulin treatment, and intensive metabolic support in the intensive care unit, and we summarize the clinical data. Intensive metabolic support is a 3-component model involving metabolic control and intensive insulin therapy, early nutrition support, and nutritional pharmacology aimed at preventing allostatic overload and the development of chronic critical illness. To improve clinical outcome and prevent mortality, intensive metabolic support should start on arrival to the intensive care unit and should end only when patients are in the recovery phase of their illness. Intensive metabolic support should be an essential part of the daily treatment strategy in critical care medicine. This will involve a newfound and extensive collaboration between the endocrinologist and the intensivist. We call for well-designed future studies involving implementation of this protocol to decrease the burden of chronic critical illness.

19054691
Successful conservative management of a tracheal tear in a septic octogenarian.


18595867
Chromium infusion reverses extreme insulin resistance in a cardiothoracic ICU patient.
Insulin resistance is common and often multifactorial in acutely critically ill patients. At our institution, glycemic control is achieved in these patients using an intravenous insulin protocol. The authors present a case in which a patient developed severe insulin resistance following surgical repair of a thoracic aorta aneurysm. Postoperatively, the patient required 2110 units of insulin over 40 hours while receiving pressors and glucocorticoids. After the administration of intravenous chromium at 3 microg/h, the blood sugar normalized and insulin therapy was discontinued. This case represents a unique approach using intravenous chromium to achieve glycemic control in a patient with extreme insulin resistance and acute critical illness. Prospective clinical trials using intravenous chromium may provide the means to optimize intensive insulin therapy for critically ill patients.

18301091
Early nutrition support in the intensive care unit: a US perspective.
Early nutrition support, defined as within the first 24-48 h of ICU care, is recommended by clinical practice guidelines. The purpose of this paper is to provide an evidence-based US perspective on early nutrition support in critical illness, explain its mechanism of action, and describe its implementation using combined enteral and parenteral nutrition support. Recent American and Canadian guidelines recommend starting enteral nutrition within the first 24-48 h of ICU care. This is mainly due to accrued 'energy debt' from underfeeding in certain patients. This energy debt leads to increased risks of complications and longer lengths of stay. Strong clinical evidence, however, in the form of prospective, randomized, controlled intervention studies of early nutrition support in the setting of routine intensive insulin therapy, is lacking. Early enteral nutrition should be first-line therapy in the ICU. If a caloric goal of 20-25 kcal/kg/day is not possible, then combined enteral and parenteral nutrition should be started. In the new age of intensive insulin therapy, parenteral nutrition has not been shown to confer significant additional infective risk. There are many unanswered questions, but a proactive posture for metabolic support in the ICU is advocated.

17667513
Predictors and outcome of gastrointestinal complications in patients undergoing cardiac surgery.
To determine the incidence and independent predictors of gastrointestinal complications (GICs) following cardiac surgery. Gastrointestinal ischemia and hemorrhage represent a rare but devastating complication following heart surgery. The profile of patients referred for cardiac surgery has changed during the last decade, questioning the validity of previously reported incidence and risk factors. We retrospectively analyzed prospectively collected data from 4819 patients undergoing cardiac surgery between 1998 and 2004. Patients with GICs were compared with the entire patient population. Study endpoints were mortality, postoperative morbidities, and long-term survival. GICs occurred in 51 (1.1%) patients. Etiologies were intestinal ischemia (n = 30; 59%) and hemorrhage (n = 21; 41%). The incidence decreased during the study period (1998-2001: 1.3%, 2002-2004: 0.7%; P = 0.04). The incidence per type of procedure was as follows: coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)/valve (2.4%), aortic surgery (1.7%), valve surgery (1.0%), and CABG (0.5%; P = 0.001). Multivariate analysis revealed age (odds ratio [OR] = 2.1), myocardial infarction (OR = 2.5), CHF (OR = 2.4), hemodynamic instability (OR = 2.8), cardiopulmonary bypass time >120 minutes (OR = 6.2), peripheral vascular disease (OR = 2.2), renal (OR = 3.2), and hepatic failure (OR = 10.8) as independent predictors of GICs. The overall hospital mortality among patients with GICs was 33%. Long-term survival was significantly decreased in patients with GICs compared with the control group. Gastrointestinal complications following cardiac surgery remain rare with an incidence <1% in a contemporary series. The key to a lower incidence of GICs lies in systematic application of preventive measures and new advances in intraoperative management. Identification of independent risk factors would facilitate the determination of patients who would benefit from additional perioperative monitoring. Future resources should therefore be redirected to mitigate GICs in high-risk patients.

