21513889
A Small Molecule Binding to the Coactivator CREB-Binding Protein Blocks Apoptosis in Cardiomyocytes.
As a master transcription factor in cellular responses to external stress, tumor suppressor p53 is tightly regulated. Excessive p53 activity during myocardial ischemia causes irreversible cellular injury and cardiomyocyte death. p53 activation is dependent on lysine acetylation by the lysine acetyltransferase and transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) and on acetylation-directed CBP recruitment for p53 target gene expression. Here, we report a small molecule ischemin, developed with a structure-guided approach to inhibit the acetyl-lysine binding activity of the bromodomain of CBP. We show that ischemin alters post-translational modifications on p53 and histones, inhibits p53 interaction with CBP and transcriptional activity in cells, and prevents apoptosis in ischemic cardiomyocytes. Our study suggests small molecule modulation of acetylation-mediated interactions in gene transcription as a new approach to therapeutic interventions of human disorders such as myocardial ischemia.

21375368
Differential gene expression in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Abstract Our objective was to analyze gene expression pattern in muscles from patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) compared to controls. Biopsied skeletal muscles from three ALS, three MMN and three control subjects had total RNA extracted and subjected to genome-wide gene expression analysis using Affymetrix GeneChip Exon 1.0 ST array. The most significant expression pattern differences were confirmed with RT-PCR in four additional ALS patients. Results showed that over 3000 genes were identified across the groups using q < 10%. Among 50 genes that were overexpressed only in the ALS group were: leucine-rich repeat kinase-2, follistatin, collagen type XIX alpha-1, ceramide kinase-like, sestrin-3 and CXorf64. No genes were significantly overexpressed in MMN alone. Underexpressed genes only in ALS included actinin ?3, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase-2 and homeobox C10; whereas only in MMN: hemoglobin A1 and CXorf64. Ankyrin repeat domain-1 was overexpressed in both groups. Underexpressed genes in both groups included myosin light chain kinase-2, enolase-3 and 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase-1. Validation analysis using RT-PCR confirmed the data for leucine-rich repeat kinase-2, follistatin, collagen type XIX alpha-1, ceramide kinase-like, sestrin-3 and CXorf64. In conclusion, there is differential tissue-specific gene expression in patients with ALS relative to MMN and controls. Further studies are necessary to evaluate the identified genes in larger patient groups and different tissues.

19863813
Proteomics, pathway array and signaling network-based medicine in cancer.
ABSTRACT: Cancer is a multifaceted disease that results from dysregulated normal cellular signaling networks caused by genetic, genomic and epigenetic alterations at cell or tissue levels. Uncovering the underlying protein signaling network changes, including cell cycle gene networks in cancer, aids in understanding the molecular mechanism of carcinogenesis and identifies the characteristic signaling network signatures unique for different cancers and specific cancer subtypes. The identified signatures can be used for cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and personalized treatment. During the past several decades, the available technology to study signaling networks has significantly evolved to include such platforms as genomic microarray (expression array, SNP array, CGH array, etc.) and proteomic analysis, which globally assesses genetic, epigenetic, and proteomic alterations in cancer. In this review, we compared Pathway Array analysis with other proteomic approaches in analyzing protein network involved in cancer and its utility serving as cancer biomarkers in diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic target identification. With the advent of bioinformatics, constructing high complexity signaling networks is possible. As the use of signaling network-based cancer diagnosis, prognosis and treatment is anticipated in the near future, medical and scientific communities should be prepared to apply these techniques to further enhance personalized medicine.

19649297
Gene remodeling in type 2 diabetic cardiomyopathy and its phenotypic rescue with SERCA2a.
Diabetes-associated myocardial dysfunction results in altered gene expression in the heart. We aimed to investigate the changes in gene expression profiles accompanying diabetes-induced cardiomyopathy and its phenotypic rescue by restoration of SERCA2a expression. Using the Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima Fatty rat model of type 2 diabetes and the Agilent rat microarray chip, we analyzed gene expression by comparing differential transcriptional changes in age-matched control versus diabetic hearts and diabetic hearts that received gene transfer of SERCA2a. Microarray expression profiles of selected genes were verified with real-time qPCR and immunoblotting. Our analysis indicates that diabetic cardiomyopathy is associated with a downregulation of transcripts. Diabetic cardiomyopathic hearts have reduced levels of SERCA2a. SERCA2a gene transfer in these hearts reduced diabetes-associated hypertrophy, and differentially modulated the expression of 76 genes and reversed the transcriptional profile induced by diabetes. In isolated cardiomyocytes in vitro, SERCA2a overexpression significantly modified the expression of a number of transcripts known to be involved in insulin signaling, glucose metabolism and cardiac remodeling. This investigation provided insight into the pathophysiology of cardiac remodeling and the potential role of SERCA2a normalization in multiple pathways in diabetic cardiomyopathy.

18776119
Podocyte-selective deletion of dicer induces proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis.
Dicer is an enzyme that generates microRNA (miRNA), which are small, noncoding RNA that function as important regulators of gene and protein expression. For exploration of the functional roles of miRNA in glomerular biology, Dicer was inactivated selectively in mouse podocytes. Mutant mice developed proteinuria 4 to 5 weeks after birth and died several weeks later, presumably from kidney failure. Multiple abnormalities were observed in glomeruli of mutant mice, including foot process effacement, irregular and split areas of the glomerular basement membrane, podocyte apoptosis and depletion, mesangial expansion, capillary dilation, and glomerulosclerosis. Gene profiling revealed upregulation of 190 genes in glomeruli isolated from mutant mice at the onset of proteinuria compared with control littermates. Target sequences for 16 miRNA were significantly enriched in the 3'-untranslated regions of the 190 upregulated genes. Further suggesting validity of the in silico analysis, six of the eight top-candidate miRNA were identified in miRNA libraries generated from podocyte cultures; these included four members of the mir-30 miRNA family, which are known to degrade target transcripts directly. Among 15 upregulated target genes of the mir-30 miRNA, four genes known to be expressed and/or functional in podocytes were identified, including receptor for advanced glycation end product, vimentin, heat-shock protein 20, and immediate early response 3. Receptor for advanced glycation end product and immediate early response 3 are known to mediate podocyte apoptosis, whereas vimentin and heat-shock protein-20 are involved in cytoskeletal structure. Taken together, these results provide a knowledge base for ongoing investigations to validate functional roles for the mir-30 miRNA family in podocyte homeostasis and podocytopathies.

18060857
Functional grouping of osteoclast genes revealed through microarray analysis.
We describe for the first time functional clusters of genes that are modulated during the differentiation of osteoclasts. Pathway analysis was applied to gene array data generated from affymetrix chips hybridized to RNA isolated from RAW264.7 cells exposed to RANK-ligand (RANK-L) for 5 days. This analysis revealed major functional gene clusters that were either up- or down-regulated during osteoclastogenesis. Some of the genes within the clusters have known functions, while others do not. We discuss herein the relevance of these functional gene clusters and their modulation to biological processes underlying the formation, function, and fate of osteoclasts.

17600282
Influence of prothymosin-alpha on HIV-1 target cells.
The important role of CD8(+) T cells in controlling HIV-1 infection through the innate as well as the adaptive immune system is well established. In addition to the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-dependent cytotoxic activity of CD8(+) T cells, they produce soluble factors that suppress HIV-1 replication in an MHC-independent manner. Several of those factors have been identified, including beta-chemokines, Rantes, MIP-1alpha, MIP-1beta, and MDC. We previously identified that prothymosin alpha (ProTalpha) in the conditioned medium of HVS transformed CD8(+) T cells was a potent inhibitor of HIV-1 replication following proviral integration. In this report we further characterize the anti-HIV-1 activity of ProTalpha by demonstrating its target-cell specificity, distinction from additional inhibitors of HIV-1 transcription in CD8(+) T cell supernatants, as well as the differential regulation of host cell antiviral genes that could impact HIV-1 replication. These genes include a number of transcription factors as well IFN-alpha-inducible genes including PKR, IRF1, and Rantes, in the absence of induction of IFN-alpha. These data suggest that the anti-HIV-1 activity of ProTalpha is mediated through the modulation of a number of genes that have been reported to suppress HIV-1 replication including the dysregulation of transcription factors and the induction of PKR and Rantes mRNA.

17393520
Genome-wide molecular profiles of HCV-induced dysplasia and hepatocellular carcinoma.
Although HCC is the third-leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide, there is only an elemental understanding of its molecular pathogenesis. In western countries, HCV infection is the main etiology underlying this cancer's accelerating incidence. To characterize the molecular events of the hepatocarcinogenic process, and to identify new biomarkers for early HCC, the gene expression profiles of 75 tissue samples were analyzed representing the stepwise carcinogenic process from preneoplastic lesions (cirrhosis and dysplasia) to HCC, including 4 neoplastic stages (very early HCC to metastatic tumors) from patients with HCV infection. We identified gene signatures that accurately reflect the pathological progression of disease at each stage. Eight genes distinguish between control and cirrhosis, 24 between cirrhosis and dysplasia, 93 between dysplasia and early HCC, and 9 between early and advanced HCC. Using quantitative real-time reverse-transcription PCR, we validated several novel molecular tissue markers for early HCC diagnosis, specifically induction of abnormal spindle-like, microcephaly-associated protein, hyaluronan-mediated motility receptor, primase 1, erythropoietin, and neuregulin 1. In addition, pathway analysis revealed dysregulation of the Notch and Toll-like receptor pathways in cirrhosis, followed by deregulation of several components of the Jak/STAT pathway in early carcinogenesis, then upregulation of genes involved in DNA replication and repair and cell cycle in late cancerous stages. CONCLUSION: These findings provide a comprehensive molecular portrait of genomic changes in progressive HCV-related HCC.

