19372342
Amniotic fluid embolism.
Amniotic fluid embolism is one of the most catastrophic complications of pregnancy. First described in 1941, the condition is exceedingly rare and the exact pathophysiology is still unknown. The etiology was thought to be embolic in nature, but more recent evidence suggests an immunologic basis. Common presenting symptoms include dyspnea, nonreassuring fetal status, hypotension, seizures, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Early recognition of amniotic fluid embolism is critical to a successful outcome. However, despite intensive resuscitation, outcomes are frequently poor for both infant and mother. Recently, aggressive and successful management of amniotic fluid embolism with recombinant factor VIIa and a ventricular assist device, inhaled nitric oxide, cardiopulmonary bypass and intraaortic balloon pump with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation have been reported and should be considered in select cases.

19303328
Perioperative beta-blockade in patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: a review of the major randomized clinical trials.


18834818
Transesophageal echocardiography utilization in high-volume liver transplantation centers in the United States.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) during liver transplantation (LT) has been shown to be helpful in managing fluid therapy, monitoring myocardial function, and identifying intraoperative LT complications. The present study sought to investigate the current utilization of TEE by anesthesiologists during LT as well as issues of training and credentialing in this monitoring modality. A survey distributed by electronic mail. LT centers in the United States in which more than 50 liver transplantation procedures were performed annually. Survey respondents were contact persons in the LT divisions of the anesthesiology department of selected centers. Data collection only. A total of 40 high-volume LT centers were identified, and survey responses were received from 30 of those. Among 217 anesthesiologists, 86% performed TEE in some or all LT cases. Most users performed a limited-scope examination, although some performed a comprehensive TEE examination during LT. Most users acquired their TEE skills informally. Only 12% of users were board certified to perform TEE, and only 1 center reported having a policy related to credentialing requirements for TEE. There is high utilization of intraoperative TEE by anesthesiologists to perform limited-scope examinations during LT cases. Training to perform such examinations is mostly informal, and credentialing processes are lacking. An opportunity exists to establish guidelines, training programs, and standards for quality assurance in the use of this valuable monitoring modality.

17959970
Radiologic assessment of potential sites for needle decompression of a tension pneumothorax.
The recommended treatment of suspected tension pneumothorax is immediate needle decompression. Recommended sites and needle sizes for this procedure vary, and there are published reports of failed decompression as well as iatrogenic hemothorax. We investigated the optimal needle length and relative safety of three potential needle decompression sites. Using thoracic computed tomography scans of 100 adults, we measured the distance from skin surface to pleura and to intrathoracic structures at the level of the sternal angle at the midhemithoracic line (MHL), and at the level of the xiphoid process at the anterior axillary and midaxillary lines, as well as the distance from the sternal midline to internal mammary vessels. Median distances from the midline to the MHL and internal mammary vessels were 6.1 and 3.0 cm, respectively. Median (range) depth-to-pleura below the skin surface at the MHL, midaxillary lines, and anterior axillary line sites was 3.1 (1.4-6.9), 3.5 (1.7-9.3+), and 2.6 (1.0-7.7+) cm, respectively. Overall, there was a lower margin of safety on the left side compared with the right side, and the MHL site was safest on both sides. Needle decompression of suspected tension pneumothorax should be attempted in the MHL at the level of the sternal angle using a needle at least 7 cm long inserted perpendicular to the horizontal plane. This approach should yield the highest success rate and margin of safety compared with other sites.

17711969
The pulmonary artery catheter in anesthesia practice in 2007: an historical overview with emphasis on the past 6 years.
The pulmonary artery catheter has been widely used in anesthesiology and critical care medicine. Until recently, only retrospective or relatively weak prospective studies examining its effect on outcome had been performed. Over the past 6 years, however, a number of well-designed prospective trials and statistically sound retrospective studies have been completed. All of these show no benefit and some even reveal a potential for increased morbidity. Reasons for this device's inability to improve outcome are numerous, including wrong patient selection and misinterpretation, but the most impressive and convincing evidence is that filling pressures measured from the catheter, particularly the pulmonary artery "wedge" pressure, have no physiologic value. The wedge pressure has been shown to not correlate with other accepted methods of determining left ventricular filling or volume or intravascular volume and also does not help to generate cardiac function curves. Therefore, knowledge of it may actually lead to incorrect management more frequently than not.

17581470
Intraoperative acute tumor lysis syndrome during laparoscopic splenectomy preceded by splenic artery embolization.
Laparoscopic resection has become the standard of care for routine splenectomy. Preoperative splenic artery embolization for massive splenomegaly has been described to allow a laparoscopic approach in previously ineligible laparoscopic candidates. Our case describes an intraoperative cardiac arrest secondary to tumor lysis after preoperative splenic artery embolization. The patient recovered fully after suffering acute renal failure requiring dialysis for 6 weeks postoperatively. Caution using this approach is necessary to avoid this rare and potentially lethal complication.

