19910860
Anesthesia for cosmetic surgery.
Increasing numbers of plastic surgery procedures are performed in diverse environments, including traditional hospital operating rooms, outpatient surgery centers, and private offices. Just as plastic surgeons develop areas of specialization to better care for their patients, anesthesiologists have specialized in outpatient plastic surgery, both cosmetic and reconstructive. The methods they utilize are similar to those for other procedures but incorporate specific techniques that aim to better relieve preoperative anxiety, induce and awaken patients more smoothly, and minimize postoperative sequelae of anesthesia such as nausea and vomiting. It is important for plastic surgeons to understand these techniques since they are the ones who are ultimately responsible for their patients' care and are frequently called on to employ anesthesiologists for their practices, surgery centers, and hospitals. The following is a review of the specific considerations that should be given to ambulatory plastic surgery patients and the techniques used to safely administer agreeable and effective anesthesia.

19590280
Caring for the pediatric patient in a remote location. Preface.


18922409
Providing safe sedation/analgesia: an anesthesiologist's perspective.
Over the past several years office-based procedures with sedation have become increasingly more common. It must be appreciated that not all procedures are well suited for this type of environment. Unacceptable ones would include those associated with significant fluid shifts, post-operative pain, bleeding or procedures of long duration. Since esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy are relatively non-invasive, of short duration, and not associated with either fluid shifts or significant post-procedure discomfort. In appropriate patients, these procedures are well-suited to office-based practice.

18617124
The safety and efficacy of regional anesthesia in an office-based setting.
To determine the safety and efficacy of regional anesthesia techniques when administered in the office-based setting. Retrospective chart review. Free-standing orthopedic office with an operating room suite. A total of 238 patients underwent 242 anesthetics. Types of anesthetics delivered were quantified. Regional anesthetics were further divided into specific nerve blocks. Times from anesthetic start to surgical start and from surgical end to anesthetic end were calculated. Adverse outcomes were ascertained and followed. Of the 242 anesthetics administered, 123 were peripheral nerve blocks, two were neuraxial blocks, 140 were monitored anesthesia care cases, and 17 were general anesthetics (14 Laryngeal Mask Airway cases, two mask ventilation cases, and one endotracheal intubation). The average times from anesthesia start to surgery start were as follows: monitored anesthesia cases, 19+/-7 min (median, 20 min); regional anesthesia cases, 29+/-11 min (median, 30 min); and general anesthesia cases, 31+/-11 min (median, 30 min). The average time from surgery end to anesthesia end for monitored anesthesia cases was 9+/-3 min (median, 10 min); regional anesthesia, 9+/-3 min (median, 10 min); and general anesthesia, 12+/-4 min (median, 20 min). Two transient nerve injuries occurred, both of which resolved. On the basis of our experience, we believe that regional anesthesia can be delivered efficiently and safely for orthopedic procedures in the office-based environment, and we encourage its wider use.

17684872
Office-based surgery: expanding the role of the anesthesiologist.
Office-based anesthesia (OBA) has developed in the United States as an important field for the anesthesia provider. Both the numbers and types of procedures performed in offices around the country have steadily increased, as has the invasiveness of these procedures. New anesthetic considerations arise. For example, most training programs have not addressed this area of practice. Indeed many practitioners are unfamiliar with practice outside the hospital operating room setting. Information as to how to provide quality care in a location where one may be the sole anesthesiologist must be readily available. Many of the safety mechanisms we take for granted in a hospital setting are often not present in a surgical office, and it becomes the responsibility of training centers to help in establishing standards. As the 'safety' of many surgical offices where anesthesia care is provided has been challenged, medical societies have begun to issue recommendations as to the standards of care that should exist. Different anesthetic techniques are also emerging that are appropriate to the office setting. But as office-based anesthesia continues to mature as a specialty, we the anesthesia providers, must be proactive in establishing guidelines and recommendations to ensure safe practice.

