21465419
Surgical treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma.
OPINION STATEMENT: Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma (MPM) remains a rare and lethal disease that is directly related to asbestos exposure in the vast majority of cases. While the total number of cases remains low compared to other malignancies, the worldwide incidence is expected to increase over the next twenty years. Currently, survival rates remain dismal and there is no standard therapy or consensus regarding treatment. However, over the last fifteen years there have been substantial improvements in the diagnosis and treatment of MPM, including easier and more accurate diagnostic techniques, improved methods of staging, more effective systemic therapy, a remarkable decrease in operative mortality, marked improvements in local control with adjuvant therapy, and perhaps most important, an emphasis on multidisciplinary care and multimodality clinical trials. Despite these advances, optimal therapy for these patients remains highly controversial and the role of surgery is actively debated. Most controversy centers on whether surgery increases survival and whether a survival benefit is best achieved with extrapleural pneumonectomy or pleurectomy/decortication within a multimodal regimen. To date, trimodality therapy that includes surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation offers the best survival advantage. It is generally accepted that the main goals of surgery, within the framework of a multimodality approach, is not only complete resection if possible, but more realistically, the resection of all macroscopic disease as an adjunct to the delivery of chemotherapy and radiation. The surgical options available to obtain this goal include extrapleural pneumonectomy (EPP) and pleurectomy/decortication (P/D). There are no randomized trials directly comparing EPP and P/D and the level of evidence supporting either technique remains low. Ultimately, the choice of operation depends on multiple factors including: disease stage, the patient's cardiopulmonary reserve, surgeon experience and philosophy, and the extent of planned adjuvant therapy. Yet, despite the inherent biases in most studies, the data thus far illustrates significant survival advantages with both P/D and EPP and surgeons should consider these approaches in select patients.

21055770
Patterns of recurrence and incidence of second primary tumors after lobectomy by means of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) versus thoracotomy for lung cancer.
Reports have questioned the oncologic efficacy of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery when compared with thoracotomy despite similar survival results. In response, we investigated the pattern of recurrent disease and the incidence of second primary tumors after lobectomy by means of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery and thoracotomy. All patients who underwent lobectomy for clinical stage IA lung cancer determined by means of computed tomographic and positron emission tomographic analysis were identified from a prospective database at a single institution. All patients were selected for video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery or thoracotomy by an individual surgeon. Patients' characteristics, perioperative results, recurrences, and second primary tumors were recorded. Variables were compared by using Student's t test, the Pearson ?(2) test, and Fisher's exact test. A logistic regression model was constructed to identify variables influencing the development of recurrent disease or metachronous tumors. From 2002 to 2009, 520 patients underwent lobectomy by means of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery, and 652 underwent lobectomy by means of thoracotomy. Final pathological stage was similar in the video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery and thoracotomy groups. Logistic regression demonstrated a lower risk (odds ratio, 0.65; P = .01) of recurrent disease in patients undergoing video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery after adjusting for age, stage, sex, histology, tumor location, and synchronous primary tumors. Recurrence rates for video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery appear to be at least equivalent to those for thoracotomy. This study supports lobectomy by means of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery as an oncologically sound technique.

20871264
Frequency of use and predictors of cancer-directed surgery in the management of malignant pleural mesothelioma in a community-based (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results [SEER]) population.
Surgical intervention rates for mesothelioma patients treated at specialized tertiary hospitals are well more than 42%. Mesothelioma surgical strategies in the community are less well defined. This study evaluates the frequency of use and predictors of cancer-directed surgical intervention in a nontertiary-based population and the predictors for surgical intervention. The Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results database was searched from 1990 to 2004. Variables analyzed included age, sex, race, year of diagnosis, region, vital status, stage, surgery, and reasons for no surgery. The association of patient variables on receipt of cancer-directed surgery was evaluated using ?(2) tests and logistic regression. The incidence of mesothelioma was also evaluated over this period of time. Pathologically proven malignant pleural mesothelioma was identified in 1166 women and 4771 men. The rate of cancer-directed surgery was 22% (n = 1317). Significant predictors of receiving cancer-directed surgery included race, age, and stage (all p < 0.0001). A landmark analysis on the effect of cancer-directed surgery on survival after adjusting for patient and disease characteristics demonstrated a hazard ratio of 0.68 (p < 0.0001). The incidence rate of malignant pleural mesothelioma has remained constant. The rate of surgical intervention in the community is lower compared with tertiary referral centers. Age, stage, and race predict the likelihood of receiving cancer-directed surgery. A lower rate of cancer-directed surgery and worse overall outcome were observed in black patients. As part of quality assurance, referral of patients to centers with multidisciplinary programs that include thoracic surgical expertise should be considered.

