21447652
Central endocannabinoid signaling regulates hepatic glucose production and systemic lipolysis.
The endocannabinoid (EC) system has been implicated as an important regulator of energy homeostasis. In obesity and type 2 diabetes, EC tone is elevated in peripheral tissues including liver, muscle, fat, and also centrally, particularly in the hypothalamus. Cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB?) blockade with the centrally and peripherally acting rimonabant induces weight loss and improves glucose homeostasis while also causing psychiatric adverse effects. The relative contributions of peripheral versus central EC signaling on glucose homeostasis remain to be elucidated. The aim of this study was to test whether the central EC system regulates systemic glucose fluxes. We determined glucose and lipid fluxes in male Sprague-Dawley rats during intracerebroventricular infusions of either WIN55,212-2 (WIN) or arachidonoyl-2'-chloroethylamide (ACEA) while controlling circulating insulin and glucose levels through hyperinsulinemic, euglycemic clamp studies. Conversely, we fed rats a high-fat diet for 3 days and then blocked central EC signaling with an intracerebroventricular infusion of rimonabant while assessing glucose fluxes during a clamp. Central CB? activation is sufficient to impair glucose homeostasis. Either WIN or ACEA infusions acutely impaired insulin action in both liver and adipose tissue. Conversely, in a model of overfeeding-induced insulin resistance, CB? antagonism restored hepatic insulin sensitivity. Thus central EC tone plays an important role in regulating hepatic and adipose tissue insulin action. These results indicate that peripherally restricted CB? antagonists, which may lack psychiatric side effects, are also likely to be less effective than brain-permeable CB? antagonists in ameliorating insulin resistance.

21284985
Brain insulin controls adipose tissue lipolysis and lipogenesis.
White adipose tissue (WAT) dysfunction plays a key role in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes (DM2). Unrestrained WAT lipolysis results in increased fatty acid release, leading to insulin resistance and lipotoxicity, while impaired de novo lipogenesis in WAT decreases the synthesis of insulin-sensitizing fatty acid species like palmitoleate. Here, we show that insulin infused into the mediobasal hypothalamus (MBH) of Sprague-Dawley rats increases WAT lipogenic protein expression, inactivates hormone-sensitive lipase (Hsl), and suppresses lipolysis. Conversely, mice that lack the neuronal insulin receptor exhibit unrestrained lipolysis and decreased de novo lipogenesis in WAT. Thus, brain and, in particular, hypothalamic insulin action play a pivotal role in WAT functionality.

19290485
The dysregulation of the endocannabinoid system in diabesity-a tricky problem.
Endocannabinoids (ECs) are small lipid mediators that play a critical role in energy metabolism. Human studies have shown that the EC tone in peripheral tissues positively correlates with increased adiposity. Furthermore, pharmacological inhibition of EC signaling results in weight loss in humans. However, the mechanisms that cause the dysregulation of the EC system in obesity are not well-understood. Since the clinical utility of currently available EC blockers is severely limited due to their side effects like depression and suicidal ideation that are caused by central effects, it is important to delineate the role of central and peripheral effects of EC signaling in regulating glucose and lipid metabolism.

19026934
Hypothalamic control of hepatic glucose production and its potential role in insulin resistance.
The liver plays a pivotal role in the regulation of glucose metabolism because it is the key organ that maintains glucose levels during fasting. An emerging body of literature has demonstrated the important role of the hypothalamus in controlling hepatic glucose production (HGP). The hypothalamus senses circulating nutrients and hormones, conveying the energy status to the central nervous system, which, in turn, controls HGP in part by way of the autonomic nervous system. Overfeeding results in the failure of the hypothalamus to sense circulating nutrients and hormones, and in a loss of the central control of HGP.

18516053
Leptin controls adipose tissue lipogenesis via central, STAT3-independent mechanisms.
Leptin (encoded by Lep) controls body weight by regulating food intake and fuel partitioning. Obesity is characterized by leptin resistance and increased endocannabinoid tone. Here we show that leptin infused into the mediobasal hypothalamus (MBH) of rats inhibits white adipose tissue (WAT) lipogenesis, which occurs independently of signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3) signaling. Correspondingly, transgenic inactivation of STAT3 signaling by mutation of the leptin receptor (s/s mice) leads to reduced adipose mass compared to db/db mice (complete abrogation of leptin receptor signaling). Conversely, the ability of hypothalamic leptin to suppress WAT lipogenesis in rats is lost when hypothalamic phosphoinositide 3-kinase signaling is prevented or when sympathetic denervation of adipose tissue is performed. MBH leptin suppresses the endocannabinoid anandamide in WAT, and, when this suppression of endocannabinoid tone is prevented by systemic CB1 receptor activation, MBH leptin fails to suppress WAT lipogenesis. These data suggest that the increased endocannabinoid tone observed in obesity is linked to a failure of central leptin signaling to restrain peripheral endocannabinoids.

18516053
Leptin controls adipose tissue lipogenesis via central, STAT3-independent mechanisms.
Leptin (encoded by Lep) controls body weight by regulating food intake and fuel partitioning. Obesity is characterized by leptin resistance and increased endocannabinoid tone. Here we show that leptin infused into the mediobasal hypothalamus (MBH) of rats inhibits white adipose tissue (WAT) lipogenesis, which occurs independently of signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3) signaling. Correspondingly, transgenic inactivation of STAT3 signaling by mutation of the leptin receptor (s/s mice) leads to reduced adipose mass compared to db/db mice (complete abrogation of leptin receptor signaling). Conversely, the ability of hypothalamic leptin to suppress WAT lipogenesis in rats is lost when hypothalamic phosphoinositide 3-kinase signaling is prevented or when sympathetic denervation of adipose tissue is performed. MBH leptin suppresses the endocannabinoid anandamide in WAT, and, when this suppression of endocannabinoid tone is prevented by systemic CB1 receptor activation, MBH leptin fails to suppress WAT lipogenesis. These data suggest that the increased endocannabinoid tone observed in obesity is linked to a failure of central leptin signaling to restrain peripheral endocannabinoids.

17908552
Does FASing out new fat in the hypothalamus make you slim?
Fatty acid synthase (FAS) is a key enzyme for lipogenesis. A recent study (Chakravarthy et al., 2007) shows that the targeted deletion of FAS in hypothalamic neurons produces hypophagic, lean mice and suggests that PPARalpha signaling is an important mediator of the effects of FAS on energy homeostasis.

