19787715
Differentiating multiple sclerosis from other causes of demyelination using diffusion weighted imaging of the corpus callosum.
To compare diffusion weighted imaging metrics in gray and white matter brain regions of patients diagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS) to those diagnosed with secondary demyelinating diseases such as neurosarcoid and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM). Diffusion weighted scans were performed and apparent diffusion coefficients of 12 regions of interest were determined in 30 MS patients, 21 neurosarcoid patients, and 4 ADEM patients. Mean apparent diffusion coefficients were significantly higher in MS patients than in non-MS patients in 6 of 6 of the corpus callosal regions assessed but not in any of the non-callosal white or gray matter regions assessed. Elevated apparent diffusion coefficients within the corpus callosum on diffusion weighted imaging may potentially help differentiate between patients with MS and patients with other diseases affecting the central nervous system white matter.

18500719
Neurotherapeutics in multiple sclerosis: novel agents and emerging treatment strategies.
New insights into the complex immunopathogenesis of multiple sclerosis have led to a proliferation of promising new therapeutic strategies. While the current armamentarium of immunomodulatory medications has demonstrated beneficial effects on the disease, more effective and tolerable therapies are needed. Several novel therapeutic strategies under investigation include oral therapies, monoclonal antibodies, symptomatic treatments, insights into neuroprotection and repair as well as combination regimens. New therapies may prove more efficacious and tolerable than the available arsenal of treatments; however, decisions regarding first-line therapies will expectedly become more complicated, with greater influence if risk-to-benefit ratios in light of premature safety data. Biomarker profiles may help elucidate disease subtypes as well as therapeutic response in an effort to individualize treatment choice. This review will highlight recent promising therapeutic strategies under investigation in the field of MS.

18451708
Multiple sclerosis: new treatment trials and emerging therapeutic targets.
This review focuses on new therapeutic strategies in multiple sclerosis. The past decade has marked the advent of various new therapeutic strategies in multiple sclerosis. Whereas the current armamentarium of immunomodulatory medications has demonstrated beneficial effects on the disease, more effective and tolerable therapies are needed. Several novel therapeutic strategies in testing include oral therapies, monoclonal antibodies, symptomatic treatments as well as insights into neuroprotection and repair. Ways to build upon existing therapies are also under investigation, including early initiation of treatment and various combination regimens. New therapies, along with variations of currently available treatments, may prove more efficacious and tolerable than the available arsenal of treatments. Nevertheless, as the treatment horizon broadens, choosing first-line therapies will become more complicated, with greater influence of risk-to-benefit ratios in light of premature safety data. Patient's clinical, paraclinical and biomarker fingerprint profiles may help elucidate disease subtypes as well as response to therapy in an effort to individualize treatment choice. A complete discussion of all studies currently underway is beyond the scope of this review, which will highlight recent promising therapeutic strategies under investigation in the field of multiple sclerosis.

