21347441
Role of cell-to-cell variability in activating a positive feedback antiviral response in human dendritic cells.
In the first few hours following Newcastle disease viral infection of human monocyte-derived dendritic cells, the induction of IFNB1 is extremely low and the secreted type I interferon response is below the limits of ELISA assay. However, many interferon-induced genes are activated at this time, for example DDX58 (RIGI), which in response to viral RNA induces IFNB1. We investigated whether the early induction of IFNBI in only a small percentage of infected cells leads to low level IFN secretion that then induces IFN-responsive genes in all cells. We developed an agent-based mathematical model to explore the IFNBI and DDX58 temporal dynamics. Simulations showed that a small number of early responder cells provide a mechanism for efficient and controlled activation of the DDX58-IFNBI positive feedback loop. The model predicted distributions of single cell responses that were confirmed by single cell mRNA measurements. The results suggest that large cell-to-cell variation plays an important role in the early innate immune response, and that the variability is essential for the efficient activation of the IFNB1 based feedback loop.

20739535
Novel Nipah virus immune-antagonism strategy revealed by experimental and computational study.
Nipah virus is an emerging pathogen that causes severe disease in humans. It expresses several antagonist proteins that subvert the immune response and that may contribute to its pathogenicity. Studies of its biology are difficult due to its high pathogenicity and requirement for biosafety level 4 containment. We integrated experimental and computational methods to elucidate the effects of Nipah virus immune antagonists. Individual Nipah virus immune antagonists (phosphoprotein and V and W proteins) were expressed from recombinant Newcastle disease viruses, and the responses of infected human monocyte-derived dendritic cells were determined. We developed an ordinary differential equation model of the infectious process that that produced results with a high degree of correlation with these experimental results. In order to simulate the effects of wild-type virus, the model was extended to incorporate published experimental data on the time trajectories of immune-antagonist production. These data showed that the RNA-editing mechanism utilized by the wild-type Nipah virus to produce immune antagonists leads to a delay in the production of the most effective immune antagonists, V and W. Model simulations indicated that this delay caused a disconnection between attenuation of the antiviral response and suppression of inflammation. While the antiviral cytokines were efficiently suppressed at early time points, some early inflammatory cytokine production occurred, which would be expected to increase vascular permeability and promote virus spread and pathogenesis. These results suggest that Nipah virus has evolved a unique immune-antagonist strategy that benefits from controlled expression of multiple antagonist proteins with various potencies.

20298589
Coregulation mapping based on individual phenotypic variation in response to virus infection.
Gene coregulation across a population is an important aspect of the considerable variability of the human immune response to virus infection. Methodology to investigate it must rely on a number of ingredients ranging from gene clustering to transcription factor enrichment analysis. We have developed a methodology to investigate the gene to gene correlations for the expression of 34 genes linked to the immune response of Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV) infected conventional dendritic cells (DCs) from 145 human donors. The levels of gene expression showed a large variation across individuals. We generated a map of gene co-expression using pairwise correlation and multidimensional scaling (MDS). The analysis of these data showed that among the 13 genes left after filtering for statistically significant variations, two clusters are formed. We investigated to what extent the observed correlation patterns can be explained by the sharing of transcription factors (TFs) controlling these genes. Our analysis showed that there was a significant positive correlation between MDS distances and TF sharing across all pairs of genes. We applied enrichment analysis to the TFs having binding sites in the promoter regions of those genes. This analysis, after Gene Ontology filtering, indicated the existence of two clusters of genes (CCL5, IFNA1, IFNA2, IFNB1) and (IKBKE, IL6, IRF7, MX1) that were transcriptionally co-regulated. In order to facilitate the use of our methodology by other researchers, we have also developed an interactive coregulation explorer web-based tool called CorEx. It permits the study of MDS and hierarchical clustering of data combined with TF enrichment analysis. We also offer web services that provide programmatic access to MDS, hierarchical clustering and TF enrichment analysis. MDS mapping based on correlation in conjunction with TF enrichment analysis represents a useful computational method to generate predictions underlying gene coregulation across a population.

20159146
Immune response modeling of interferon beta-pretreated influenza virus-infected human dendritic cells.
The pretreatment of human dendritic cells with interferon-beta enhances their immune response to influenza virus infection. We measured the expression levels of several key players in that response over a period of 13 h both during pretreatment and after viral infection. Their activation profiles reflect the presence of both negative and positive feedback loops in interferon induction and interferon signaling pathway. Based on these measurements, we have developed a comprehensive computational model of cellular immune response that elucidates its mechanism and its dynamics in interferon-pretreated dendritic cells, and provides insights into the effects of duration and strength of pretreatment.

17763931
A simple model of retina-LGN transmission.
To gain a deeper understanding of the transmission of visual signals from retina through the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), we have used a simple leaky integrate and-fire model to simulate a relay cell in the LGN. The simplicity of the model was motivated by two questions: (1) Can an LGN model that is driven by a retinal spike train recorded as synaptic ('S') potentials, but does not include a diverse array of ion channels, nor feedback inputs from the cortex, brainstem, and thalamic reticular nucleus, accurately simulate the LGN discharge on a spike-for-spike basis? (2) Are any special synaptic mechanisms, beyond simple summation of currents, necessary to model experimental recordings? We recorded cat relay cell responses to spatially homogeneous small or large spots, with luminance that was rapidly modulated in a pseudo-random fashion. Model parameters for each cell were optimized with a Simplex algorithm using a short segment of the recording. The model was then tested on a much longer, distinct data set consisting of responses to numerous repetitions of the noisy stimulus. For LGN cells that spiked in response to a sufficiently large fraction of retinal inputs, we found that this simplified model accurately predicted the firing times of LGN discharges. This suggests that modulations of the efficacy of the retino-geniculate synapse by pre-synaptic facilitation or depression are not necessary in order to account for the LGN responses generated by our stimuli, and that post-synaptic summation is sufficient.

17720728
Noise propagation and scaling in regulation of gonadotrope biosynthesis.
Reproductive physiology depends on the control of biosynthesis in the pituitary gonadotrope by hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). The responses to GnRH include activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and induction of Egr1. Using population and single cell signaling assays, we investigated the signal and noise transmission through this signaling and gene circuit, analyzing data obtained from 43,775 individual cells in 40 experiments. After exposure to GnRH, phosphorylated ERK (pERK) is elevated in 50% of the cells at 1.7 (SD = 0.3) min. Studies of the cell-to-cell response showed that for both pERK and for Egr1 protein production the mean response (mu) and standard deviation (sigma) within individual cells were linearly related (sigma = kmu) and had similar values of k. To understand the basis for the scaling observed for noise propagation through this system, we determined the relationship between pERK and egr1 mRNA levels induced at varying concentration of GnRH. While both pERK and egr1 mRNA show a saturating sigmoidal relationship to the concentration of GnRH exposure, egr1 mRNA is linearly related to the levels of pERK. These results explain the basis for variation in cellular responses in an important mammalian signaling pathway leading to gene induction.

17675303
Chromosome-specific and noisy IFNB1 transcription in individual virus-infected human primary dendritic cells.
The induction of interferon beta (IFNB1) is a key event in the antiviral immune response. We studied the role of transcriptional noise in the regulation of the IFNB1 locus in primary cultures of human dendritic cells (DCs), which are important 'first responders' to viral infection. In single cell assays, IFNB1 mRNA expression in virus-infected DCs showed much greater cell-to-cell variation than that of a housekeeping gene, another induced transcript and viral RNA. We determined the contribution of intrinsic noise by measuring the allelic origin of transcripts in each cell and found that intrinsic noise is a very significant part of total noise. We developed a stochastic model to investigate the underlying mechanisms. We propose that the surprisingly high levels of IFNB1 transcript noise originate from the complexity of IFNB1 enhanceosome formation, which leads to a range up to many minutes in the differences within each cell in the time of activation of each allele.

19804729
Power-laws in interferon-B mRNA distribution in virus-infected dendritic cells.
Interferon-beta (IFNB1) mRNA shows very large cell-to-cell variability in primary human dendritic cells infected by Newcastle disease virus, with copy numbers varying from a few to several thousands. Analysis of data from the direct measurement of the expression of this gene in its natural chromatin environment in primary human cells shows that the distribution of mRNA across cells follows a power law with an exponent close to -1, and thus encompasses a range of variation much more extensive than a Gaussian. We also investigate the single cell levels of IFNB1 mRNA induced by infection with Texas influenza A mutant viruses, which vary in their capacity to inhibit the signaling pathways responsible for activation of this gene. Here as well we observe power-law behavior for the distribution of IFNB1 mRNA, albeit over a truncated range of values, with exponents similar to the one for cells infected by Newcastle disease virus. We propose a model of stochastic enhanceosome and preinitiation complex formation that incorporates transcriptional pulsing. Analytical and numerical results show good agreement with the observed power laws, and thus support the existence of transcriptional pulsing of an unmodified, intact gene regulated by a natural stimulus.

18997274
Shared kinase fluctuations between two enzymatic reactions.
Kinases serve crucial roles in many cellular signaling pathways that process and transfer information. When signaling kinases phosphorylate two targets, these can serve as branch points that distribute information among two pathways. Responses to stimuli transmitted by activated kinases show high levels of cell-to-cell variation that influence cellular function. We ask how fluctuations around a steady state, due to kinase fluctuations and intrinsic noise, are distributed between two reactions with substrates phosphorylated by a shared kinase. We develop the formalism to answer this question and, for a realistic set of biological constants, we illustrate various features of fluctuations and relaxation times to a steady state. We find that the steady-state response determines the size and range in enzyme concentration of phosphorylated substrate fluctuations, and that the choice of an operating point can have a large impact on how shared kinase noise is distributed among two available pathways.

