19116146
sPLA2-IIa is an inflammatory mediator when the ocular surface is compromised.
sPLA2-IIa is an enzyme at high concentration in tears that has been known as an innate barrier of the ocular surface against microbial infection. sPLA2-IIa and other enzymes in the same protein family are known to hydrolyze fatty acids resulting in the generation of free arachidonic acid (AA) and lysophospholipids, which are the precursors of pro-inflammatory lipid mediators, such as PGE(2). sPLA2-IIa has been shown to be an inflammatory mediator in non-ocular inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA). It was also found to be increased in the tears of the patients with dry eye disease, chronic blepharitis and contact lens intolerance. However, the role of sPLA2-IIa in chronic ocular surface inflammation has yet to be determined. In the current study, we examined the potential role of sPLA2-IIa in inflammation of ocular surface diseases. Our results show that the activity of sPLA2-IIa was significantly increased in tears from dry eye disease patients compared with that from normal subjects. Also, sPLA2-IIa stimulated the production of PGE(2) in ocular surface epithelial cell cultures. The stimulating effect was markedly enhanced when the cells or tissues were pre-compromised with TNF-alpha, IL-1beta or desiccation. Furthermore, sPLA2-IIa stimulated inflammatory cytokine production in the ocular surface epithelial cell cultures in vitro. To our knowledge, this is the first report regarding the role of sPLA2-IIa as an inflammatory mediator in ocular surface inflammation. These findings indicate that sPLA2-IIa may play an important role in chronic ocular surface inflammation, especially when the ocular surface is compromised.

17962448
Nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB precedes apoptotic poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage during productive HSV-1 replication in corneal epithelial cells.
Herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 infections of the human cornea range in severity from uncomplicated episodes that readily resolve to severe, recurring disease that invades the stroma, having a devastating permanent effect on vision. Recent published data implicate an apoptotic component to stromal HSV-1 infection. In a prior study, it was found that wild type (wt) HSV-1 infection induces, then blocks, apoptosis in epithelial cells derived from skin and that this block requires infected cell proteins (ICPs) synthesized between 3 and 6 hours post infection (hpi). This inhibition of apoptosis is in part dependent on the activation of inducible nuclear transcription factor kappaB (NF-kappaB). HSV-1-dependent apoptosis in rabbit corneal epithelial (SIRC) cells was compared with that in infected human epithelial (HEp-2) cells. SIRC cells were sensitive to apoptotic cell death induced by environmental treatment with tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha plus cycloheximide (CHX). HSV-1 stimulated the degradation of regulatory IkappaBalpha protein, resulting in nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB. This phenomenon was dependent on ICP synthesis. Neither wt nor apoptotic HSV-1 infection resulted in apoptosis in these cells. However, wt HSV-1-infected cells produced detectable levels of cleaved poly(ADP-ribose) (PARP). Inhibition of SIRC cell protein synthesis with CHX during wt HSV-1 infection led to a reduction in the amount of PARP cleavage. Whereas PARP cleavage defined cell death in most other cell types, its processing in SIRC cells was a reproducible characteristic of wt HSV-1 infection. This is the first report of such an effect, and it suggests that in corneal epithelial cells, activation of apoptotic pathways may be necessary for productive viral replication. Thus, efficient replication of HSV-1 in the corneal milieu proceeds via a different mechanism than it does in skin. However, it appears that NF-kappaB participates in inhibiting apoptosis during HSV-1 infection in both systems.

