19861948
AAV8-mediated gene therapy prevents induced biochemical attacks of acute intermittent porphyria and improves neuromotor function.
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), an autosomal dominant hepatic porphyria due to half-normal hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMB-synthase) activity, is manifested by life-threatening acute neurological attacks that are precipitated by factors that induce heme biosynthesis. The acute attacks are currently treated with intravenous hemin, but a more continuous therapy is needed, particularly for patients experiencing frequent attacks. Thus, a recombinant AAV8-based serotype vector expressing murine HMB-synthase driven by liver-specific regulatory elements was generated and its effectiveness to prevent the biochemical induction of an acute attack was evaluated in an AIP mouse model. Intraperitoneal administration of the adeno-associated viral (AAV) vector resulted in a rapid and dose-dependent increase of HMB-synthase activity that was restricted to the liver. Stable expression of hepatic HMB-synthase was achieved and wild-type or greater levels were sustained for 36 weeks. When heme synthesis was periodically induced by a series of phenobarbital injections, the treated mice did not accumulate urinary delta-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) or porphobilinogen (PBG), indicating that the expressed enzyme was functional in vivo and prevented induction of the acute attack. Further, rotarod performance and footprint analyses improved significantly. Thus, liver-directed gene therapy provided successful long-term correction of the hepatic metabolic abnormalities and improved neuromotor function in the murine model of human AIP.

17654633
Acute intermittent porphyria: vector optimization for gene therapy.
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by the half-normal activity of hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMB-synthase). Affected individuals can experience episodic, life-threatening, acute neurological attacks that are precipitated by various drugs, dieting, and hormonal changes. Intravenous hematin is used to treat the attacks, but a more effective, preventive therapy is needed, especially for patients with frequent attacks. Since the disease is a hepatic encephalopathy, efforts were focused towards evaluating four different combinations of liver-specific enhancers and promoters for maximal hepatic HMB-synthase expression. Four different mammalian expression vectors, each carrying a unique combination of liver-specific enhancers and promoters driving murine HMB-synthase cDNA expression, were transiently transfected into HepG2 cells. The vectors included: HMBS-1; human alpha1-microglobulin enhancer/alpha1-antityrpsin promoter (alpha1Me/alpha1ATp), HMBS-2; alpha1Me/human serum albumin promoter (alpha1Me/SAp), HMBS-3; human prothrombin enhancer/SAp (PTe/SAp), and HMBS-4; (PTe/alpha1ATp). Each HMB-synthase construct and a luciferase reporter construct were hydrodynamically coinjected into mice with HMB-synthase deficiency and evaluated for hepatic expression 24 h post-injection, the time-point of peak hepatic HMB-synthase expression. Following transient transfection into HepG2 cells, HMBS-1 (alpha1Me/alpha1ATp) had the highest HMB-synthase expression level, with an approximately 8-fold increase over endogenous cellular activities. Construct HMBS-1 also had the highest hepatic HMB-synthase activity following hydrodynamic delivery into HMB-synthase deficient mice, with a approximately 6-fold increase over saline-treated mice. These studies support the use of a gene therapy vector containing the alpha1Me/alpha1ATp combination for preclinical studies of the efficacy and safety of liver-targeted gene therapy for AIP.

