21236620
Diagnosis, management, and future developments of fibromuscular dysplasia.
Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is a nonatherosclerotic noninflammatory vascular disease that primarily affects women from age 20 to 60, but may also occur in infants and children, men, and the elderly. It most commonly affects the renal and carotid arteries but has been observed in almost every artery in the body. FMD has been considered rare and thus is often underdiagnosed and poorly understood by many health care providers. There are, however, data to suggest that FMD is much more common than previously thought, perhaps affecting as many as 4% of adult women. When it affects the renal arteries, the most common presentation is hypertension. When it affects the carotid or vertebral arteries, the patient may present with transient ischemic attack or stroke, or dissection. An increasing number of patients are asymptomatic and are only discovered incidentally when imaging is performed for some other reason or by the detection of an asymptomatic bruit. FMD should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a young person with a cervical bruit; a "swishing" sound in the ear(s); transient ischemic attack, stroke, or dissection of an artery; or in individuals aged ? 35 years with onset hypertension. Treatment consists of antiplatelet therapy for asymptomatic individuals and percutaneous balloon angioplasty for patients with indications for intervention. Patients with aneurysms should be treated with a covered stent or open surgical repair. Little new information has been published about FMD in the last 40 years. The recently instituted International Registry for Fibromuscular Dysplasia will remedy that situation and provide observational data on a large numbers of patients with FMD.

20620007
A rare case of familial carotid body tumor in a patient with bilateral fibromuscular dysplasia.
Carotid body tumors (CBTs) are neuroendocrine tumors that arise due to mutations of respiratory cycle enzymes. Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is a disease that causes narrowing of medium-sized arteries. There is no documented link between CBT and FMD. In this article, we report a case of a patient with bilateral carotid FMD and familial CBT, including one in an identical twin who underwent successful surgical excision of the CBT. We describe specific considerations in the management of CBT in patients with concomitant carotid FMD. Also, we review the literature about the genetics of familial CBT and its possible relationship to the etiology of FMD.

20592174
Peripheral artery disease: current insight into the disease and its diagnosis and management.
Peripheral artery disease (PAD), which comprises atherosclerosis of the abdominal aorta, iliac, and lower-extremity arteries, is underdiagnosed, undertreated, and poorly understood by the medical community. Patients with PAD may experience a multitude of problems, such as claudication, ischemic rest pain, ischemic ulcerations, repeated hospitalizations, revascularizations, and limb loss. This may lead to a poor quality of life and a high rate of depression. From the standpoint of the limb, the prognosis of patients with PAD is favorable in that the claudication remains stable in 70% to 80% of patients over a 10-year period. However, the rate of myocardial infarction, stroke, and cardiovascular death in patients with both symptomatic and asymptomatic PAD is markedly increased. The ankle brachial index is an excellent screening test for the presence of PAD. Imaging studies (duplex ultrasonography, computed tomographic angiography, magnetic resonance angiography, catheter-based angiography) may provide additional anatomic information if revascularization is planned. The goals of therapy are to improve symptoms and thus quality of life and to decrease the cardiovascular event rate (myocardial infarction, stroke, cardiovascular death). The former is accomplished by establishing a supervised exercise program and administering cilostazol or performing a revascularization procedure if medical therapy is ineffective. A comprehensive program of cardiovascular risk modification (discontinuation of tobacco use and control of lipids, blood pressure, and diabetes) will help to prevent the latter.

20307322
Elevated osteoprotegerin is associated with abnormal ankle brachial indices in patients infected with HIV: a cross-sectional study.
Patients infected with HIV have an increased risk for accelerated atherosclerosis. Elevated levels of osteoprotegerin, an inflammatory cytokine receptor, have been associated with a high incidence of cardiovascular disease (including peripheral arterial disease, or PAD), acute coronary syndrome, and cardiovascular mortality. The objective of this study was to determine whether PAD is prevalent in an HIV-infected population, and to identify an association with HIV-specific and traditional cardiovascular risk factors, as well as levels of osteoprotegerin. One hundred and two patients infected with HIV were recruited in a cross-sectional study. To identify the prevalence of PAD, ankle-brachial indices (ABIs) were measured. Four standard ABI categories were utilized: < or = 0.90 (definite PAD); 0.91-0.99 (borderline); 1.00-1.30 (normal); and >1.30 (high). Medical history and laboratory measurements were obtained to determine possible risk factors associated with PAD in HIV-infected patients. The prevalence of PAD (ABI < or = 0.90) in a young HIV-infected population (mean age: 48 years) was 11%. Traditional cardiovascular risk factors, including advanced age and previous cardiovascular history, as well as elevated C-reactive protein levels, were associated with PAD. Compared with patients with normal ABIs, patients with high ABIs had significantly elevated levels of osteoprotegerin [1428.9 (713.1) pg/ml vs. 3088.6 (3565.9) pg/ml, respectively, p = 0.03]. There is a high prevalence of PAD in young HIV-infected patients. A number of traditional cardiovascular risk factors and increased osteoprotegerin concentrations are associated with abnormal ABIs. Thus, early screening and aggressive medical management for PAD may be warranted in HIV-infected patients.

19892066
Combined role of reduced estimated glomerular filtration rate and microalbuminuria on the prevalence of peripheral arterial disease.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD), defined by either microalbuminuria (MA) or a reduced estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), is associated with an increased risk of peripheral arterial disease (PAD). The presence of both abnormalities might identify a subgroup of adults at particularly high risk of PAD. Accordingly, we sought to evaluate the combined effect of a reduced eGFR and MA on the prevalence of PAD among United States adults. United States adults >or=40 years old (n = 6,951) participating in the 1999 to 2004 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey were cross-classified into 4 groups according to the presence or absence of MA (urinary albumin/creatinine ratio >or=30 mg/g) and reduced eGFR (<60 mL/min/1.73 m(2)). PAD was defined as an ankle-brachial index of <0.9. The prevalence of PAD among adults without MA or a reduced eGFR was 3.6% compared to 9.7%, 14.8%, and 25.4% among adults with MA alone, reduced eGFR alone, and both reduced eGFR and MA, respectively. After multivariate adjustment, the odds ratio for prevalent PAD associated with MA alone, reduced eGFR alone, and both reduced eGFR and MA compared to those without MA or reduced eGFR was 1.72 (95% confidence interval 1.16 to 2.55), 1.58 (95% confidence interval 1.09 to 2.29), and 2.26 (95% confidence interval 1.30 to 3.94), respectively. In conclusion, the coexistence of MA and reduced eGFR was associated with a high prevalence of PAD and might be useful in identifying patients with vascular disease.

19808721
Sirolimus-eluting stent placement for refractory renal artery in-stent restenosis: sustained patency and clinical benefit at 24 months.
Renal artery stenosis may cause or exacerbate hypertension and renal failure. Percutaneous transluminal renal artery stent placement, increasingly the first-line therapy for ostial atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis, can be complicated by in-stent restenosis weeks to months after the procedure. There is currently no consensus for the treatment of in-stent restenosis. Sirolimus-eluting stents have been shown to be effective to treat in-stent restenosis in the coronary circulation. We report a case of sustained 24-month patency after repair of recurrent renal artery in-stent restenosis with use of a sirolimus-eluting stent.

19223385
Carotid artery pseudo-occlusion: does end-diastolic velocity suggest need for treatment?
We reviewed our institution's experience with carotid artery pseudo-occlusion (CAPO), to investigate whether internal carotid artery (ICA) end-diastolic velocity (EDV) as measured by duplex ultrasonography, was a predictor of need for further intervention. From February 2003 to January 2008, 7478 patients underwent duplex ultrasonographic evaluation of their carotid arteries. Diagnosis of CAPO included the appearance of a narrow flow jet (string sign) on power doppler images, low velocities in the ICA and additional criteria listed below. Ten patients (0.13%) were identified as having a CAPO. All patients were asymptomatic and had an EDV<78 cm/s. Occlusion or functional occlusion was identified in nine patients on contrast imaging studies. Eight of these patients were treated medically without neurologic complication on follow-up. Two patients were treated with interventions and were asymptomatic at follow up. The mean follow up for the entire group was 12 months. Although this is a low volume study, there is evidence to suggest that asymptomatic patients with low EDV in the setting of carotid artery pseudo-occlusion found of duplex, may be safely managed medically.

18830066
Contemporary management of fibromuscular dysplasia.
Fibromuscular dysplasia is an underdiagnosed and misunderstood disease. The purpose of this review is to inform healthcare providers and the public about a condition that may be more common than previously thought. There has been little new information published about fibromuscular dysplasia in the past 30 years. The International Registry that is now underway will remedy that situation and provide a large number of patients to study with this condition. Fibromuscular dysplasia is a noninflammatory, nonatherosclerotic disease that has been reported in almost every arterial bed and primarily affects women aged 15-50 years. It most commonly presents in the renal and extracranial cerebrovascular arteries, either manifesting as hypertension, transient ischemic attack or stroke, respectively. Some patients may be asymptomatic and fibromuscular dysplasia could only be discovered by imaging for some other reason or by the detection of an asymptomatic bruit. Dissection or aneurysm may also occur in patients with fibromuscular dysplasia. The true prevalence is unknown, partially because of the fact that it is underdiagnosed in many patients. Treatment consists of antiplatelet therapy for asymptomatic individuals and percutaneous balloon angioplasty for patients with indications for intervention. Patients with macroaneurysms should be treated with either a covered stent or surgery.

18779831
Can functional performance be used as a simple prognostic indicator in peripheral arterial disease?
McDermott et al. have demonstrated, for the first time, that a poor 6 min walk performance and slow walking speed in patients with peripheral arterial disease (PAD) are predictors of increased all-cause and cardiovascular mortality. The association was not affected by confounders, such as ankle brachial index and comorbidities. Simple measures of lower extremity functional performance could and should be incorporated into future research studies in patients with PAD. Reducing cardiovascular risk with statins, lowering blood pressure, and administering antiplatelet agents are not enough; measures to improve functional performance should be incorporated into overall cardiovascular risk reduction programs in patients with PAD.

18048475
Images in vascular medicine. Giant cell arteritis presenting with acute myocardial infarction.


17848920
Long-term outcomes and cost-effectiveness of screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm.


17515479
Contemporary management of postcatheterization pseudoaneurysms.


17449762
Power-pulse spray thrombectomy for treatment of Paget-Schroetter syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: This initial single-center study describes three cases of axillary-subclavian vein thrombosis (Paget-Schroetter syndrome) treated with a rapid, novel thrombectomy technique, termed "power-pulse spray thrombectomy," in which a thrombolytic agent is directly infused into the clot via a catheter, followed by intravascular mechanical clot fracture and removal. CONCLUSION: All patients in this series were treated in a single session. Complete clot removal was successfully achieved without the development of any complications. This is the first description of the application of this technique in the treatment of Paget-Schroetter syndrome to our knowledge.

17438676
Recognizing and managing fibromuscular dysplasia.
Fibromuscular dysplasia typically occurs in young women and most commonly presents with hypertension, transient ischemic attack, stroke, or an asymptomatic cervical bruit. The disease is nonatherosclerotic and noninflammatory and most often affects the renal and carotid arteries, although almost any artery can be involved. On angiography, affected blood vessels characteristically resemble a string of beads in the most common type of fibromuscular dysplasia, medial fibroplasia. Patients with renal artery stenosis and hypertension or renal impairment should be treated with percutaneous transluminal angioplasty without a stent. Patients with fibromuscular dysplasia of the internal carotid artery should also be treated with angioplasty if they develop focal neurologic symptoms such as a transient ischemic attack or stroke.

17288125
Images in vascular medicine. Mirror image artifact.


