20528998
Advantage of optimizing V-V timing in cardiac resynchronization therapy devices.
There is little consensus as to the benefits of interventricular (V-V) timing optimization in cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT). A variety of parameters are currently used to optimize device timing. This study was designed to investigate the potential advantage of using 3D ejection fraction (EF) and aortic velocity-time integral (VTI) as measures of global left ventricular (LV) function to optimize ventricular activation in CRT devices. Seventy-four patients seen in the Optimization Clinic with adequate echocardiographic images were included. Three aortic VTI and two 3D EF values were recorded at five V-V settings and the average value used. Aortic VTI and 3D EF were classified as the best, worst, and simultaneous setting values. Data were analyzed using a two-tailed paired t-test. Comparing the best to worst V-V timing settings, VTI improved by 4.7 ± 7.5 cm (P < 0.0001) and 3D EF by 9.9%± 5.7% (P < 0.0001). Comparing the simultaneous setting to the best V-V timing setting, VTI improved by 2.4 ± 2.1 cm (P < 0.0001) and 3D EF by 3.8%± 4.9% (P < 0.0001). Aortic VTI improved in 85% of patients and 3D EF improved in 72%. However, only 26% of the patients had the same optimal setting using aortic VTI and 3D EF yielding an r(2) value of 0.003. Individualized echocardiographic V-V optimization of CRT devices improves global LV function as measured by aortic VTI and 3D EF. Substantial differences in function were seen over an 80-ms range of V-V timing and optimization resulted in improved LV function in the majority of patients.

20226269
Left atrial appendage pacing to confirm far-field potentials in the left superior pulmonary vein: A case of pseudo-pulmonary vein reconnection.


20009070
Giant T-wave inversions and extreme QT prolongation.


19955117
Current concepts in ablation of atrial fibrillation.
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common arrhythmia in clinical practice. It occurs particularly frequently in cardiac surgical patients and is associated with significant excess mortality and morbidity. Pharmacological management of AF is relatively ineffective and associated with significant side effects and complications. Clinicians have therefore pursued more definitive treatment options, both catheter based and surgical, to treat patients with AF. Surgical techniques designed to cure AF have developed in parallel with an improved understanding of the pathophysiological processes underlying this condition. This review describes the rationale behind current surgical approaches to AF and summarizes the results achieved with current techniques.

19656060
Optimization techniques in cardiac resynchronization therapy.
Cardiac resynchronization therapy improves symptoms and cardiac function, as well as reduces mortality in patients with progressive congestive heart failure, reduced left ventricular ejection fraction and a left bundle branch block on the surface electrocardiogram. As many as 30% of patients fail to have an adequate response. The interplay between the atrioventricular delay and the contribution of a properly timed atrial contraction to ventricular filling along with a properly timed sequence of activation of the right and left ventricular is crucial to maximizing the benefits of cardiac resynchronization therapy devices.

19335869
Fatal outcome in a pacemaker-dependent patient.
The recent advisory of Medtronic Sprint Fidelis leads has resulted in significant controversy over proper management of patients. The current manufacture's guidelines recommend programming specific device alerts with close follow-up and implantable cardioverter-defibrillator lead replacement in patients with evidence of breach in lead integrity. Recently, several studies have identified significant limitations in this method of surveillance. We report the case of a pacemaker-dependent patient with an ischemic cardiomyopathy, who presented with cardiac arrest and evidence of fracture of the pace/sense portion of a Sprint Fidelis lead during postmortem interrogation. Likely mechanisms leading to his ultimate demise are discussed.

19272063
Transfemoral snaring and stabilization of pacemaker and defibrillator leads to maintain vascular access during lead extraction.
Lead extraction is an effective method for removing pacemaker and defibrillator leads and to obtain venous access when central veins are occluded. We report a series of patients who required lead extraction and preservation of vascular access requiring a vascular snare introduced from the femoral vein to provide traction on the lead. This technique allowed advancement of the extraction sheath beyond the level of vascular occlusion, preserving vascular access in all patients. All patients had peripheral contrast venography performed immediately prior to the procedure to identify the site(s) of venous occlusion. An extraction sheath was employed and with direct manual traction, the lead tip pulled free from the myocardial surface prior to advancement of the sheath beyond the occlusion. A transfemoral snare was used to grasp the distal portion of the lead and traction was used to immobilize the lead. In all patients, transfemoral snaring of the leads was necessary to allow safe advancement of a sheath to open the occluded venous system. There were no complications in any of the patients. Our series demonstrates the simple and safe technique of transfemoral lead snaring to assist lead extraction and maintain vascular access in the setting of venous occlusion, when the distal lead tip pulls free of the myocardium before an extraction sheath is passed beyond the point of venous obstruction.

19148728
Lack of clinical predictors of optimal V-V delay in patients with cardiac resynchronization devices.
Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) is a well-established therapy for patients with moderate-to-severe heart failure (HF), left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction <or= 35% and a QRS on the surface electrocardiogram of >or=130 msec. Device optimization is often performed, adjusting the timing of RV and LV stimulation to produce a pacing sequence that yields the best global cardiac performance. However, no standard guidelines exist for optimization and many invasive and non-invasive techniques have been employed with mixed results. The aim of the present study was to determine whether there are any clinical predictors of the optimal V-V settings in patients implanted with CRT devices. We prospectively evaluated 47 consecutive patients with HF who were referred to our device optimization clinic. The mean patient age was 64.9 +/- 12.7 years. Patients were in both sinus rhythm (83%) and atrial fibrillation. Prior to device implant, 51% of patients had left bundle branch block (LBBB), 17% had intra-ventricular conduction delay (IVCD) and 21% were RV paced. Sixty-two percent were male, the mean QRS duration was 152 +/- 29 ms, mean LVEF 26 +/- 8% and 60% had a non-ischemic cardiomyopathy. Overall, 82% of patients required sequential pacing with 69% requiring LV pre-excitation to produce the best global cardiac function as determined by aortic velocity time integrals (VTI). In our cohort, none of the clinical characteristics evaluated, including etiology of the cardiomyopathy, QRS duration, LVEF, pre-implant rhythm or AV delay were predictive of an optimal simultaneous or sequential V-V setting. None of the clinical variables tested in our analysis predicted optimal RV-LV settings. Our results suggest that individual optimization and programming of V-V settings is necessary. The inability to predict optimal settings likely reflects the unique characteristics of each patient and supports the need for individualized programming of each device.

18950298
Impact of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator recalls on patients' anxiety, depression, and quality of life.
In the past 2 years, multiple implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) manufacturers have issued recalls on ICD models due to the potential for serious malfunction and even patient death. Previous studies examining the relationship between these recalls and patients' psychological well-being have been limited by small sample size and conflicting results. The purpose of this study is to examine the association between ICD recalls and patients' anxiety, depression, and quality of life. Patients were drawn from an outpatient electrophysiology clinic at a tertiary care hospital in New York City. Patients who had devices subject to a recall (cases) were identified from lists provided by device manufacturer and controls (patients with ICDs not subjected to a recall) were drawn from a convenience sample of outpatients. The survey instrument consisted of two validated questionnaires--Hospital Anxiety and Depression Score (HADS) and MacNew heart disease health-related quality of life (QOL) instrument. In addition, a series of Likert-type scales were designed to elucidate patients' concerns related to the following domains: anger, trust, hope, concerns regarding ICD shock, fear of death (FOD), and physicians' ability to reduce their concern about the ICD recall. Data were analyzed using simple descriptive statistics and bivariate analyses (chi(2) and t-test) as appropriate. Sixty-one cases and 43 control patients were enrolled. Thirty-two patients (52%) with devices subject to a recall opted for a generator replacement. There were no significant differences in the mean scores on the HADS scale, or the MacNew QOL scale between these two groups of patients (cases and controls). Subgroup analysis within the group of patients whose ICDs were recalled (cases) revealed a reduced QOL among patients with a class I recall (reasonable probability that the product will cause serious adverse health consequences or death) as compared to those with a class II recall (product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences) (P = 0.01). Both cases and control patients reported having reduced trust in the health-care system. On the whole, however, patients were satisfied with the way their physicians dealt with the recall. There was no significant change in the overall concern of ICD shocks or FOD between the two groups. In this study of ICD recall, we found no difference in the levels of anxiety, depression, or QOL expressed by patients with an ICD subject to a recall as compared to those without. These findings may be a reflection of good physician-patient communication, which might have reduced any anxiety associated with recalls.

19808406
Paroxysmal atrioventricular block induced by a single ventricular premature beat in the absence of overt atrioventricular conduction system disease.


18403546
Catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation.


18181924
Laser lead extraction and baffle stenting to facilitate dual chamber implantable defibrillator upgrade in a patient with L-transposition of the great arteries status-post Senning/Rastelli repair: a case report and review of literature.
A case of successful laser extraction of a defibrillator lead with baffle stenting in a 15-year-old boy with dextrocardia, L-transposition, ventricular septal defect, and pulmonic stenosis status-post Senning/Rastelli repair is presented. Six-month follow-up revealed a significant increase in exercise tolerance and maximum oxygen consumption (VO(2)max).

