20470998
Association between transforming growth factor-beta(1) and left ventricular mass and diameter in hypertensive patients.
Angiotensin II influences development of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) by stimulating cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, fibroblast proliferation, and collagen synthesis. Because pro-fibrotic actions of angiotensin may be mediated by increased production of transforming growth factor-beta(1) (TGF-beta(1)), we assessed whether serum TGF-beta(1) levels might reflect involvement in LVH development. We analyzed relationships between left ventricular mass and levels of renin, aldosterone, and TGF-beta(1) in 67 hypertensive subjects (mean age 64 +/- 11.3 years) with electrocardiographic evidence of LVH. Levels were obtained after a 2-week washout of antihypertensive medications; two-dimensional echocardiography was subsequently performed. Linear regression analysis showed a correlation between TGF-beta(1) and LV mass (r = 0.36, P = .002). This was apparently explained by the correlation between TGF-beta(1) and left ventricular diastolic internal diameter (r = 0.42, P < .001), because no correlation between TGF-beta(1) levels and LV wall thickness was found. In multivariate analysis, the correlation between TGF-beta(1) and internal diameter remained significant (r = 0.39, P = .0014). There were no racial differences in levels of TGF-beta(1) or left ventricular geometry, and no correlations between age, blood pressure, renin, aldosterone, and left ventricular mass or dimensions. These findings indicate that serum TGF-beta(1) levels are related to left ventricular structure in hypertensive subjects, suggesting its possible involvement in the process of hypertensive left ventricular remodeling.

20425249
Evidence for aggressive blood pressure-lowering goals in patients with coronary artery disease.
Lowering blood pressure (BP) reduces the risk of major cardiovascular mortality and morbidity. Current consensus targets for BP reduction are less than 140/90 mm Hg in uncomplicated hypertension and less than 130/80 mm Hg in those patients with diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and coronary artery disease or in those who are at high risk for developing coronary artery disease (defined as a Framingham risk score of > or = 10%). There is solid epidemiologic evidence for lower BP targets, supported by some clinical studies with surrogate end points. On the other hand, there are meager data from clinical trials using hard end points, and there is a concern that overly aggressive BP lowering, especially of diastolic BP, may impair coronary perfusion, particularly in patients with left ventricular hypertrophy and/or coronary artery disease. This review evaluates the evidence for the benefit of lower BP targets in hypertension management.

19863867
Hypertension and atrial fibrillation.
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is an emerging public health problem. The most important risk factor for developing chronic AF is uncontrolled hypertension. Uncontrolled hypertension promotes the initiation and perpetuation of AF through atrial remodeling. Experimental evidence has demonstrated the important role of the renin-angiotensin system in atrial remodeling. Retrospective analysis of several large clinical trials and small prospective trials suggests the beneficial role of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers in preventing the onset and recurrence of AF in different populations. Several large prospective trials with longer follow-up periods are in progress. These trials may provide definitive evidence for the use of these agents in the prevention of AF.

19616668
Comparison of olmesartan medoxomil versus amlodipine besylate on regression of ventricular and vascular hypertrophy.
Reversal of left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy is an important goal of antihypertensive therapy. This phase 3b study compared the ability of the angiotensin receptor blocker olmesartan medoxomil with the calcium channel blocker amlodipine besylate to induce regression of LV hypertrophy and vascular hypertrophy after achieving blood pressure (BP) goal. After a washout phase, 102 patients with hypertension and LV hypertrophy were randomized to olmesartan medoxomil 20 mg/day, up titrated to 40 mg/day, or amlodipine 5 mg/day, up titrated to 10 mg/day, for up to 4 weeks until a BP goal of <140/90 mm Hg (<130/85 mm Hg for diabetes) was achieved (hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg/day and terazosin 1 to 5 mg/day 2 times/day could be added if needed). Upon achieving the BP goal or by week 8, and again at weeks 26 and 52, assessments of LV mass and compliance and arterial structure and function were performed by echocardiography, Doppler flow, and arterial ultrasonography, respectively. There was no statistically significant percent change in LV mass at 52 weeks in either treatment group (11.6% with olmesartan medoxomil vs 2.9% with amlodipine) and no statistically significant difference between treatment groups. There were no significant changes in LV compliance or carotid or femoral artery wall-to-lumen ratios in either treatment group at 52 weeks. In conclusion, there did not appear to be a clinically significant BP-independent effect with olmesartan medoxomil or amlodipine on LV mass decrease, diastolic function or vascular structure, and compliance in patients with hypertension and LV hypertrophy.

19395951
Evidence for a lower target blood pressure for people with heart disease.
The review assesses the evidence for the benefit of lower blood pressure (BP) targets in hypertension management. The current consensus target for the treatment of hypertension is a BP of below 140/90 mmHg for all patients, and a BP of below 130/80 mmHg for those with diabetes or chronic kidney disease. Recently added to the list of conditions warranting the lower BP target are coronary artery disease and coronary artery disease equivalents (stroke, carotid disease, aortic aneurysm, and peripheral vascular disease), as well as those individuals with a Framingham Risk Score of at least 10%. One theoretical issue with lower BP targets may be the existence of a J-shaped curve of BP versus cardiovascular event rate, implying a greater risk, especially of myocardial ischemia, of lowering diastolic BP, which is also the filling pressure of the coronary arteries, below the lower limit of coronary autoregulation. The evidence that this is not a compelling concern is provided by animal studies, clinical trials with both surrogate and hard endpoints, and epidemiologic data. There is at present no proof that more aggressive treatment is harmful and much indirect evidence that it may be beneficial, although the clinical trials that specifically address this question are still in progress.

19147740
C-reactive protein and memory function suggest antagonistic pleiotropy in very old nondemented subjects.


18757771
Better memory functioning associated with higher total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels in very elderly subjects without the apolipoprotein e4 allele.
To examine the association of cholesterol with cognitive functioning in oldest old community dwelling individuals with and without the apolipoprotein e4 (APOE4) allele. One hundred eighty-five nondemented, community dwelling individuals (>or=85) were assessed with a broad neuropsychological battery. Bloods were drawn to assess total, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, as well as for APOE genotyping. In contrast to our expectations, high total cholesterol and high LDL cholesterol were associated with higher memory scores for noncarriers of the APOE4 allele. No significant associations between cognitive performance and lipid profile were found for carriers of the APOE4 allele. In oldest old nondemented noncarriers of the APOE4 allele, high cholesterol is associated with better memory function. Further examination of the role of APOE genotype on the association between cholesterol and cognitive performance, especially in the oldest old is warranted.

17965777
Valsartan lowers brain beta-amyloid protein levels and improves spatial learning in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease.
Recent epidemiological evidence suggests that some antihypertensive medications may reduce the risk for Alzheimer disease (AD). We screened 55 clinically prescribed antihypertensive medications for AD-modifying activity using primary cortico-hippocampal neuron cultures generated from the Tg2576 AD mouse model. These agents represent all drug classes used for hypertension pharmacotherapy. We identified 7 candidate antihypertensive agents that significantly reduced AD-type beta-amyloid protein (Abeta) accumulation. Through in vitro studies, we found that only 1 of the candidate drugs, valsartan, was capable of attenuating oligomerization of Abeta peptides into high-molecular-weight (HMW) oligomeric peptides, known to be involved in cognitive deterioration. We found that preventive treatment of Tg2576 mice with valsartan significantly reduced AD-type neuropathology and the content of soluble HMW extracellular oligomeric Abeta peptides in the brain. Most importantly, valsartan administration also attenuated the development of Abeta-mediated cognitive deterioration, even when delivered at a dose about 2-fold lower than that used for hypertension treatment in humans. These preclinical studies suggest that certain antihypertensive drugs may have AD-modifying activity and may protect against progressive Abeta-related memory deficits in subjects with AD or in those at high risk of developing AD.

17917507
Hypertension and coronary artery disease: a summary of the American Heart Association scientific statement.
The American Heart Association scientific statement on the treatment of hypertension in the prevention and management of ischemic heart disease was published recently. The main recommendations were as follows: (1) For most adults with hypertension, the blood pressure (BP) goal is <140/90 mm Hg but should be <130/80 [corrected] mm Hg in patients with diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, known coronary artery disease (CAD), CAD equivalents (carotid artery disease, abdominal aortic aneurism, and peripheral vascular disease), or 10-year Framingham risk score of >/=10%. For those with left ventricular dysfunction, the recommended BP target is <120/80 mm Hg. (2) For primary CAD prevention, any effective antihypertensive drug or combination is indicated, but preference is given to angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), calcium channel blockers (CCBs), and thiazide diuretics. (3) For the management of hypertension in patients with established CAD (stable or unstable angina, non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction), beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors (or ARBs) are the basis of treatment. If further BP lowering is needed, a thiazide diuretic and/or a dihydropyridine CCB (not verapamil or diltiazem) can be added. If a beta-blocker is contraindicated or not tolerated, diltiazem or verapamil can be substituted. (4) If there is left ventricular dysfunction, recommended therapy consists of an ACE inhibitor or ARB, a beta-blocker, and either a thiazide or loop diuretic. In patients with more severe heart failure, an aldosterone antagonist and hydralazine/isosorbide dinitrate (in black patients) should be considered.

17562781
Do statins lower blood pressure?
Hypercholesterolemia is present in many patients with hypertension and adds a significant component of cardiovascular risk. The 3-hydroxy-3 methyl-glutarylcoenzyme A reductase inhibitors (statins) lower low-density lipoprotein cholesterol but also inhibit many of the structural and functional components of the arteriosclerotic process. Structural effects include reductions in vascular smooth muscle hypertrophy and proliferation, fibrin deposition, and collagen cross-linking. Among the functional effects are improvements in endothelial function, reduction in inflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species, and down-regulation of angiotensin II and endothelin receptors. These would be expected to reduce blood pressure in patients with hypertension; 14 studies have shown statin-induced decrease in blood pressure, but 11 studies showed no effect. Many of the studies had no placebo controls, were of short duration, or had small sample sizes, or combinations of these. Despite predictions made on the basis of the vasoprotective actions of statins, the blood-pressure-lowering effects of statins are at best modest.

17483665
Cardiovascular risk factors for Alzheimer's disease.
There is now sizable literature on the association between traditional cardiovascular risk factors and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Based on epidemiologic studies, both cross-sectional and longitudinal, there are statistically significant correlations between the prevalence of AD and diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, hyperhomocysteinemia, dietary saturated fats, cholesterol, antioxidants, alcohol consumption, smoking, physical activity, the presence of atrial fibrillation, atherosclerotic disease, and the plasma concentration of some hemostatic factors. Most of the cardiovascular risk factors found to be associated with AD are age-dependent, and the prevalence of AD increases with age. Therefore, the association could simply be attributed to aging. On the other hand, the common pathogenetic mechanisms for the generation of both atherosclerotic disease and AD, such as inflammation and the generation of free radicals, suggest a causal link. If this is the case, the identification of modifiable risk factors for dementia becomes a research priority and early intervention aimed at reducing those cardiovascular risk factors a therapeutic imperative.

17396072
More light please.


