21605533
Combined robotic radical prostatectomy and robotic radical nephrectomy.
A 60-year-old man with prostatic adenocarcinoma and an enhancing left-sided renal mass underwent successful combined robotic radical prostatectomy and robotic radical nephrectomy. We describe the initial report of this combined robotic procedure to remove 2 synchronous urological malignancies and describe our technique. An analysis was conducted of the operating room and postanesthesia care unit charges of this procedure compared with the 2 procedures performed independently.

21333205
Robotic prostatectomy in a patient with hemophilia.
Given the rich blood supply to the prostate and the adjacent Santorini's plexus, radical prostatectomy is associated with significant blood loss even in patients with normal coagulation profiles. In patients with hemophilia, any surgical procedure carries a risk of significant hemorrhage due to a deficiency of factors in the coagulation cascade. For these reasons, hemophiliac patients have often been encouraged to undergo radiation or other forms of nonsurgical treatment for clinically localized prostate cancer. However, the decreased blood loss associated with a laparoscopic/robotic approach and appropriate perioperative factor transfusions can minimize the risk of hemorrhage during robotic-assisted radical prostatectomy. We present the case report of a successful robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy in a patient with mild hemophilia A, with an estimated blood loss for the procedure of 20 mL. We will focus on the perioperative management of the patient's factor replacement.

20932557
Unnecessary imaging for the staging of low-risk prostate cancer is common.
To quantify the rate of overuse of preoperative imaging procedures in a referral cohort of low-risk patients. International evidence-based best practice guidelines discourage routine imaging for staging purposes in low-risk patients with newly diagnosed prostate cancer. An institutional database comprised of all patients undergoing robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy was queried for "low-risk" patients between May 2005 and January 2010. "Low-risk" was defined by the most inclusive criteria for imaging recommendations: prostate-specific antigen ?10 ng/mL and Gleason score ?6. We defined staging imaging as a bone scan, computed tomography (CT) of the pelvis or endorectal magnetic resonance imaging performed after the diagnosis of prostate cancer and before prostatectomy for the indication of "prostate cancer." Six-hundred seventy-seven patients were identified as having low-risk disease and comprised our study population. Of the 677 patients identified as low risk, 328 (48%) underwent at least one preoperative imaging procedure despite the guideline recommendations. Two-hundred two of 677 (30%) patients were administered at least 2 of the 3 modalities, and 18/677 (3%) patients received all 3 imaging examinations before prostatectomy. Suspicious results from the CT (7/265%, 2.7%) or bone scan (21/241%, 8.7%) resulted in 27 patients undergoing additional radiographic imaging, none of which resulted in suspicious lesions requiring intervention or biopsy. Despite international evidence-based guidelines for the staging of newly diagnosed prostate cancer patients, many urologists continue to refer low-risk patients for unnecessary imaging studies. This may place the patient at increased risk from radiation or contrast exposure and places an unnecessary financial burden on the patient and health care system.

20880130
'Mohs surgery of the prostate': the utility of in situ frozen section analysis during robotic prostatectomy.
OBJECTIVE • To evaluate a novel technique to lower positive surgical margin rates while preserving as much of the neurovascular bundles as possible during nerve-sparing robotic prostatectomy. MATERIALS AND METHODS • In situ intraoperative frozen section (IFS) was performed during robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy (RALP) when there was macroscopic concern for a positive margin or residual prostate tissue. • When IFS was positive, additional sections were taken from the same area until the IFS was negative, similar to the procedure of Mohs micrographic surgery. • Positive surgical margin and biochemical recurrence rates were compared between the patients who underwent IFS and those who did not. RESULTS • Of 970 patients consecutively undergoing RALP at a single institution, IFS was performed on 177 (18%). • Eleven patients (6%) had IFS positive for carcinoma, whereas another 25 (14%) had benign prostatic tissue in the IFS specimen. • IFS and non-IFS patients had similar pathological and nerve-sparing characteristics. • The IFS group had significantly lower rates of positive surgical margins, 7% vs 18% (P = 0.001) but similar rates of biochemical recurrence (5%) at a median follow-up of 11 months. CONCLUSIONS • In situ IFS is an effective way of reducing positive margins during RALP. • Twenty percent of patients who underwent IFS, representing 4% of the overall RALP population, had either malignant or benign prostate tissue removed from their prostatic fossa. • Although a reduction of biochemical recurrence was not demonstrated, the follow-up is short and a difference may become apparent as the data mature.

20858052
Continuing robotically? The completion of a robot-assisted radical prostatectomy after laparotomy.
The laparoscopic management of difficult adhesions can be quite challenging for even the most experienced of laparoscopic surgeons. We describe a case of managing a suspected enterotomy with a laparotomy during a robot-assisted radical prostatectomy and the surgical options after repair. The case was complicated by a Meckel's diverticulum fused and continuous with a urachal cyst, itself a rare occurrence. After the excision of the Meckel's diverticulum–urachal complex, the laparotomy incision was closed, and the prostatectomy was performed robotically. We discuss the controversies regarding continuation of a planned robotic procedure after a midline laparotomy.

20804475
Endorectal magnetic resonance imaging has limited clinical ability to preoperatively predict pT3 prostate cancer.
Study Type - Diagnostic (non-consecutive case series) Level of Evidence?3b What's known on the subject? and What does the study add? A wide range of performance characteristics has been reported for the preoperative prediction of extraprostatic extension by erMRI, with sensitivities as high as 90%. Our study differs in design from previous investigations in three ways: we examined the performance characteristics of the erMRI on patients with clinical parameters of prostate cancer worrisome for advanced disease; we dichotomized erMRI reports as "positive" or "negative"; and erMRIs were conducted at both academic and community radiology centers, which we believe is more reflective of current practice patterns in the USA. We found the overall accuracy of erMRI to be 62%, with a positive predictive value of 50%, suggesting that pretreatment erMRI offers minimal clinical information. •? To assess the clinical value of preoperative knowledge of the presence of extracapsular extension (ECE) or seminal vesicle invasion (SVI) in the planning for prostatectomy. •? An institutional database of 1161 robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomies (RALP) performed by a single surgeon (D.B.S.) was queried for those who underwent endorectal coil magnetic resonance imaging (erMRI) before robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy. •? erMRI reports were dichotomized into positive or negative and compared with the final histopathology. The erMRIs performed at academic centres were compared with those performed in non-academic settings. •? A sub-group of high-risk patients was also analyzed for erMRI accuracy. •? The 179 patients who underwent erMRI had significantly worse disease compared to the 982 patients without imaging. Of the 110 patients with histopathologically organ-confined disease, 81 (74%) were correctly diagnosed as such on erMRI, whereas 29 (26%) were felt to have cT3 disease and constituted false-positives. Among the 69 patients with pT3 disease, erMRI correctly predicted 30 (43%), whereas 39 (57%) were incorrectly considered organ-confined. •? The overall sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing pT3 disease was 43% and 73%. •? When stratified by pT3a and pT3b, the sensitivity and specificity of erMRI to accurately diagnose ECE is 33% and 81%, respectively. In evaluating SVI, erMRI has a sensitivity and specificity of 33% and 89%, respectively. The positive predictive value of erMRI to assess for ECE and SVI is 50% in both, with a negative predictive value of 61% and 63%, respectively. •? erMRIs performed at academic centres compared to non-academic locations demonstrated similar rates of sensitivity at 67% vs 77% and specificity at 39% vs 54%, respectively (P= 0.33). •? In the setting of the present study, which was designed to be more reflective of current practice patterns in the USA, erMRI has limited clinical value in preoperatively detecting ECE and SVI. •? The accuracy of detecting T3 disease did not improve in academic centres or in high-risk patients.

20735909
High body mass index does not affect outcomes following robotic assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy.
Given the anatomic constraints of obese patients, concern exists as to whether robotic assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy (RALP) is appropriate in patients with higher body mass index (BMI). We reviewed a large RALP database to determine if clinical outcomes are related to BMI. The records of patients who underwent a RALP from 2003-2009 were reviewed. BMI stratifications were concordant with the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) standards: > or = 30, > or = 25 and < 30, and < 25 were classified as obese, overweight, and normal weight, respectively. Baseline, perioperative, histopathologic, and functional outcome data were collected. A total of 1420 patients were identified and BMI information was available for 1112 patients. Median BMI in the three strata was 23.5 (n = 270), 27.3 (n = 600), and 32.1 (n = 242). There were no significant differences in preoperative prostate specific antigen (PSA), clinical staging, and preoperative Gleason scores. Operating time was 6 minutes longer in the obese (p < 0.001) and prostate weight was 8 g greater (p < 0.001). Other perioperative factors were similar, including: EBL, pathologic stage and Gleason score and rates of positive surgical margins. The overall incidence of postoperative complications was similar between the three groups. Biochemical recurrence rates were similar among all patients, although there was a trend toward increased recurrence in the obese (p = 0.09). Recovery of erectile function and continence was similar regardless of BMI. RALP is an effective approach to prostatectomy in obese patients as perioperative and functional outcomes are almost identical across BMI strata. This supports the continued utilization of RALP in obese and overweight men.

20624081
Improvements in robot-assisted prostatectomy: the effect of surgeon experience and technical changes on oncologic and functional outcomes.
To assess the effect of surgeon experience and technical modifications on functional and oncologic outcomes after robot-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy (RALP). Data were available for 1181 of 1420 consecutive patients undergoing RALP by a single surgeon (DBS). Three techniques were evaluated. The "initial" technique included incision of the lateral endopelvic fascia, suture ligation of the dorsal venous complex (DVC), and anterior tennis-racquet bladder neck reconstruction (n = 590 procedures). The "intermediate" technique included a modified "curtain" nerve-sparing technique and incision of the DVC without previous ligation (n = 170). The "current" technique uses a posterior tennis-racquet bladder neck reconstruction (n = 421). Outcomes included continence and potency recovery and the presence of pT(2) surgical margins assessed in continuous fashion. Validated questionnaires were used to assess baseline and postoperative functional outcomes. Continence rates improved between techniques at all evaluated time points, with 1-year continence rates of 88%, 93%, and 96% in the initial, intermediate, and current technique groups, respectively (Ptrend <0.001). One-year potency rates, however, remained similar among the groups, with rates of 77%, 84%, and 79%, respectively (P = 0.58). pT(2) margin rates decreased continuously during the initial technique period, followed by a transient worsening of margin rates during the intermediate time period and a subsequent decrease during the period when the current technique was used. Increased experience with robot-assisted prostatectomy resulted in improvements in oncologic and functional outcomes. Modifications to robot-assisted prostatectomy techniques may aid in this improvement but are also associated with transient worsening of outcomes during the learning curve of the new technique.

20529522
Intraoperative management of robotic-assisted versus open radical prostatectomy.
Minimally invasive surgery has been shown to decrease postoperative morbidity and length of stay for several laparoscopic procedures. We sought to retrospectively compare intraoperative surgical and anesthetic parameters, post-anesthetic care unit (PACU) length of stay, and hospital length of stay of patients who underwent robotic-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy (RAP) versus open radical retropubic prostatectomy (ORP). A retrospective investigation was performed using a urologic surgery database and an anesthesia electronic medical record. We queried information regarding 106 ORP patients from 2002 through 2007 and 575 RAP patients from 2007 through 2008. Patients in the RAP group compared with ORP patients had reductions in surgical time, anesthesia time, estimated blood loss, crystalloid administration, and PACU and hospital length of stays. Compared with ORP procedures, intraoperative respiratory rates, peak inspiratory pressures, and arterial pressures in RAP procedures were higher; tidal volumes and heart rates were decreased; but end-tidal carbon dioxide concentrations were not different. In the RAP group, intraoperative complications included severe bradycardia, corneal abrasions, and 2 patients required reintubation. Surgically, no rectal perforations were noted, and no operative mortalities occurred. Our data demonstrate the safety and efficacy of RAP due to a combination of surgical and anesthetic factors.

20202392
Risk stratification and early oncologic outcomes following robotic prostatectomy.
Although the popularity of robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy is assured, little is known about the oncologic outcomes following the procedure. We performed a retrospective cohort study including consecutive patients who underwent the surgery between 2003 and 2007 with at least 6 months of follow-up (n=464). Patients were stratified into low-, intermediate-, and high-risk groups according to D'Amico criteria. Biochemical failure was defined as a PSA > or =0.2 ng/mL. Of study patients, 256 (55%), 171 (37%), and 37 (8%) were classified as low-, intermediate-, and high-risk, respectively. Over a mean follow-up of 14.1 months (range, 6.0 to 55.3), 7.3% experienced biochemical failure. Biochemical disease-free survival at 30 months was 94%, 79%, and 73% among patients in the low-, intermediate-, and high-risk groups, respectively, (P<0.001). Preoperative risk stratification was strongly associated with biochemical failure, with hazard ratios of 5.04 (95%: 1.52 to 16.7; P<0.001) and 7.04 (95%: 1.39 to 35.6; P < 0.001) for intermediate- and high- over low-risk groups, respectively. The ability of risk stratification to predict biochemical failure had an area under the receiver operator characteristic curve of 0.74. Robotic prostatectomy provides excellent cancer control outcomes for clinically localized disease.

20189844
Nerve-sparing robotic prostatectomy in preoperatively high-risk patients is safe and efficacious.
OBJECTIVE: Given the higher likelihood of extraprostatic extension in high-risk patients, many urologists will sacrifice the neurovascular bundles in such patients in an attempt to decrease the risk of positive surgical margins. In contrast, we frequently perform nerve-sparing in high-risk patients. We analyzed our outcomes in patients with preoperatively high-risk prostate cancer according to the D'Amico risk group classification, and stratified by nerve-sparing status. MATERIALS AND METHODS: An institutional database of 1,503 robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomies (RALP) was queried for patients presenting with PSA > 20 ng/ml, Gleason 8 or higher on biopsy, or clinical stage T2c or higher. Interfascial nerve-sparing was performed whenever oncologically feasible. Validated questionnaires were used to assess baseline and postoperative functional outcomes. RESULTS: Adequate follow-up was available in 123 high-risk patients. Mean serum PSA was 10.8. Bilateral, unilateral, and non-nerve-sparing was performed on 58%, 15%, and 27%, respectively. On final histopathology, 42% were organ confined; 55 patients had extraprostatic extension, and 35 had seminal vesicle invasion. Positive surgical margins occurred in 31%: 15% focal and 16% extensive. Favorable pathologic outcomes (organ-confined and negative surgical margins) were observed in 40%. Biochemical recurrence occurred in 20%. Nerve-sparing was associated with more favorable pathologic features, possibly due to selection bias. When controlling for adverse pathologic features, nerve-sparing was not associated with higher rates of positive surgical margins or biochemical recurrence. At a median follow-up of 13 months, 78% were continent and 56% were potent. The "trifecta" of continence, potency, and freedom from recurrence was achieved in 28 patients (23%). CONCLUSIONS: Nerve-sparing robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy can be safely performed in patients with preoperatively high risk prostate cancer. Histopathologic and short-term oncologic outcomes at 13-month median follow-up are comparable to those in open surgical series from similar cohorts.

19256581
What PCPs and geriatricians need to know about robotic prostatectomy and organ-confined prostate cancer.
Prostate cancer is the most common visceral neoplasm diagnosed in the United States and has gained significant public awareness over the past 20 years as a result of the serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening test. Though there is potentially wide variability in presentation, most patients are diagnosed with organ-confined disease. Treatments for localized prostate cancer include surgery, radiation, and active surveillance. One of the newer surgical modalities is robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy, which has shown promise in improving cancer control and reducing the morbidity commonly associated with open radical prostatectomy. This article will discuss screening and treatment options for localized prostate cancer, with special focus on robotic prostatectomy and its advantages.

18570719
Incidental seminal vesicle smooth muscle neoplasm of unknown malignancy following robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy.
Primary soft tissue sarcomas of the genitourinary tract are rarely seen, especially in the seminal vesicle. While sarcomas have been reported in the seminal vesicle, this is the first report of a smooth muscle neoplasm, of uncertain malignant potential, involving the seminal vesicle. The finding was incidental, following robotic-assisted radical retropubic prostatectomy for prostate cancer. To our knowledge, this is also the first report of a primary seminal vesicle tumor found following radical prostatectomy. A clinical case review and a brief review of the literature are presented.

