20939760
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation and p-EGFR expression in resected non-small cell lung cancer.
Lung cancer, specifically non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), is a leading cause of mortality worldwide. In China, a dramatic increase in the incidence of NSCLC is expected in the next 20 years (Molina et al. Mayo Clin Proc. 2008;83:584–594). Mutated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) status is a known predictor of response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), and immunohistochemistry may be a less costly way of predicting presence of mutation. In this study, mutation analysis of EGFR in 218 cases of NSCLC was performed. One hundred thirty tissue samples were examined via immunohistochemistry of p-EGFR (Y1045 and Y1068) and correlated with mutation status. Mutations were seen in 29% of patients, and were correlated with female sex, nonsmoking history, and adenocarcinoma histology. Phosphorylation at Y1045 was noted in 52% of cases, but in 71% of cases with EGFR mutation (P = .003). Phosphorylation of Y1068 was seen in 55% of cases but in 73% of cases with EGFR mutation (P = .006). This study correlating EGFR mutation with p-EGFR expression in resected NSCLC is one of the largest to date, although TKI response could not be assessed. The data show that, among Chinese patients, detection of p-1045 and p-1068 expression with immunohistochemistry predicts EGFR mutations. Immunohistochemical analysis of p-EGFR may be useful to predict responses to TKI therapy, although future studies are necessary.

19863813
Proteomics, pathway array and signaling network-based medicine in cancer.
ABSTRACT: Cancer is a multifaceted disease that results from dysregulated normal cellular signaling networks caused by genetic, genomic and epigenetic alterations at cell or tissue levels. Uncovering the underlying protein signaling network changes, including cell cycle gene networks in cancer, aids in understanding the molecular mechanism of carcinogenesis and identifies the characteristic signaling network signatures unique for different cancers and specific cancer subtypes. The identified signatures can be used for cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and personalized treatment. During the past several decades, the available technology to study signaling networks has significantly evolved to include such platforms as genomic microarray (expression array, SNP array, CGH array, etc.) and proteomic analysis, which globally assesses genetic, epigenetic, and proteomic alterations in cancer. In this review, we compared Pathway Array analysis with other proteomic approaches in analyzing protein network involved in cancer and its utility serving as cancer biomarkers in diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic target identification. With the advent of bioinformatics, constructing high complexity signaling networks is possible. As the use of signaling network-based cancer diagnosis, prognosis and treatment is anticipated in the near future, medical and scientific communities should be prepared to apply these techniques to further enhance personalized medicine.

19838925
The effect of Scutellaria baicalensis on the signaling network in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.
Scutellaria baicalensis is an anti-inflammatory and antineoplastic Chinese herbal therapy. We have previously shown that S. baicalensis can inhibit hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell growth in vitro. In this study, we sought to determine the effect of S. baicalensis on the cell signaling network using our newly developed Pathway Array technology, which screens cell signaling pathways involved in cell cycle regulation. The HCC cell line (HepG2) was treated with S. baicalensis extract in vitro. The effect on the cell cycle was analyzed by flow cytometry, and the expression of various signaling proteins was assayed with Pathway Array. Our results indicate that S. baicalensis exerts a strong growth inhibition of the HepG2 cells via G(2)/M phase arrest. The Pathway Array analysis of 56 proteins revealed a total of 14 differentially expressed proteins or phosphorylations after treatment. Of these, 9 showed a dose-dependent decrease (p53, ETS1, Cdc25B, p63, EGFR, ERK1/2, XIAP, HIF-2alpha, and Cdc25C) whereas one demonstrated a dose-dependent increase (Cyclin E) after treatment with 200 microg/ml of S. baicalensis. Using computer simulation software, we identified additional hubs in the signaling network activated by S. baicalensis. These results indicate that S. baicalensis exerts a broad effect on cell signaling networks leading to a collective inhibition of cell proliferation.

17516867
Molecular mechanism of anti-prostate cancer activity of Scutellaria baicalensis extract.
Scutellaria baicalensis is a widely used Chinese herbal medicine historically used in antiinflammatory and anticancer therapy. The goals of the study were to 1) determine its in vitro and in vivo anti-prostate cancer activity, 2) investigate its molecular mechanism directed at cell proliferation control including cyclooxygenase-2(COX-2) prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and cyclins/cdks pathways, and 3) compare it with those of PC-SPES (PC stands for prostate cancer and spes is Latin for hope), a former herbal mixture for prostate cancer treatment of which S. baicalensis is a major constituent. Two human prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP, androgen dependent, and PC-3, androgen independent) were assessed for growth inhibition. S. baicalensis exerted dose- and time-dependent increased growth inhibition in both cell lines. However, the PC-3 cells IC50 (50% growth inhibition concentration) were slightly more sensitive than LNCaP cells (IC50=0.15 mg/ml), although the former is androgen independent. S. baicalensis was more effective in inhibition of cell growth compared with PC-SPES (IC50=0.38 mg/ml for PC-3 cells). Significant reduction of PGE2 synthesis in both cells after treatment with S. baicalensis resulted from direct inhibition of COX-2 activity rather than COX-2 protein suppression. S. baicalensis also inhibited prostate-specific antigen production in LNCaP cells. Finally, S. baicalensis suppressed expression of cyclin D1 in LNCaP cells, resulting in a G1 phase arrest, while inhibiting cdk1 expression and kinase activity in PC-3 cells, ultimately leading to a G2/M cell cycle arrest. Animal studies showed a 50% reduction in tumor volume after a 7-wk treatment period. This study demonstrated that S. baicalensis may be a novel anticancer agent for the treatment of prostate cancer.

