20932821
CYP2E1 enhances ethanol-induced lipid accumulation but impairs autophagy in HepG2 E47 cells.
The regulation and function of autophagy and lipid metabolism have recently been reported to be reciprocally related. Macroautophagy mediates the breakdown of lipids stored in lipid droplets. An inhibition of autophagy leads to the development of a fatty liver. We evaluated the ability of CYP2E1 to modulate the effects of ethanol on lipid accumulation and autophagy in vitro. The E47 HepG2 cell which expresses CYP2E1 was treated with ethanol at 50, 100 and 150mM for 4 or 5days. Ethanol-induced lipid accumulation and an increase of triglycerides (TG) in E47 cells to a greater extent than in control C34 cells which do not express CYP2E1. In contrast, autophagy (LC3 II/LC3 I ratio) was significantly induced by ethanol in C34 cells to a greater extent than in E47 cells. P62 was significantly increased in E47 cells after ethanol treatment. Thus, there is a reciprocal relationship between the effects of ethanol on lipid accumulation and autophagy in the CYP2E1-expressing cells. Inhibition of autophagy by 3-methyladenine (3MA), increased lipid accumulation and TG levels in C34 cells which display elevated autophagy, but enhanced lipid accumulation and TG level to a lesser extent in E47 cells which displayed lower autophagy. Ethanol induced CYP2E1 activity and oxidative stress in E47 cells compared with C34 cells. These experiments suggest that the expression of CYP2E1 may impair autophagy formation which contributes to lipid accumulation in the liver. We hypothesize that CYP2E1-induced oxidative stress promotes the accumulation of lipid droplets by ethanol and this may be responsible for the suppression of autophagy in the liver.

20692331
Chronic alcohol-induced liver injury and oxidant stress are decreased in cytochrome P4502E1 knockout mice and restored in humanized cytochrome P4502E1 knock-in mice.
A major pathway for chronic ethanol-induced liver injury is ethanol-induced oxidant stress. Several pathways contribute to mechanisms by which ethanol induces oxidant stress. Although some studies support a role for cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1), others do not. Most previous studies were conducted in the intragastric infusion model of ethanol administration. There is a need to develop oral models of significant liver injury and to evaluate the possible role of CYP2E1 in ethanol actions in such models. We evaluated chronic ethanol-induced liver injury, steatosis, and oxidant stress in wild-type (WT) mice, CYP2E1 knock out (KO) mice, and humanized CYP2E1 knock-in (KI) mice, in which the human 2E1 was added back to mice deficient in the mouse 2E1. WT mice and the CYP2E1 KO and KI mice (both provided by Dr. F. Gonzalez, National Cancer Institute) were fed a high-fat Lieber-DeCarli ethanol liquid diet for 3weeks; pair-fed controls received dextrose. Ethanol produced fatty liver and oxidant stress in WT mice but liver injury (transaminases, histopathology) was minimal. Ethanol-induced steatosis and oxidant stress were blunted in the KO mice (no liver injury) but restored in the KI mice. Significant liver injury was produced in the ethanol-fed KI mice, with elevated transaminases, necrosis, and increased levels of collagen type 1 and smooth muscle actin. This liver injury in the KI mice was associated with elevated oxidant stress and elevated levels of the human CYP2E1 compared to levels of the mouse 2E1 in WT mice. Activation of JNK and decreased levels of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL were observed in the ethanol-fed KI mice compared to the other groups. Fatty liver in the WT and the KI mice was associated with lower levels of PPAR? and acyl-CoA oxidase. No such changes were found in the ethanol-fed KO mice. These results show that CYP2E1 plays a major role in ethanol-induced fatty liver and oxidant stress. It is the absence of CYP2E1 in the KO mice that is responsible for the blunting of steatosis and oxidant stress because restoring the CYP2E1 restores the fatty liver and oxidant stress. Moreover, it is the human CYP2E1 that restores these effects of ethanol, which suggests that results for fatty liver and oxidant stress from rodent models of ethanol intake and mouse CYP2E1 can be extrapolated to human models of ethanol intake and to human CYP2E1.

19477265
Chronic ethanol feeding potentiates Fas Jo2-induced hepatotoxicity: role of CYP2E1 and TNF-alpha and activation of JNK and P38 MAP kinase.
We have previously shown that treatment of mice with pyrazole or acute ethanol potentiated Fas agonistic Jo2 antibody-induced liver injury by a mechanism involving induction of CYP2E1 and elevated oxidative stress. The current study evaluated whether chronic alcohol feeding potentiates Fas-induced liver injury and whether CYP2E1 plays a role in any enhanced hepatotoxicity. Wild-type and CYP2E1 knockout mice were fed ethanol or isocaloric dextrose for 4 weeks followed by a single treatment with either saline or Jo2. Mice were killed 8 h after the Jo2 challenge. There were three- to five fold increases in transaminases and more extensive eosinophilic necrosis, hemorrhage, and infiltration of inflammatory cells in the central zone of the hepatic lobule in the ethanol-fed mice treated with Jo2 compared to the dextrose/Jo2- or ethanol/saline-treated mice. Liver injury was blunted in ethanol-fed CYP2E1 knockout mice treated with Jo2. The chronic ethanol feeding produced steatosis, elevation of CYP2E1, and oxidative stress in wild-type but not CYP2E1 knockout mice. These changes in wild-type mice fed ethanol were similar after saline or Jo2 treatment. The Jo2 treatment produced activation of JNK and P38 MAP kinase, increased activity of caspase-8 and -3, and lowered hepatic GSH levels in both the dextrose- and the alcohol-fed mice. JNK was activated at early times after Jo2 treatment in the ethanol-fed mice. Serum TNF-alpha levels were strikingly elevated in the wild-type ethanol/Jo2 group, which showed liver injury, compared to all the other groups, which did not show liver injury. Inhibition of JNK or P38 MAPK partially, but not completely, prevented the elevated liver injury in the wild-type ethanol/Jo2 mice. These results show that chronic ethanol feeding enhances Fas-induced liver injury by a mechanism associated with induction of CYP2E1, elevated serum TNF-alpha levels, and activation of MAPK.

18482574
S-adenosyl-L-methionine decreases the elevated hepatotoxicity induced by Fas agonistic antibody plus acute ethanol pretreatment in mice.
The current study was designed to investigate the effect and potential mechanism of exogenous administration of S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) on the enhanced hepatotoxicity induced by the Fas agonistic Jo2 antibody plus acute ethanol pretreatment in C57BL/6 mice. Acute ethanol plus Jo2 treatment produces liver toxicity under conditions in which ethanol alone or Jo2 alone do not. SAM significantly attenuated this elevated hepatotoxicity in mice as manifested by a decrease of serum aminotransferases and morphological amelioration. Levels of SAM and activity of methionine adenosyltransferase were lowered by the ethanol plus Jo2 treatment but restored by administration of SAM. The ethanol plus Jo2 treatment increased activity and content of CYP2E1, iNOS content and TNF-alpha levels; these increases were blunted by SAM. SAM also protected against the elevated oxidative and nitrosative stress found after ethanol plus Jo2, likely due to the decreases in CYP2E1, iNOS and TNF-alpha. Calcium-induced swelling of mitochondria was enhanced by the ethanol plus Jo2 treatment and this was prevented by SAM. JNK and P38 MAPK were activated by the ethanol plus Jo2 treatment; JNK activation was partially prevented by SAM. It is suggested that SAM protects against the ethanol plus Jo2 toxicity by restoring hepatic SAM levels, preventing the increase in iNOS, CYP2E1 and TNF-alpha and there by lowering the elevated oxidative/nitrosative stress and activation of the JNK signal pathway, ultimately preventing mitochondrial damage.

18393316
Cytochrome P450 2E1 contributes to ethanol-induced fatty liver in mice.
Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) is suggested to play a role in alcoholic liver disease, which includes alcoholic fatty liver, alcoholic hepatitis, and alcoholic cirrhosis. In this study, we investigated whether CYP2E1 plays a role in experimental alcoholic fatty liver in an oral ethanol-feeding model. After 4 weeks of ethanol feeding, macrovesicular fat accumulation and accumulation of triglyceride in liver were observed in wild-type mice but not in CYP2E1-knockout mice. In contrast, free fatty acids (FFAs) were increased in CYP2E1-knockout mice but not in wild-type mice. CYP2E1 was induced by ethanol in wild-type mice, and oxidative stress induced by ethanol was higher in wild-type mice than in CYP2E1-knockout mice. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha), a regulator of fatty acid oxidation, was up-regulated in CYP2E1-knockout mice fed ethanol but not in wild-type mice. A PPARalpha target gene, acyl CoA oxidase, was decreased by ethanol in wild-type but not in CYP2E1-knockout mice. Chlormethiazole, an inhibitor of CYP2E1, lowered macrovesicular fat accumulation, inhibited oxidative stress, and up-regulated PPARalpha protein level in wild-type mice fed ethanol. The introduction of CYP2E1 to CYP2E1-knockout mice via an adenovirus restored macrovesicular fat accumulation. These results indicate that CYP2E1 contributes to experimental alcoholic fatty liver in this model and suggest that CYP2E1-derived oxidative stress may inhibit oxidation of fatty acids by preventing up-regulation of PPARalpha by ethanol, resulting in fatty liver.

17349925
Acute ethanol pretreatment increases FAS-mediated liver injury in mice: role of oxidative stress and CYP2E1-dependent and -independent pathways.
This study evaluated whether acute ethanol pretreatment potentiates Fas-mediated liver injury and if oxidative stress and CYP2E1 play a role in any enhanced hepatotoxicity. There were 3-fold increases of transaminases and more extensive apoptotic necrosis of hepatocytes and focal hemorrhages of the hepatic lobule in mice treated with Jo2 Fas agonistic antibody plus ethanol compared to saline control or to mice treated with Jo2 or ethanol alone. CYP2E1 catalytic activity and protein were increased 2-fold by the acute ethanol pretreatment. There were 2- and 2.5-fold increases of caspase-8 and caspase-3 activity and 1.6-fold increases of apoptotic-positive cells in the Jo2 plus acute ethanol group compared to the Jo2 alone group. Levels of TNF-alpha, malondialdehyde, 4-hydroxynonenal, protein carbonyl formation, 3-nitrotyrosine protein adducts, and inducible nitric oxide synthase were increased in the Jo2 plus ethanol group. The enhanced hepatotoxicity of Jo2 plus ethanol and the elevated oxidative stress and TNF levels were lower in CYP2E1 knockout mice compared to wild-type mice expressing CYP2E1 but higher than saline controls. Toxicity also declined in mice treated with gadolinium chloride, an inhibitor of the inducible nitric oxide synthase or the antioxidant, N-acetyl-L-cysteine. These data indicate that acute ethanol pretreatment is capable of elevating hepatic apoptosis and liver injury induced by Jo2 Fas agonistic antibody. The enhanced hepatotoxicity involves increased oxidative and nitrosative stress, and appears to be mediated by CYP2E1-dependent and also CYP2E1-independent mechanisms.

