20613843
Mechanism and regulation of acetylated histone binding by the tandem PHD finger of DPF3b.
Histone lysine acetylation and methylation have an important role during gene transcription in a chromatin context. Knowledge concerning the types of protein modules that can interact with acetyl-lysine has so far been limited to bromodomains. Recently, a tandem plant homeodomain (PHD) finger (PHD1-PHD2, or PHD12) of human DPF3b, which functions in association with the BAF chromatin remodelling complex to initiate gene transcription during heart and muscle development, was reported to bind histones H3 and H4 in an acetylation-sensitive manner, making it the first alternative to bromodomains for acetyl-lysine binding. Here we report the structural mechanism of acetylated histone binding by the double PHD fingers of DPF3b. Our three-dimensional solution structures and biochemical analysis of DPF3b highlight the molecular basis of the integrated tandem PHD finger, which acts as one functional unit in the sequence-specific recognition of lysine-14-acetylated histone H3 (H3K14ac). Whereas the interaction with H3 is promoted by acetylation at lysine 14, it is inhibited by methylation at lysine 4, and these opposing influences are important during transcriptional activation of the mouse DPF3b target genes Pitx2 and Jmjd1c. Binding of this tandem protein module to chromatin can thus be regulated by different histone modifications during the initiation of gene transcription.

20541999
Molecular interplay of the noncoding RNA ANRIL and methylated histone H3 lysine 27 by polycomb CBX7 in transcriptional silencing of INK4a.
Expression of the INK4b/ARF/INK4a tumor suppressor locus in normal and cancerous cell growth is controlled by methylation of histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me) as directed by the Polycomb group proteins. The antisense noncoding RNA ANRIL of the INK4b/ARF/INK4a locus is also important for expression of the protein-coding genes in cis, but its mechanism has remained elusive. Here we report that chromobox 7 (CBX7) within the polycomb repressive complex 1 binds to ANRIL, and both CBX7 and ANRIL are found at elevated levels in prostate cancer tissues. In concert with H3K27me recognition, binding to RNA contributes to CBX7 function, and disruption of either interaction impacts the ability of CBX7 to repress the INK4b/ARF/INK4a locus and control senescence. Structure-guided analysis reveals the molecular interplay between noncoding RNA and H3K27me as mediated by the conserved chromodomain. Our study suggests a mechanism by which noncoding RNA participates directly in epigenetic transcriptional repression.

20463968
p53-induced growth arrest is regulated by the mitochondrial SirT3 deacetylase.
A hallmark of p53 function is to regulate a transcriptional program in response to extracellular and intracellular stress that directs cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and cellular senescence. Independent of the role of p53 in the nucleus, some of the anti-proliferative functions of p53 reside within the mitochondria [1]. p53 can arrest cell growth in response to mitochondrial p53 in an EJ bladder carcinoma cell environment that is naïve of p53 function until induced to express p53 [2]. TP53 can independently partition with endogenous nuclear and mitochondrial proteins consistent with the ability of p53 to enact senescence. In order to address the role of p53 in navigating cellular senescence through the mitochondria, we identified SirT3 to rescue EJ/p53 cells from induced p53-mediated growth arrest. Human SirT3 function appears coupled with p53 early during the initiation of p53 expression in the mitochondria by biochemical and cellular localization analysis. Our evidence suggests that SirT3 partially abrogates p53 activity to enact growth arrest and senescence. Additionally, we identified the chaperone protein BAG-2 in averting SirT3 targeting of p53 -mediated senescence. These studies identify a complex relationship between p53, SirT3, and chaperoning factor BAG-2 that may link the salvaging and quality assurance of the p53 protein for control of cellular fate independent of transcriptional activity.

20022962
A DDX5 S480A polymorphism is associated with increased transcription of fibrogenic genes in hepatic stellate cells.
We recently identified a missense single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in DDX5 (rs1140409, p.S480A) that enhances the risk of developing cirrhosis. DDX5 is an ATP-dependent RNA helicase and transcriptional modulator. We hypothesized that the activity of DDX5 in regulating fibrogenic gene transcription in hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) is altered by the S480A SNP. To test this, we employed two approaches: 1) transient overexpression of DDX5 cDNA or siRNA knockdown of endogenous DDX5, with replacement by either DDX5 wild type (WT) or SNP cDNA, or 2) stable expression of exogenous DDX5 WT and SNP in HSC lines. WT DDX5 mRNA in HSCs was inversely correlated with gene expression for alpha2(I) collagen, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1, and transforming growth factor-beta1. Stable DDX5 SNP-expressing cells had higher basal and transforming growth factor-beta1-stimulated expression and enhanced promoter activities of fibrogenic genes. DDX5 variant-expressing cells also had higher Smad3 and AP-1-responsive reporter activities. In a one-hybrid GAL4 system, co-expression of the DDX5 SNP variant with chimeras of GAL4 DNA binding domain linked to JunD or Sp1 displayed higher transactivation of a GAL4-responsive reporter than that of DDX5 WT. Increased fibrogenic gene expression in DDX5 SNP-expressing cells was associated with reduced recruitment of DDX5 homodimers to responsive promoters, but there was no difference in the recruitment of the co-repressor HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1). These data suggest that DDX5 is a repressor of fibrogenic genes in HSCs through interaction with transcriptional complexes. The enhanced fibrogenic activity of the DDX5 risk variant is linked to a reduced repressive function toward these target genes.

19242095
The ZNF217 oncogene is a candidate organizer of repressive histone modifiers.
The zinc finger protein 217 (ZNF217) is an important oncogene based on the high frequency of amplification and overexpression in many cancer types, but its molecular mode of gene regulation is poorly understood. We purified a complex of nuclear ZNF217-binding proteins by affinity chromatography and identified its components by mass spectrometry as Jarid1b/Plu-1, G9a, LSD1, CoREST and CtBP1. Individual binding of these with ZNF217 was confirmed by co-immunoprecipiation (IP). Known activities of these proteins suggested a role of the ZNF217 complex in histone modification. Using in vitro assays the following activities were demonstrated: Histone H3 lysine 4 trimethyl (H3K4me3) demethylase activity, which co-fractionated with Jarid1b/Plu-1 in anion-exchange chromatography; H3K9 methylation, the known principal activity of G9a; and H3K27 methylation. The latter suggested EZH2 as another ZNF217 binding candidate, which could be confirmed by co-IP. Taken together, these findings suggest that ZNF217 assembles a distinct set of histone modifying proteins at target DNA sites that act synergistically in transcriptional repression.

18945682
Structure and hemimethylated CpG binding of the SRA domain from human UHRF1.
Human UHRF1 (ubiquitin-like PHD and RING finger 1) functions to maintain CpG DNA methylation patterns through DNA replication by co-localizing with the DNA methyltransferase DNMT1 at chromatin in mammals. Recent studies show that UHRF1 binds selectively to hemimethylated CpG via its conserved SRA (SET- and RING finger-associated) domain. However, the underlying molecular mechanism is not known. Here, we report a 1.95 A resolution crystal structure of the SRA domain of human UHRF1. Using NMR structure-guided mutagenesis, electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and fluorescence anisotropy analysis, we determined key amino acid residues for methyl-DNA binding that are conserved in the SRA domain.

18495928
Transcription factor Ap2delta associates with Ash2l and ALR, a trithorax family histone methyltransferase, to activate Hoxc8 transcription.
The family of Ap2 transcription factors comprises five members with highly conserved DNA-binding domains. Among the family members, Ap2delta is the most divergent, because it lacks highly conserved residues within the transactivation domain (TAD) and has weak affinity for known Ap2 binding sites. To identify specific Ap2delta coactivators/regulators during development, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen, using Ap2delta's TAD. We identified the trithorax superfamily member, Ash2l, as a binding partner that interacts exclusively with Ap2delta. We showed that Ash2l positively mediates Ap2delta transactivation in a dose-dependent manner. Given the known role of Ash2l in histone modification, we determined whether Ap2delta was able to form a complex with that activity. Our results showed that Ap2delta associates with endogenous ASH2L and a member of the MLL family of histone lysine methyltransferases (HKMTs), MLL2 (ALR), forming a complex that methylates lysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4). Additionally, we showed that Ap2delta is necessary for recruitment of Ash2l and Alr to the Hoxc8 locus and that recruitment of this complex leads to H3K4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and subsequent gene activation. Altogether, we provide evidence of an association between a highly restricted gene-specific transcription factor and a Su(var), Enhancer of Zeste, Trithorax (SET)1/trithorax-like complex with H3K4 methyltransferase activity. Our studies also document a functional role for Ap2delta in recruiting histone methyltransferases (HMTs) to specific gene targets, such as Hoxc8. This role provides a mechanism through which these transcription factors can have diverse effects despite nearly identical DNA-binding motifs.

18156491
The MMSET protein is a histone methyltransferase with characteristics of a transcriptional corepressor.
MMSET, identified by its fusion to the IgH locus in t(4;14)-associated multiple myeloma, possesses domains found within chromatin regulators, including the SET domain. MMSET protein is overexpressed and highly associated with chromatin in myeloma cell lines carrying t(4;14). MMSET possesses methyltransferase activity for core histone H3 lysine 4 and histone 4 lysine 20, whereas MMSET made in cells only modified H4. Segments of MMSET fused to the Gal4 DNA binding domain repressed transcription of a chromatin-embedded Gal4 reporter gene. MMSET-mediated repression was associated with increased H4K20 methylation gene and loss of histone acetylation. Consistent with this repressive activity, MMSET could form a complex with HDAC1 and HDAC2, mSin3a, and the histone demethylase LSD1, suggesting that it is a component of corepressor complexes. Furthermore, MMSET coexpression enhances HDAC1- and HDAC2-mediated repression in transcriptional reporter assays. Finally, shRNA-mediated knockdown of MMSET compromised viability of a myeloma cell line, suggesting a biologic role for the protein in malignant cell growth. Collectively, these data suggest that, by acting directly as a modifier of chromatin as well as through binding of other chromatin-modifying enzymes, MMSET influences gene expression and potentially acts as a pathogenic agent in multiple myeloma.

17848139
The epigenetic signature of CFTR expression is co-ordinated via chromatin acetylation through a complex intronic element.
The CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) gene is a tightly regulated and differentially expressed transcript in many mucosal epithelial cell types. It appears that DNA sequence variations alone do not explain CFTR-related gastrointestinal disease patterns and that epigenetic modifiers influence CFTR expression. Our aim was to characterize the native chromatin environment in cultured cells for intestinal CFTR expression by determining the relationship between histone acetylation and occupation of CFTR by multiple transcription factors, through a common regulatory element. We used HDAC (histone deacetylase) inhibition and ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) analyses to define regions associated with acute acetylation of histone at the CFTR locus. We identified a region within the first intron associated with acute acetylation of histone H4 as an epigenetic signature corresponding to an intestine-specific enhancer element for CFTR. DHS (DNase I-hypersensitivity) assays and ChIP were used to specify control elements and occupation by regulatory factors. Quantitative ChIP procedures indicate that HNF1alpha (hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha) and Cdx2 (caudal homeobox protein 2) occupy and regulate through a novel intronic enhancer element of CFTR and that Tcf4 (T-cell factor 4) overlaps the same DNA element. RNAi (RNA interference) of Tcf4 and HNF1alpha decreased intestinal cell CFTR expression, identifying these as positive regulatory factors and CFTR as a target for Wnt signalling. We have linked the acetylation signature of nucleosomal histones to active intestinal CFTR expression and occupation by transcription factors HNF1alpha, Cdx2 and Tcf4 which converge to modify chromatin architecture. These studies suggest the therapeutic potential of histone modification strategies, such as inhibition of HDAC activity, to treat CFTR-associated disease by selectively enhancing CFTR expression.

