20220007
Functional dissociation of the frontoinsular and anterior cingulate cortices in empathy for pain.
The frontoinsular cortex (FI) and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) are thought to be involved in empathy for others' pain. However, the functional roles of FI and ACC in empathetic responses have not yet been clearly dissociated in previous studies. In this study, participants viewed color photographs depicting human body parts in painful or nonpainful situations and performed either pain judgment (painful/nonpainful) or laterality judgment (left/right) of the body parts. We found that activation of FI, rather than ACC, showed significant increase for painful compared with nonpainful images, regardless of the task requirement. Our data suggest a clear functional dissociation between FI and ACC in which FI is more domain-specific than ACC when processing empathy for pain.

19474379
Intracranial tumors: cisternal angle as a measure of midbrain compression for assessing risk of postembolization clinical deterioration.
To identify objective imaging characteristics that are predictors of clinical deterioration after embolization of large intracranial tumors. This HIPAA-compliant retrospective study was approved by the institutional review board, and informed consent was waived. The records of twelve patients with large intracranial tumors who underwent embolization were analyzed for imaging characteristics that would portend acute neurologic deterioration following embolization. The degree of midbrain compression was calculated by using the cisternal angle (the angle formed at the intersection of a line drawn along the midsagittal plane and a line drawn along the anterior aspect of the cerebral peduncle). Angiograms were evaluated for the degree of pre- and postembolization tumor blush. Neurologic status before and after embolization was evaluated. The Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to compare the cisternal angles ipsilateral and contralateral to the tumor. The cisternal angle was measured in 100 control subjects with no mass lesions to evaluate its normal distribution. Of the 12 patients, three experienced acute clinical deterioration after embolization. A feature common to these patients was substantial preprocedure midbrain compression, as indicated by a cisternal angle of less than 25 degrees , which was significantly less than the mean angle in the control group. Another consistent risk factor was a strong initial tumor blush pattern and a major blush reduction following embolization. Cisternal angle is an objective measure of midbrain compression. The presence of a cisternal angle less than 25 degrees (indicating severe midbrain compression), strong tumor blush, and major postprocedure blush reduction are predictors of clinical deterioration after embolization.

18317442
Neuroimaging for the pediatric endocrinologist.
Imaging of the sella and surrounding structures has become essential in the evaluation of pituitary dysfunction and its causes. This article begins with a review of the normal anatomy of the sella and the imaging patterns in and about the normal pituitary gland. There exists considerable variability in the size and configuration of the normal gland in all age groups, and absolute determination of a 'large' or 'small' gland can prove difficult and problematic. Absence of the posterior bright-spot may indicate disruption of the normal stalk transport mechanisms. Microadenomas are well-resolved by magnetic resonance imaging as areas with reduced or delayed enhancement relative to the normal gland. Among hormonally active tumors, adrenocorticotropic hormone-releasing adenomas are most common in the first 11 years of life, while prolactinomas become more common into the teenage years. Macroadenomas tend to present clinically because of mass-effect on adjacent structures, such as the bitemporal hemianopsia seen with optic chiasm compression. Cystic lesions such as Rathke's cleft cysts are commonly seen in the gland, even in healthy children, and their presence need not correlate with any functional abnormality; however, such cysts can cause mass effect on the remaining gland, reflect hemorrhage into adenoma, or actually comprise the central portion of a more worrisome tumor such as craniopharyngioma. Solid tumors of the suprasellar region include optic pathway gliomas, hamartomas, and germinomas. Among inflammatory conditions, granulomatous diseases such as sarcoidosis have predilection for involvement of the suprasellar regions and can spread along perivascular spaces deep within the parenchyma. Because of the association of pituitary endocrinopathies with midline anomalies, one should pay careful attention to midline structures included on a sellar survey.

18494774
Central nervous system lymphoma characterization by diffusion-weighted imaging and MR spectroscopy.
The characterization and differentiation of central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma has important diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic significance. The purpose of this study is to characterize the diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and MR spectroscopic (MRS) findings in CNS lymphoma. Twenty consecutive patients (male [n= 12], female [n= 8]) with histopathologically proven CNS lymphoma were retrospectively evaluated during this study from July 2005 to April 2007. Patients included immunocompromised (n= 9) and immunocompetent (n= 11) individuals. MR Imaging (pretreatment n= 13), pre- and post-treatment (n= 7) included DWI (n= 20) (b = 1000s/mm2) and ADC (apparent diffusion coefficient) maps of all patients. MRS was performed (n= 10) with PRESS (point-resolved spectroscopy) sequence (multivoxel n= 8, single voxel n= 2) with a TE of 144 msec. All patients were histopathologically confirmed to have lymphoma by biopsy. Areas of restricted diffusion were observed in 90 % (n= 18/20) on pretreatment scans. The diffusion restriction was variable on post-treatment scans. Median metabolite ratios in 10 patients were Cho/Cr- 2.12, NAA/Cho - .49, and NAA/Cr - 1.64. Presence of lactate or lipid was noted in 90 % (n= 9/10). Sites of lesion location were subcortical white matter (n= 6), basal ganglia (n= 4), corpus callosum (n= 3), extra-axial space including cavernous sinus (n= 5), cerebellum (n= 1), and lateral ventricle (n= 1). Restricted diffusion is a consistent imaging finding in CNS lymphoma in immunocompetent patients. Spectroscopy is helpful in initial imaging diagnosis and post-treatment surveillance. These lesions are usually paraventricular in location. MR imaging appearances differ among immunocompetent and immunosuppressed individuals in most cases.

18768714
Crista galli pneumatization is an extension of the adjacent frontal sinuses.
The crista galli is part of the ethmoid bone and, as such, it could be expected that aeration of the crista would come from ethmoid cells. After observing crista pneumatization from the frontal sinuses in several cases, we undertook this study to establish how often crista galli pneumatization came from the frontal sinuses rather than from the ethmoid complex. Two hundred consecutive CT scans of the paranasal sinuses were studied in adult patients to obtain the incidence of crista galli pneumatization and the cell of origin for this phenomenon. A second group of 132 children, 0-7 years of age, was studied to see if any crista galli pneumatization occurred before frontal sinus development. A third group of 79 children, 7-12 years of age, was also studied to see when crista pneumatization occurred in children whose frontal sinuses had already extended into the squamosal portion of the frontal bone. Of the 200 adult cases, there were 26 patients (13%) with crista galli pneumatization, all from either the left or right frontal sinuses. In the second group of children 0-7 years of age, there were no cases of crista pneumatization. In the third group of children 7-12 years of age, there were 4 cases of crista galli pneumatization, all from well-developed frontal sinuses. Our study indicates that crista galli pneumatization is virtually exclusively from either the left or right frontal sinuses and not from displaced ethmoid complex cells in the frontal recess. This finding may have surgical implications when disease is present in the crista galli.

