21477851
Wdr5 Mediates Self-Renewal and Reprogramming via the Embryonic Stem Cell Core Transcriptional Network.
The embryonic stem (ES) cell transcriptional and chromatin-modifying networks are critical for self-renewal maintenance. However, it remains unclear whether these networks functionally interact and, if so, what factors mediate such interactions. Here, we show that WD repeat domain 5 (Wdr5), a core member of the mammalian Trithorax (trxG) complex, positively correlates with the undifferentiated state and is a regulator of ES cell self-renewal. We demonstrate that Wdr5, an "effector" of H3K4 methylation, interacts with the pluripotency transcription factor Oct4. Genome-wide protein localization and transcriptome analyses demonstrate overlapping gene regulatory functions between Oct4 and Wdr5. The Oct4-Sox2-Nanog circuitry and trxG cooperate in activating transcription of key self-renewal regulators, and furthermore, Wdr5 expression is required for the efficient formation of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. We propose an integrated model of transcriptional and epigenetic control, mediated by select trxG members, for the maintenance of ES cell self-renewal and somatic cell reprogramming.

20712812
Peripheral blood cytokine profiling during pregnancy and post-partum periods.
Pregnancy requires that the maternal immune system adapt to prevent rejection of the fetal semi-allograft. This immunologic adaptation may contribute to pregnancy-related alterations in disease susceptibility and severity of infections from viral pathogens such as influenza virus. As part of a larger study investigating the maternal systemic immune response during pregnancy, peripheral blood was collected three times during pregnancy and twice post-partum to measure serum levels of 23 cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors. This longitudinal study design allowed each woman's post-partum blood draw to serve as her own comparison, thus controlling for interpersonal variability in expression levels. When compared to the post-partum samples, significant pregnancy-related changes in IFN?, TNF?, VEGF, GCSF, Eotaxin, and MCP-1 expression were observed. These changes have significant immunologic effects in vivo and in culture. Pregnancy-associated changes to steady state serum cytokines may have important immunologic consequence.

20535210
Patient-specific induced pluripotent stem-cell-derived models of LEOPARD syndrome.
The generation of reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from patients with defined genetic disorders holds the promise of increased understanding of the aetiologies of complex diseases and may also facilitate the development of novel therapeutic interventions. We have generated iPSCs from patients with LEOPARD syndrome (an acronym formed from its main features; that is, lentigines, electrocardiographic abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary valve stenosis, abnormal genitalia, retardation of growth and deafness), an autosomal-dominant developmental disorder belonging to a relatively prevalent class of inherited RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase signalling diseases, which also includes Noonan syndrome, with pleomorphic effects on several tissues and organ systems. The patient-derived cells have a mutation in the PTPN11 gene, which encodes the SHP2 phosphatase. The iPSCs have been extensively characterized and produce multiple differentiated cell lineages. A major disease phenotype in patients with LEOPARD syndrome is hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. We show that in vitro-derived cardiomyocytes from LEOPARD syndrome iPSCs are larger, have a higher degree of sarcomeric organization and preferential localization of NFATC4 in the nucleus when compared with cardiomyocytes derived from human embryonic stem cells or wild-type iPSCs derived from a healthy brother of one of the LEOPARD syndrome patients. These features correlate with a potential hypertrophic state. We also provide molecular insights into signalling pathways that may promote the disease phenotype.

20298589
Coregulation mapping based on individual phenotypic variation in response to virus infection.
Gene coregulation across a population is an important aspect of the considerable variability of the human immune response to virus infection. Methodology to investigate it must rely on a number of ingredients ranging from gene clustering to transcription factor enrichment analysis. We have developed a methodology to investigate the gene to gene correlations for the expression of 34 genes linked to the immune response of Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV) infected conventional dendritic cells (DCs) from 145 human donors. The levels of gene expression showed a large variation across individuals. We generated a map of gene co-expression using pairwise correlation and multidimensional scaling (MDS). The analysis of these data showed that among the 13 genes left after filtering for statistically significant variations, two clusters are formed. We investigated to what extent the observed correlation patterns can be explained by the sharing of transcription factors (TFs) controlling these genes. Our analysis showed that there was a significant positive correlation between MDS distances and TF sharing across all pairs of genes. We applied enrichment analysis to the TFs having binding sites in the promoter regions of those genes. This analysis, after Gene Ontology filtering, indicated the existence of two clusters of genes (CCL5, IFNA1, IFNA2, IFNB1) and (IKBKE, IL6, IRF7, MX1) that were transcriptionally co-regulated. In order to facilitate the use of our methodology by other researchers, we have also developed an interactive coregulation explorer web-based tool called CorEx. It permits the study of MDS and hierarchical clustering of data combined with TF enrichment analysis. We also offer web services that provide programmatic access to MDS, hierarchical clustering and TF enrichment analysis. MDS mapping based on correlation in conjunction with TF enrichment analysis represents a useful computational method to generate predictions underlying gene coregulation across a population.

20048384
Multiple testing and its applications to microarrays.
The large-scale multiple testing problems resulting from the measurement of thousands of genes in microarray experiments have received increasing interest during the past several years. This article describes some commonly used criteria for controlling false positive errors, including familywise error rates, false discovery rates and false discovery proportion rates. Various statistical methods controlling these error rates are described. The advantages and disadvantages of these methods are discussed. These methods are applied to gene expression data from two microarray studies and the properties of these multiple testing procedures are compared.

19737878
Gene expression changes in areas of focal loss of retinal ganglion cells in the retina of DBA/2J mice.
Purpose. To determine whether differences in gene expression occur between areas of focal retinal ganglion cell (RGC) loss and of relative RGC preservation in the DBA/2 mouse retina and whether they can provide insight into the pathophysiology of glaucoma. Methods. Areas of focal RGC loss (judged by lack of Fluorogold labeling; Fluorochrome, Denver, CO), adjacent areas with relative RGC preservation in DBA/2 retina, and Fluorogold-labeled retina from DBA/2(-pe) (pearl) mice were dissected and used for microarray analysis. RT-PCR and immunoblot analysis were used to confirm differential gene expression. Bioinformatic analysis was used to identify gene networks affected in the glaucomatous retina. Results. Microarray analysis identified 372 and 115 gene chip IDs as up- and downregulated, respectively, by 0.5-fold in areas of RGC loss. Differentially expressed genes included those coding for cytoskeletal proteins, enzymes, transport proteins, extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, and immune response proteins. Several genes were confirmed by RT-PCR. For at least two genes, differential protein expression was verified. Bioinformatics analysis identified multiple affected functional gene networks. Pearl mice appeared to have significantly different gene expression, even when compared with relatively preserved areas of the DBA/2 retina. Conclusions. Regional gene expression changes occur in areas of focal RGC loss in the DBA/2 retina. The genes involved code for proteins with diverse cellular functions. Further investigation is needed to determine the cellular localization of the expression of these genes during the development of spontaneous glaucoma in the DBA/2 mouse and to determine whether some of these gene expression changes are causative or protective of RGC loss.

19657031
Requirement for protein synthesis at developing synapses.
Activity and protein synthesis act cooperatively to generate persistent changes in synaptic responses. This forms the basis for enduring memory in adults. Activity also shapes neural circuits developmentally, but whether protein synthesis plays a congruent function in this process is poorly understood. Here, we show that brief periods of global or local protein synthesis inhibition decrease the synaptic vesicles available for fusion and increase synapse elimination. Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) is a critical target; its levels are controlled by rapid turnover, and blocking its activity or knocking it down recapitulates the effects of protein synthesis inhibition. Mature presynaptic terminals show decreased sensitivity to protein synthesis inhibition, and resistance coincides with a developmental switch in regulation from CaMKII to PKA (protein kinase A). These findings demonstrate a novel mechanism regulating presynaptic activity and synapse elimination during development, and suggest that protein translation acts coordinately with activity to selectively stabilize appropriate synaptic interactions.

19577281
Development of a novel peptide microarray for large-scale epitope mapping of food allergens.
The peptide microarray is a novel assay that facilitates high-throughput screening of peptides with a small quantity of sample. We sought to use overlapping peptides of milk allergenic proteins as a model system to establish a reliable and sensitive peptide microarray-based immunoassay for large-scale epitope mapping of food allergens. A milk peptide microarray was developed by using commercially synthesized peptides (20-mers, 3 offset) covering the primary sequences of alpha(s1)-casein, alpha(s2)-casein, beta-casein, kappa-casein, and beta-lactoglobulin. Conditions for printing and immunolabeling were optimized using a serum pool of 5 patients with milk allergy. Reproducibility of the milk peptide microarray was evaluated using replicate arrays immunolabeled with the serum pool, whereas specificity and sensitivity were assessed by using serial dilution of the serum pool and a peptide inhibition assay. Our results show that epitopes identified by the peptide microarray were mostly consistent with those identified previously by SPOT membrane technology, but with specific binding to a few newly identified epitopes of milk allergens. Data from replicate arrays were reproducible (r > or = 0.92) regardless of printing lots, immunolabeling, and serum pool batches. Using the serially diluted serum pool, we confirmed that IgE antibody binding detected in the array was specific. Peptide inhibition of IgE binding to the same peptide and overlapping peptides further confirmed the specificity of the array. A reliable peptide microarray was established for large-scale IgE epitope mapping of milk allergens, and this robust technology could be applied for epitope mapping of other food allergens.

19018297
SOME STEP-DOWN PROCEDURES CONTROLLING THE FALSE DISCOVERY RATE UNDER DEPENDENCE.
Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) proposed the false discovery rate (FDR) as an alternative to the familywise error rate (FWER) in multiple testing problems. Since then, researchers have been increasingly interested in developing methodologies for controlling the FDR under different model assumptions. In a later paper, Benjamini and Yekutieli (2001) developed a conservative step-up procedure controlling the FDR without relying on the assumption that the test statistics are independent.In this paper, we develop a new step-down procedure aiming to control the FDR. It incorporates dependence information as in the FWER controlling step-down procedure given by Westfall and Young (1993). This new procedure has three versions: lFDR, eFDR and hFDR. Using simulations of independent and dependent data, we observe that the lFDR is too optimistic for controlling the FDR; the hFDR is very conservative; and the eFDR a) seems to control the FDR for the hypotheses of interest, and b) suggests the number of false null hypotheses. The most conservative procedure, hFDR, is proved to control the FDR for finite samples under the subset pivotality condition and under the assumption that joint distribution of statistics from true nulls is independent of the joint distribution of statistics from false nulls.

18729740
A comprehensive evaluation of human plasmacytoid dendritic cells using small volumes of human blood.
Elucidation of the role played by cells of the innate immune system, particularly the dendritic cell (DC) populations, has led to a precipitous growth in our understanding of immunity to pathogens and foreign antigens. Much of this information has been derived from studies using mouse model systems. However, mice and human DCs differ drastically in the relative distribution of the toll-like receptors (TLRs) critical for immune activation. This is particularly true for the plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), which are activated almost exclusively through TLR signaling. Variation in this DC subpopulation has been implicated in a number of pathological syndromes; therefore, a thorough understanding of their steady state and activation profiles in human patients is essential. A number of factors, including the relatively low numbers of these cells in blood, have precluded careful analysis in clinical trials. To overcome these limitations, we have developed a technique for studying the steady state and activation profile of pDCs collected from small amounts of human blood. This technique can be performed with 10,000 cells to obtain the immune transcriptome of the pDCs analyzed by quantitative PCR using amplified RNA. In addition, we have used multiplex enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays to measure secreted proteins. We demonstrate the validity of this technique and document its potential for use with blood from human study populations.

18651636
ERM proteins regulate growth cone responses to Sema3A.
Axonal growth cones initiate and sustain directed growth in response to cues in their environment. A variety of events such as receptor internalization, kinase activation, and actin rearrangement can be stimulated by guidance cues and are essential for mediating targeted growth cone behavior. Surprisingly little is known about how such disparate actions are coordinated. Our data suggest that ezrin, radixin, and moesin (ERMs), a family of highly homologous, multifunctional proteins may be able to coordinate growth cone responses to the guidance cue Semaphorin 3A (Sema3A). We show that active ERMs concentrate asymmetrically in neocortical growth cones, are rapidly and transiently inactivated by Sema3A, and are required for Sema3A-mediated growth cone collapse and guidance. The FERM domain of active ERMs regulates internalization of the Sema3A receptor, Npn1, and its coreceptor, L1CAM, while the ERM C-terminal domain binds and caps F-actin. Our data support a model in which ERMs can coordinate membrane and actin dynamics in response to Sema3A.

17720728
Noise propagation and scaling in regulation of gonadotrope biosynthesis.
Reproductive physiology depends on the control of biosynthesis in the pituitary gonadotrope by hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). The responses to GnRH include activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and induction of Egr1. Using population and single cell signaling assays, we investigated the signal and noise transmission through this signaling and gene circuit, analyzing data obtained from 43,775 individual cells in 40 experiments. After exposure to GnRH, phosphorylated ERK (pERK) is elevated in 50% of the cells at 1.7 (SD = 0.3) min. Studies of the cell-to-cell response showed that for both pERK and for Egr1 protein production the mean response (mu) and standard deviation (sigma) within individual cells were linearly related (sigma = kmu) and had similar values of k. To understand the basis for the scaling observed for noise propagation through this system, we determined the relationship between pERK and egr1 mRNA levels induced at varying concentration of GnRH. While both pERK and egr1 mRNA show a saturating sigmoidal relationship to the concentration of GnRH exposure, egr1 mRNA is linearly related to the levels of pERK. These results explain the basis for variation in cellular responses in an important mammalian signaling pathway leading to gene induction.

17630829
Evolutionary history of mammalian transposons determined by genome-wide defragmentation.
The constant bombardment of mammalian genomes by transposable elements (TEs) has resulted in TEs comprising at least 45% of the human genome. Because of their great age and abundance, TEs are important in comparative phylogenomics. However, estimates of TE age were previously based on divergence from derived consensus sequences or phylogenetic analysis, which can be unreliable, especially for older more diverged elements. Therefore, a novel genome-wide analysis of TE organization and fragmentation was performed to estimate TE age independently of sequence composition and divergence or the assumption of a constant molecular clock. Analysis of TEs in the human genome revealed approximately 600,000 examples where TEs have transposed into and fragmented other TEs, covering >40% of all TEs or approximately 542 Mbp of genomic sequence. The relative age of these TEs over evolutionary time is implicit in their organization, because newer TEs have necessarily transposed into older TEs that were already present. A matrix of the number of times that each TE has transposed into every other TE was constructed, and a novel objective function was developed that derived the chronological order and relative ages of human TEs spanning >100 million years. This method has been used to infer the relative ages across all four major TE classes, including the oldest, most diverged elements. Analysis of DNA transposons over the history of the human genome has revealed the early activity of some MER2 transposons, and the relatively recent activity of MER1 transposons during primate lineages. The TEs from six additional mammalian genomes were defragmented and analyzed. Pairwise comparison of the independent chronological orders of TEs in these mammalian genomes revealed species phylogeny, the fact that transposons shared between genomes are older than species-specific transposons, and a subset of TEs that were potentially active during periods of speciation.

17270739
Hallucinogens recruit specific cortical 5-HT(2A) receptor-mediated signaling pathways to affect behavior.
Hallucinogens, including mescaline, psilocybin, and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), profoundly affect perception, cognition, and mood. All known drugs of this class are 5-HT(2A) receptor (2AR) agonists, yet closely related 2AR agonists such as lisuride lack comparable psychoactive properties. Why only certain 2AR agonists are hallucinogens and which neural circuits mediate their effects are poorly understood. By genetically expressing 2AR only in cortex, we show that 2AR-regulated pathways on cortical neurons are sufficient to mediate the signaling pattern and behavioral response to hallucinogens. Hallucinogenic and nonhallucinogenic 2AR agonists both regulate signaling in the same 2AR-expressing cortical neurons. However, the signaling and behavioral responses to the hallucinogens are distinct. While lisuride and LSD both act at 2AR expressed by cortex neurons to regulate phospholipase C, LSD responses also involve pertussis toxin-sensitive heterotrimeric G(i/o) proteins and Src. These studies identify the long-elusive neural and signaling mechanisms responsible for the unique effects of hallucinogens.

17280588
Effective use of microarrays in neuroendocrine research.
The development of microarray technology makes it possible to simultaneously assay the expression level of hundreds to tens of thousands of mRNA transcripts in one experiment. Genome-wide transcriptional analysis has increasing importance for many areas of neuroendocrinology research. The expense and technical complexity of microarray experiments can make it difficult to navigate the terrain of rival platforms and technologies. In this review, we provide a practical view and comparison of various microarray technologies. Affymetrix arrays, high-density cDNA arrays, membrane arrays and experimental design and data analysis are all discussed by researchers currently using these techniques to study gene regulation in neuroendocrine tissues.

