17698587
Analysis of endogenous LRP6 function reveals a novel feedback mechanism by which Wnt negatively regulates its receptor.
The canonical Wnt pathway plays a crucial role in embryonic development, and its deregulation is involved in human diseases. The LRP6 single-span transmembrane coreceptor is essential for transmission of canonical Wnt signaling. However, due to the lack of immunological reagents, our understanding of LRP6 structure and function has relied on studies involving its overexpression, and regulation of the endogenous receptor by the Wnt ligand has remained unexplored. Using a highly sensitive and specific antibody to LRP6, we demonstrate that the endogenous receptor is modified by N-glycosylation and is phosphorylated in response to Wnt stimulation in a sustained yet ligand-dependent manner. Moreover, following triggering by Wnt, endogenous LRP6 is internalized and recycled back to the cellular membrane within hours of the initial stimulus. Finally, we have identified a novel feedback mechanism by which Wnt, acting through beta-catenin, negatively regulates LRP6 at the mRNA level. Together, these findings contribute significantly to our understanding of LRP6 function and uncover a new level of regulation of Wnt signaling. In light of the direct role that the Wnt pathway plays in human bone diseases and malignancies, our findings may support the development of novel therapeutic approaches that target Wnt signaling through LRP6.

19377513
Wnt pathway aberrations including autocrine Wnt activation occur at high frequency in human non-small-cell lung carcinoma.
Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer mortality worldwide. Non-small-cell lung carcinomas (NSCLCs), which represent around 80% of lung tumors, exhibit poor prognosis and are usually refractory to conventional chemotherapy. Elucidating the molecular and cellular mechanisms that are dysregulated in NSCLCs may lead to new possibilities for targeted therapy or enhanced efficacy of current therapies. Here we demonstrate Wnt pathway activation in around 50% of human NSCLC cell lines and primary tumors, through different mechanisms, including autocrine Wnt pathway activation involving upregulation of specific Wnt ligands. Downregulation of activated Wnt signaling inhibited NSCLC proliferation and induced a more differentiated phenotype. Together, our findings establish importance of activated Wnt signaling in human NSCLCs and offer the possibility of targeting upregulated Wnt signaling as a new therapeutic modality for this disease.

