21614868
Galvanic vestibular stimulation as an analogue of spatial disorientation after spaceflight.
Exposure to microgravity adversely affects performance of astronaut pilots; a review of the first 100 Shuttle missions found that touchdown speed was above specified limits in 20% of landings, in contrast to near ideal performance in preflight high-fidelity Shuttle simulations. Ground-based simulators emphasize spacecraft handling abilities, but do not recreate the effects of extended weightlessness on sensorimotor function. The aim of this study was to validate an analogue of the sensorimotor effects of microgravity using pseudorandom bilateral bipolar galvanic vestibular stimulation (GVS) during Shuttle landing simulations. Pilot performance was assessed during simulated Shuttle landings in the Vertical Motion Simulator at NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA (used for astronaut pilot training). Subjects (N = 11) flew eight pairs of identical landing profiles (final approach and touchdown), with and without GVS, presented in a pseudorandom order. Touchdown speed was on target (204 kn) without GVS [203.8 kn], but increased significantly during GVS exposure 1208.5 kn] and was at the upper limit (209 kn) of the target range. The adverse effects of GVS on pilot performance were obvious. Unsuccessful (crash) landings increased from 2.3% (2/88) without GVS to 9% (7/88) with GVS. Hard landings, with touchdown speed in the 'red' (unacceptable) range (> 214 kn), almost doubled from 14 (15.9%) without GVS to 27 (30.7%) with GVS. GVS was an effective analogue of decrements in postflight Shuttle pilot performance.

18785358
Head-eye coordination during simulated orbiter landing.
Orbiter landing data show decrements in pilot performance following spaceflight compared to preflight simulated landings. This study aimed to characterize pilot head-eye coordination during simulated orbiter landings, and relate findings to microgravity-related spatial disorientation. Orbiter landings were simulated in an A340-300 simulator flown by six pilots. Turns about the Heading Alignment Circle (HAC) to align the orbiter with the runway were simulated by 45 degrees banking turns. Final approach was simulated with an 11 degrees glide slope from an altitude of 4267 m, with preflare at 610 m and touchdown at 200 kn. Orbiter landings were also performed in the Vertical Motion Simulator (VMS) at NASA Ames by a NASA test pilot. A340: During the HAC maneuver the head and eyes rolled toward the visual horizon with a combined gain of 0.14 of bank angle. Pilots alternated fixation between the instruments and the runway during final approach, almost exclusively focusing on the runway after preflare. Optokinetic nystagmus was observed during rollout. VMS: Head and eye roll tilt when rounding the HAC were of similar magnitude to that observed in the A340. During final approach the Heads-Up Display (HUD) reduced pitch head and eye movement. Roll tilt of the head and eyes during the HAC tended to align the retina with the visual horizon. Overlaying critical flight information and the approaching runway with the HUD reduced pitch head and eye movement during orbiter final approach in the VMS relative to the A340 (no HUD installed).

17928063
Ambulatory monitoring of freezing of gait in Parkinson's disease.
Freezing of gait (FOG) is common in advanced Parkinson's disease (PD), is resistant to treatment and negatively impacts quality of life. In this study an ambulatory FOG monitor was validated in 11 PD patients. The vertical linear acceleration of the left shank was acquired using an ankle-mounted sensor array that transmitted data wirelessly to a pocket PC at a rate of 100 Hz. Power analysis showed high-frequency components of leg movement during FOG in the 3-8 Hz band that were not apparent during volitional standing, and power in this 'freeze' band was higher (p=0.00003) during FOG preceded by walking (turning or obstacles) than FOG preceded by rest (gait initiation). A freeze index (FI) was defined as the power in the 'freeze' band divided by the power in the 'locomotor' band (0.5-3 Hz) and a threshold chosen such that FI values above this limit were designated as FOG. A global threshold detected 78% of FOG events and 20% of stand events were incorrectly labeled as FOG. Individual calibration of the freeze threshold improved accuracy and sensitivity of the device to 89% for detection of FOG with 10% false positives. Ambulatory monitoring may significantly improve clinical management of FOG.

17828529
Locomotor response to levodopa in fluctuating Parkinson's disease.
The aim of this study was to quantify the dynamic response of locomotion to the first oral levodopa administration of the day in patients with fluctuating Parkinson's disease (PD). Stride length, walking speed, cadence and gait variability were measured with an ambulatory gait monitor in 13 PD patients (8 males) with a clinical history of motor fluctuations. The Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) gait score (part 29) was also determined by a movement disorders specialist from video recordings. Subjects arrived in the morning in an 'off' state (no PD medication) and walked for a maximum length of 100 m. They then took their usual morning dose of oral levodopa and repeated the walking task at 13 min intervals (on average) over a 90 min period. Changes in stride length over time were fit with a Hill (Emax) function. Latency (time until stride length increased 15% of the difference between baseline and maximum response) and the Hill coefficient (shape of the 'off-on' transition) were determined from the fitted curve. Latency varied from 4.7 to 53.3 min post-administration [23.31 min (SD 14.9)], and was inversely correlated with age at onset of PD (R = -0.83; P = 0.0004). The Hill coefficient (H) ranged from a smooth hyperbolic curve (0.9) to an abrupt 'off-on' transition (16.9), with a mean of 8.1 (SD 4.9). H correlated with disease duration (R = 0.67; P = 0.01) and latency (R = 0.67; P = 0.01), and increased with Hoehn & Yahr stage in the 'off' state (P = 0.02) from 5.7 (SD 3.5) (H&Y III) to 11.9 (SD 4.7) (H&Y IV). Walking speed correlated with changes in mean stride length, whereas cadence and gait variability did not. UPDRS gait score also reflected improving gait in the majority of subjects (8), providing clinical confirmation of the objective measures of the locomotor response to levodopa. Increasing abruptness (H) of the 'off-on' transition with disease duration is consistent with results from finger-tapping studies, and may reflect reduced buffering capacity of pre-synaptic nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons. Ambulatory monitoring of gait objectively measures the dynamic locomotor response to levodopa, and this information could be used to improve daily management of motor fluctuations.

17046261
Long-term monitoring of gait in Parkinson's disease.
A new system for long-term monitoring of gait in Parkinson's disease (PD) has been developed and validated. The characteristics of every stride taken over 10-h epochs were acquired using a lightweight ankle-mounted sensor array that transmitted data wirelessly to a small pocket PC at a rate of 100 Hz. Stride was calculated from the vertical linear acceleration and pitch angular velocity of the leg with an accuracy of 5 cm. Results from PD patients (5) demonstrate the effectiveness of long-term monitoring of gait in a natural environment. The small, variable stride length characteristic of Parkinsonian gait, and fluctuations of efficacy associated with levodopa therapy, such as delayed onset, wearing off, and the 'off/on' effect, could reliably be detected from long-term changes in stride length.

