18521893
Newly revealed cricothyropharyngeus muscle in the human laryngopharynx.
Humans have a uniquely curved pharynx and tongue that is believed to have evolved for speech. The most inferior part of the pharynx consists of the laryngopharynx, the critical crossroad where swallowing, breathing, and phonation overlap. We hypothesized that the human laryngopharynx has unique neuromuscular specializations that may be speech related. Laryngopharynx specimens from 15 humans and 20 nonhuman mammals (dog, pig, rabbit, and rat) were studied. Microdissection revealed that only human specimens had a muscle originating from the anterior arch of the cricoid cartilage, and coursing between the inferior pharyngeal constrictor and cricopharyngeus muscles to insert into the median raphe at the posterior midline of the pharynx. On the basis of these anatomic features, we termed it the "cricothyropharyngeus" (CTP). The structure, innervation, and muscle fiber types of the human CTP were further investigated by histological methods, Sihler's stain, and myosin heavy chain (MHC) immunocytochemistry. The innervation and muscle fiber types of the CTP were found to differ from those of neighboring muscles. The laryngeal portion of the CTP was innervated by the external superior laryngeal nerve, whereas the pharyngeal portion of the muscle was supplied by the pharyngeal plexus. Most notable was that the CTP contained specialized muscle fibers expressing some unusual MHC isoforms (i.e., slow-tonic, alpha-cardiac, neonatal, and embryonic). In conclusion, the CTP appears to be a newly described and uniquely human muscle with characteristics suggesting a specialized function that may be speech related.

18191374
The human cricothyroid muscle: three muscle bellies and their innervation patterns.
We hypothesized that the phonatory and respiratory functions of the human cricothyroid (CT) muscle are subserved by separately controlled muscle bellies. In this work, 30 autopsied adult human hemilarynges were used to determine the neuromuscular organization of the CT muscle using microdissection, histology, and Sihler's stain. The results showed that the human CT was composed of three bellies: rectus, oblique, and horizontal. External superior laryngeal nerve (ESLN) was found to enter into the CT muscle as a single trunk (37.5%) or multiple (two to five) branches (62.5%). Within the CT muscle, the ESLN gave off three to seven branches to innervate the rectus belly and one or two branches to supply the oblique and horizontal bellies, respectively. Notably, ESLN also gave off branches to innervate the ipsilateral thyroarytenoid muscle (46%) and subglottic mucosa (67%) or connect with the recurrent laryngeal nerve (25%). These findings suggest that the CT bellies appear to be functionally designed for different motor tasks. The data are also useful for further clarifying the functions of the CT bellies and the ESLN branches and for developing belly-based reinnervation procedures to treat laryngeal paralysis.

18090684
Anatomical localization of motor endplate bands in the human biceps brachii.
: Botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT) reduces disabling muscle contraction in numerous disorders with muscle overactivity. While motor endplates are the primary site of action for BoNT, their location is unknown in most human muscles. This study localized the motor endplate bands (MEB) within human biceps brachii (BB) muscles in relation to external landmarks. : Five human BB muscles were obtained from autopsy. Three muscles were processed for Sihler's stain, a nerve staining technique, and 2 were processed by whole-mount acetylcholinesterase stain. : The major MEB in BB is an inverted V-shaped band, 1 cm in width, located 7 cm superior to the olecranon laterally, 11 cm superior to the olecranon in the middle, and 8 cm above the olecranon medially. The ratio of MEB location to total olecranon-acromion length is 0.25 at the lateral edge, 0.39 in the midline, and 0.28 at the medial edge. : This study localized MEB in human BB in reference to external landmarks. This data should improve the feasibility of endplate targeting when injecting BoNT in BB, which might enhance the clinical efficacy of these injections.

17847729
Neuromuscular specializations within human pharyngeal constrictor muscles.
At present it is believed that the pharyngeal constrictor (PC) muscles are innervated by the vagus (X) nerve and are homogeneous in muscle fiber content. This study tested the hypothesis that adult human PCs are divided into 2 distinct and specialized layers: a slow inner layer (SIL), innervated by the glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve, and a fast outer layer (FOL), innervated by nerve X. Eight normal adult human pharynges (16 sides) obtained from autopsies were studied to determine 1) their gross motor innervation by use of Sihler's stain; 2) their terminal axonal branching by use of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and silver stain; and 3) their myosin heavy chain (MHC) expression in PC muscle fibers by use of immunocytochemical and immunoblotting techniques. In addition, the specialized nature of the 2 PC layers was also studied in developmental (newborn, neonate, and senescent humans), pathological (adult humans with idiopathic Parkinson's disease [IPD]), and comparative (nonhuman primate [adult macaque monkey]) specimens. When nerves IX and X were traced from their cranial roots to their intramuscular termination in Sihler's-stained specimens, it was seen that nerve IX supplied the SIL, whereas branches of nerve X innervated the FOL in the adult human PCs. Use of AChE and silver stain confirmed that nerve IX branches supplying the SIL contained motor axons and innervated motor end plates. In addition to distinct motor innervation, the SIL contained muscle fibers expressing slow-tonic and alpha-cardiac MHC isoforms, whereas the FOL contained muscle fibers expressing developmental MHC isoforms. In contrast, the FOL became obscured in the elderly and in the adult humans with IPD because of an increased proportion of slow muscle fibers. Notably, distinct muscle fiber layers were not found in the human newborn and nonhuman primate (monkey), but were identified in the 2-year-old human. Human PCs appear to be organized into functional fiber layers, as indicated by distinct motor innervation and specialized muscle fibers. The SIL appears to be a specialized layer unique to normal humans. The presence of the highly specialized slow-tonic and alpha-cardiac MHC isoforms, together with their absence in human newborns and nonhuman primates, suggests that the specialization of the SIL maybe related to speech and respiration. This specialization may reflect the sustained contraction needed in humans to maintain stiffness of the pharyngeal walls during respiration and to shape the walls for speech articulation. In contrast, the FOL is adapted for rapid movement as seen during swallowing. Senescent humans and patients with IPD are known to be susceptible to dysphagia; and this susceptibility may be related to the observed shift in muscle fiber content.

17294438
Myosin heavy chain-based fiber types in the adult human cricopharyngeus muscle.
The cricopharyngeus (CP) muscle is a major component of the upper sphincter of the esophagus. Its physiology is complex; a variety of reflexes maintain CP sustained contraction except during swallowing, when it relaxes to allow a food bolus to pass into the esophagus. In order to understand CP function, we previously studied the normal adult human CP and found that it has an unusual layered structure, with a slow inner and fast outer layer. In addition, a majority of its muscle fibers express unusual myosin heavy chain (MHC) isoforms (slow-tonic, alpha-cardiac, neonatal, and embryonic) as well as the major MHC isoforms (types I, IIa, and IIx). In this study, autopsied adult human CP muscles were studied with immunocytochemical techniques to determine the patterns of MHC coexpression in CP muscle fibers. The results show that CP fibers were hybrids expressing from two to six MHC isoforms. Ten different combinations of MHC isoforms were identified in CP fibers, with the most common (54%) containing three MHC isoforms. The variety of hybrid CP fiber types suggests that the CP is capable of a wide range of contraction characteristics. Determination of MHC expression patterns of the CP muscle fibers is critical for evaluating the contractile properties of the sphincter.

17074861
Adult human upper esophageal sphincter contains specialized muscle fibers expressing unusual myosin heavy chain isoforms.
The functional upper esophageal sphincter (UES) is composed of the cricopharyngeus muscle (CP), the most inferior part of the inferior pharyngeal constrictor (iIPC), and the upper esophagus (UE). This sphincter is collapsed and exhibits sustained muscle activity in the resting state; it only relaxes and opens during swallowing, vomiting, and belching. The tonic contractile properties of the UES suggest that the skeletal muscle fibers in this sphincter differ from those in the limb and trunk muscles. In this study, myosin heavy chain (MHC) composition in the adult human UES muscles obtained from autopsies was investigated using immunocytochemical and immunoblotting techniques. Results showed that the adult human UES muscle fibers expressed unusual MHC isoforms such as slow-tonic (MHC-ton), alpha-cardiac (MHC-alpha), neonatal (MHC-neo), and embryonic (MHC-emb), which coexisted with the major MHCs (i.e., MHCI, IIa, and IIx). MHC-ton and MHC-alpha were coexpressed predominantly with slow-type I MHC isoform, whereas MHC-neo and MHC-emb coexisted mainly with fast-type IIa MHC. A slow inner layer (SIL) and a fast outer layer (FOL) in the iIPC and CP were identified immunocytochemically. MHC-ton- and MHC-alpha-containing fibers were concentrated mainly in the SIL, whereas MHC-neo- and MHC-emb-containing fibers were distributed primarily to the FOL. Identification of the specialized muscle fibers and their distribution patterns in the adult human UES is valuable for a better understanding of the physiological and pathophysiological behaviors of the sphincter.

