20171483
Mandibular ramus/coronoid process grafts in maxillofacial reconstructive surgery.
To evaluate the utility of autogenous extended mandibular ramus and coronoid process bone grafts for maxillofacial reconstructive surgery. Twelve patients aged 23 to 76 years (mean, 52) who underwent extended ramus/coronoid process grafts for reconstruction of maxillofacial deformities due to trauma, alveolar atrophy, or iatrogenic nasal deformity. All patients had either unilateral or bilateral combined coronoid process-mandibular ramus bone grafts for their reconstruction. There was 1 nasal reconstruction, 2 unilateral mandibles, 1 bilateral mandible, 4 unilateral maxillas, 1 unilateral maxilla and mandible combined, and 1 bilateral maxilla and mandible combined. The procedure was considered a success when the patient's deformities were reconstructed ad integrum and when there were no failures of the dental implants placed in the augmented areas as of the longest follow-up. All patients were successfully reconstructed. There was 1 infection at a donor site that resolved with local care and oral antibiotics. All but 1 of the maxillary and mandibular alveolar augmentations underwent endosteal implant placement approximately 4 to 6 months following grafting. The nasal reconstruction restored normal function and symmetry. Using both the coronoid process of the mandible and the mandibular ramus as a source for autogenous bone graft can provide sufficient bone in quantity and quality for selected maxillofacial reconstructions.

17719408
Giant benign chondroid syringoma of the cheek: case report and review of the literature.


18554867
Complications after facial contour augmentation with injectable silicone. Diagnosis and treatment. Report of a severe case.
The purpose of this article is to increase the practitioner's awareness of the adverse effects associated with the clinical utilization of foreign bodies (heterofillers), especially silicones for contour augmentation of the face. Diagnostic modes for such difficult cases as well as means for their treatment are discussed in the light of a severe case of facial siliconomas. The case of a 46-year-old female patient with severe facial irregularities and pain secondary to siliconomas 5 years after facial augmentation with silicone is presented. The patient was treated surgically after histological and radiographical confirmation of the diagnosis of facial siliconomas. Extensive dissection of the siliconomas and infiltrated surrounding fascial planes was performed. The patient underwent a protracted course of oral minocycline followed by facial lipofilling with autogenous fat for correction of residual contour irregularities. Silicone may produce unpredictable and devastating complications, which are difficult if not impossible to treat adequately. It is cautious not to use foreign bodies that are not approved by the FDA as contour enhancers, especially not in large quantities.

