18685304
Routine recovery: an ethical plan for greatly increasing the supply of transplantable organs.
All current organ procurement policies require some form of consent. Many families refuse to permit organ recovery from a recently deceased relative; therefore, the major cost of requiring consent is the loss of some lives that could have been saved through transplantation. Here, we argue for a much more efficient approach to organ procurement from brain dead individuals - routine recovery of all transplantable organs without consent. Careful analysis of the relevant literature shows that, compared with its competitors, routine recovery has the greatest potential to increase cadaveric organ procurement and save lives while causing very little harm. Furthermore, a recent survey suggests that 30% of the US public would already accept routine recovery even though the respondents were not educated regarding the value of this approach. Patients on the transplant waiting list are dying while organs that could have saved them are being buried or burned because of family refusal to allow posthumous organ procurement. Routine recovery would eliminate this tragic loss of life-saving organs without violating ethical principles. Indeed, we argue that of all the proposals designed to increase the supply of transplantable cadaveric organs, routine recovery is the best.

17699428
Routine recovery of cadaveric organs for transplantation: consistent, fair, and life-saving.
Many families deny organ recovery from recently deceased relatives. As a result, valuable organs and some of the lives they could save are lost. Several plans designed to rectify this tragic situation have been proposed, including organ sales. We suggest another approach that we believe to be superior and that is rarely discussed: routine recovery of all transplantable cadaveric organs without consent. Here we show that this plan is ethically acceptable, more equitable than our current opting-in approach, consistent with other mandatory social programs, and life-saving. Based on these considerations, we believe that it is time to eliminate entirely the consent requirement for recovery of transplantable cadaveric organs.

17645701
The beauty of the gift: the wonder of living organ donation.
In a recent opinion piece, Nancy Scheper-Hughes provides a sweeping indictment of living organ donation, even in cases where the gift is directed to a close family member. She describes the process with caustic powerful phrases such as "sacrificial violence" and a "call to 'self-sacrifice.'" She concludes that living organ donation "should be consigned to a back seat as an exceptional back-up to deceased donation." But her conclusions are based on anecdotes and data that are not representative of donor practice and motivation in the United States and other developed countries. At reputable transplant centers great care is taken to identify genuine volunteers and to protect their interests. Under these circumstances living organ donation remains a generally safe and beneficial procedure for the donor as well as the recipient, and a wonderful example of the goodness of people.

