19367327
Protein kinase-X interacts with Pin-1 and Polycystin-1 during mouse kidney development.
The regulation of epithelial branching morphogenesis by bone morphogenetic protein-7 depends, in part, on functionally defined cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent protein kinases. We previously identified protein kinase-X (PRKX), a cAMP-dependent kinase, as a regulator of epithelial morphogenesis during kidney development and found that it binds to and phosphorylates Polycystin-1. Overexpression of PRKX stimulates renal epithelial cell migration, tubulogenesis, ureteric bud branching, and glomerular induction in embryonic mouse kidney explants in organ cultures. Here we determined the physiological functions of endogenous PRKX. Knockdown by siRNA of PRKX gene expression in a human fetal collecting tubule (HFCT) cell line exceeded 70% and resulted in decreased cell migration and increased adhesion of the cells to a collagen I matrix. In embryonic mouse kidney explants, the same degree of knockdown decreased ureteric bud branching and glomerular induction. Because PRKX BAG-3 PIN-1 and MAGI-1 are all expressed in ureteric bud derivatives, we tested for interactions among them and found that PRKX binds to all three proteins through its WW domain as determined by TransSignal domain arrays, and it coimmunoprecipitated with Pin-1 in HFCT cell lysates. These studies suggest that Polycystin-1 and Pin-1 may mediate the function of PRKX in kidney development.

21383693
From Rous sarcoma virus to plasminogen activator, src oncogene and cancer management.
Plasminogen activator (PLAU) is a serine protease that converts plasminogen to plasmin, a general protease, which promotes fibrinolysis and degradation of extracellular matrix. PLAU was reported in 1970s as one of the robustly induced enzymatic activities in Rous sarcoma virus (RSV)-transformed chicken cells. More than three decades later, with the completion of the sequencing of the chicken genome and the subsequent availability of Affymetrix GeneChip genome arrays, several laboratories have surveyed the transcriptional program affected by the RSV transformation. Interestingly, the PLAU gene was shown to be the most highly upregulated transcript. The induction of PLAU was a transformation-dependent process because viruses with deleted Src gene did not induce the transcription of the PLAU gene. Both Src and PLAU genes are associated with and contribute to the complex phenotype of human cancer. Although the activity and structures of these two enzymes are well characterized, the precise molecular function of these gene products in signaling networks is still not fully understood. Yet, the knowledge of their association with cancer is already translated into the clinical setting. Src kinase inhibitors are being tested in clinical trials of cancer therapy, and PLAU gene and its inhibitor have been included as biomarkers with strong prognostic and therapeutic predictive values. This vignette reviews the history of PLAU and Src discovery, and illuminates the complexity of their relationship, but also points to their emerging impact on public health.Oncogene advance online publication, 7 March 2011; doi:10.1038/onc.2011.38.

