21258224
Is CT screening for lung cancer ready for prime time?


21168236
Assessment of lung-cancer mortality reduction from CT Screening.
CT screening has been shown to increase lung cancer curability and we now assess the corresponding reduction in lung cancer mortality. Lung-cancer mortality in a cohort of 7995 smokers who underwent CT screening for lung cancer in New York State (NYS) was compared with two unscreened cohorts (CPS-II and CARET). The standardized mortality ratio (SMR) of observed to expected lung cancer deaths for NYS was jointly adjusted for age, sex, and smoking history. As more current NYS smokers might have quit as a result of the screening, thus reducing deaths from lung cancer, another analysis was restricted to those participants smoking at entry and still smoking 6 years later. The SMR was 64/99.8=0.64 (P = 0.84 × 10??) and 28/77.6=0.36 (P = 0.83 × 10?¹?), showing a significant reduction in deaths from lung cancer of 36% and 64% for CPS-II and CARET, respectively. Considering participants who were smoking at entry and still smoking 6 years later, the SMR using CPS-II rates was 29/49.1 = 0.59 (P = 0.001) and using CARET rates it was 21/57.4 = 0.37 (P = 0.31 × 10??). CT screening significantly reduces lung-cancer mortality.

20656844
Zone of transition: a potential source of error in tumor volume estimation.
To measure the width of the zone of transition (ZOT) between nonaerated solid tumor and surrounding nonneoplastic lung parenchyma and determine the extent to which ZOT influences computer-derived estimates of tumor volume based on computed tomographic (CT) images. This HIPAA-compliant study was approved by the institutional research board. The histologic slide containing the maximum tumor area was digitized for 20 consecutive patients with solid adenocarcinoma. The outer border of the tumor (A2) was marked; it included all lung parenchyma having any tumor cells. The inner border of the tumor (A1) was marked; it included only solid tumor where lung parenchyma was no longer preserved. Assuming two circles with areas of A2 and A1, the corresponding two radii, R2 and R1, were calculated. The average width of the ZOT was defined as R2 minus R1. The relationship between ZOT and tumor diameter on the CT images prior to surgery was assessed by using regression analysis. The relationship between ZOT and tumor volume was assessed by using a theoretical model of idealized spheres with varying diameters. The mean width of the ZOT was 0.78 mm (median, 0.48 mm). The proportional effect of ZOT on tumor volume estimates decreased with increasing tumor diameter and increased with increasing width of ZOT. Correlation between ZOT and tumor diameter was not significant (P = .87). The average width of ZOT is about a single pixel width on a full field of view CT scan; thus, the ZOT can have a large effect on volume estimates, particularly for small tumors.

20160639
Limited resection for the treatment of patients with stage IA lung cancer.
Lobectomy is the standard of care for stage IA lung cancer. Some small retrospective studies have suggested similar results after limited resection for tumors < or =2 cm in size. The objective of the study was to compare survival after lobectomy and limited resection among Medicare patients with lung cancer. Using the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results registry, linked to Medicare records, we identified 1165 cases of stage I lung cancer < or =2 cm in size that underwent lobectomy or limited resection (segmentectomy or wedge resection). We used logistic regression to determine propensity scores for undergoing limited resection based on the patients' preoperative characteristics. Overall and lung cancer-specific survival of patients treated with lobectomy or limited resection was compared after adjusting for their propensity score. Overall, 196 (17%) patients underwent limited resection. For the entire sample, the adjusted hazard ratio for all cause mortality (1.09; 95% confidence interval: 0.85-1.40) or lung cancer-specific death (hazard ratio: 1.39; 95% confidence interval: 0.97-2.01) for patients undergoing limited resection were not significantly different from those having lobectomy. Similarly, we found no significant differences in overall or lung cancer-specific survival for patients treated with limited resection compared with lobectomy when data was analyzed stratifying and matching patients by their propensity scores. These results suggest that survival of patients >65 years of age undergoing limited resection or lobectomy for stage IA tumors < or =2 cm appears to be similar. Although these findings should be confirmed in prospective trials, our results suggest that limited resection may be an effective therapeutic alternative for these patients.

