21105122
Bladder cancer: current management and opportunities for a personalized approach.
Urothelial carcinoma of the bladder exists as a spectrum of clinical states ranging from non-muscle-invasive to muscle-invasive to advanced/metastatic disease. Each clinical state is associated with a unique tumor biology, prognosis, and approach to treatment. The field of personalized medicine offers the promise to individualize therapeutic decisions in each clinical state with the goal of preventing or delaying progression to more advanced disease states while optimizing quality of life. This review will discuss bladder cancer as a paradigm for the development of personalized cancer medicine, focusing on recent efforts, current challenges, and future opportunities.

20195782
Validation of the group-based medical mistrust scale among urban black men.
Socioculturally relevant measures of medical mistrust are needed to better address health disparities, especially among Black men, a group with lower life expectancy and higher death rates compared to other race/gender groups. The study aim was to investigate the psychometric properties of the Group-Based Medical Mistrust Scale (GBMMS) in a Black male sample. Data were collected as part of a randomized controlled trial testing educational strategies to support Black men's decisions about prostate cancer screening. Participants included 201 Black men ages 40-75 years recruited in New York City during 2006-2007. The primary measures included: race-based medical mistrust, health care participation, avoidance of health care, perceived access to health care, health care satisfaction, racial identity, residential racial segregation, attitudes towards prostate cancer screening, and past prostate cancer screening behavior. An exploratory factor analysis suggested a three-factor structure. Confirmatory factor analysis supported the three-factor model. Internal consistency was high for the total GBMMS and the three sub-scales: Suspicion, Discrimination, and Lack of Support. Construct validity was supported by: significant positive correlations between GBMMS and avoidance of health care and racial identity as well as significant negative correlations with health care access, health care satisfaction, and attitudes about prostate cancer screening. ANOVA showed that the GBMMS was associated with greater residential racial segregation. Higher total GBMMS scores were associated with not visiting a physician in the last year and not having a regular physician. The present findings provide strong additional evidence that the GBMMS is a valid and reliable measure that may be used among urban Black men.

20006854
Impact of hormonal therapy on intermediate risk prostate cancer treated with combination brachytherapy and external beam irradiation.
We assessed the impact of androgen suppressive therapy on biochemical failure in patients with intermediate risk prostate cancer treated with brachytherapy and external beam irradiation. From 1994 to 2006, 432 patients with intermediate risk prostate cancer as defined by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network were treated with low dose rate brachytherapy and external beam irradiation with or without 9 months of androgen suppressive therapy. Gleason score was 7 in 76% of cases and prostate specific antigen was 1.4 to 20 ng/ml (median 7.6). Of the patients 350 received androgen suppressive therapy and 82 did not. The biologically effective dose was 142 to 280 Gy2 (median 206). Followup was 23 to 155 months (median 56). The overall 8-year biochemical failure-free rate using the Phoenix definition in patients with vs without androgen suppressive therapy was 92% vs 92% (p = 0.4). The therapy had no significant impact on the biochemical failure-free rate in patients with Gleason score 7 (92% vs 90.5%, p = 0.55), prostate specific antigen 10 to 20 ng/ml (92% vs 100%, p = 0.32), T2b-T2c disease (89.5% vs 97%, p = 0.27) and more than 1 intermediate risk feature (90% vs 100%, p = 0.2). We addressed the relative importance of radiation dose vs hormonal therapy for intermediate risk prostate cancer. With high biologically effective dose combination treatment androgen suppressive therapy did not have a significant impact on the 8-year biochemical failure-free rate. We question its routine use in this setting.

19493260
Outcomes for patients with high-grade prostate cancer treated with a combination of brachytherapy, external beam radiotherapy and hormonal therapy.
To assess the outcomes for patients with Gleason score 8-10 prostate cancer treated with brachytherapy, external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) and hormonal therapy (HT). In all, 181 patients with Gleason scores 8-10 prostate cancer were treated from 1994 to 2006 with a (103)Pd implant (prescription dose 100 Gy), 45 Gy of EBRT and 9 months of HT. The median (range) follow-up was 65 (24-150) months; freedom from biochemical failure (FBF) rates were calculated using the Phoenix definition. The 8-year actuarial FBF, freedom from distant metastases, prostate-cancer specific survival and overall survival were 73%, 80%, 87% and 79%, respectively. The pretreatment prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level significantly affected FBF, with 8-year rates of 72%, 82% and 58% for patients with PSA level of <or=10, >10-20 and >20 ng/mL, respectively (P = 0.006). The PSA level had no significant effect on rates of distant metastases. The Gleason score had the most significant affect on FBF in a multivariate analysis, and was the only factor to significantly affect rates of distant metastases; the 8-year FBF rates were 84%, 55% and 30% for scores of 8, 9 and 10, respectively (P = 0.003). The corresponding freedom from distant metastases and prostate-cancer specific survival rates were 86%, 76%, 30% (P < 0.001) and 92%, 80%, 62.5% (P = 0.003), respectively. The 8-year outcomes after this regimen showed favourable biochemical and distant control, as well disease-specific survival rates for patients with Gleason scores of 8-10. This treatment approach should be considered as a viable option for this subset of patients with high-risk disease.

18596922
KLF6-SV1 overexpression accelerates human and mouse prostate cancer progression and metastasis.
Metastatic prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the leading causes of death from cancer in men. The molecular mechanisms underlying the transition from localized tumor to hormone-refractory metastatic PCa remain largely unknown, and their identification is key for predicting prognosis and targeted therapy. Here we demonstrated that increased expression of a splice variant of the Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) tumor suppressor gene, known as KLF6-SV1, in tumors from men after prostatectomy predicted markedly poorer survival and disease recurrence profiles. Analysis of tumor samples revealed that KLF6-SV1 levels were specifically upregulated in hormone-refractory metastatic PCa. In 2 complementary mouse models of metastatic PCa, KLF6-SV1-overexpressing PCa cells were shown by in vivo and ex vivo bioluminescent imaging to metastasize more rapidly and to disseminate to lymph nodes, bone, and brain more often. Interestingly, while KLF6-SV1 overexpression increased metastasis, it did not affect localized tumor growth. KLF6-SV1 inhibition using RNAi induced spontaneous apoptosis in cultured PCa cell lines and suppressed tumor growth in mice. Together, these findings demonstrate that KLF6-SV1 expression levels in PCa tumors at the time of diagnosis can predict the metastatic behavior of the tumor; thus, KLF-SV1 may represent a novel therapeutic target.

17543727
Hormonal implications in the development and treatment of prostate cancer.
In this article, the conflicting data concerning the androgen axis and prostate cancer development are reviewed in addition to how this pathway may be exploited to prevent the development of prostate cancer. The expanding role of hormone ablative therapy alone or in conjunction with standard therapies, the controversies of timing of therapy, and the completeness of ablation and its use on an intermittent basis are reviewed.

17387369
Clinical experience with gene therapy for the treatment of prostate cancer.
Localized prostate cancer can be treated effectively with radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy. The treatment options for metastatic prostate cancer are limited to hormonal therapy; hormone-refractory cancer is treated with taxane-based chemotherapy, which provides only a modest survival benefit. New treatments are needed. The gene for the initiation of prostate cancer has not been identified; however, gene therapy can involve tumor injection of a gene to kill cells, systemic gene delivery to target and kill metastases, or local gene expression intended to generate a systemic response. This review will provide an overview of the various strategies of cancer gene therapy, focusing on those that have gone to clinical trial, detailing clinical experience in prostate cancer patients.

19129926
Community-based free prostate cancer screening program.
The objective of this study was to demonstrate both the feasibility and importance of a bilingual community-based educational program that offers free prostate cancer screening to Hispanic and black men in a high-risk community. The East Harlem Partnership for Cancer Awareness (EHPCA) brought together an academic medical center, public hospital, and two community health centers to offer monthly free prostate cancer screening programs in neighborhood community health centers. The programs included an educational component in Spanish and English, digital rectal examinations (DRE), and blood testing for prostate-specific antigen (PSA). Participant evaluations of the program demonstrated that the sessions were informative and helpful as well as successful in increasing knowledge about prostate cancer. Almost 90% of the participants chose to undergo a digital examination and PSA test; 4 of 150 participants were diagnosed as having prostate cancer. Offering free prostate screening is a successful method of reaching men who might otherwise not be tested. We found that men were willing to be tested and follow-up with care, as needed.

