18337549
Addition of plasmapheresis decreases the incidence of acute antibody-mediated rejection in sensitized patients with strong donor-specific antibodies.
The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of desensitization protocols using intravenous Ig with or without plasmapheresis in patients with donor-specific anti-HLA antibodies on prevention of antibody-mediated rejection and downregulation of donor-specific antibodies. Thirty-five complement-dependent cytotoxicity T cell cross-match-negative but complement-dependent cytotoxicity B cell and/or flow cytometry cross-match-positive kidney transplant recipients were treated with high-dosage intravenous Ig plus Thymoglobulin induction treatment. Donor-specific antibody strength was stratified as strong, medium, or weak by Luminex flow beads. Group 1 patients had weak/moderate and group 2 strong donor-specific antibodies Whereas no group 1 patients had acute rejection, 66% of group 2 had acute rejection (44% antibody-mediated rejection, 22% cellular rejection). The protocol was then changed to the addition of peritransplantation plasmapheresis to patients with strong donor-specific antibodies (group 3). This change resulted in a dramatic decrease in the acute rejection rate to 7%. During a median 18 mo of follow-up, patient survival was 100, 100, and 93% and graft survival was 100, 78, and 86% in groups 1, 2, and 3, respectively. During follow-up, 17 (52%) patients lost donor-specific antibodies completely, and 10 (30%) lost some of donor-specific antibodies and/or decreased the strength of existing donor-specific antibodies. These results indicated that in patients with strong donor-specific antibodies, the addition of plasmapheresis to high-dosage intravenous Ig decreases the incidence of acute rejection. The majority of the patients, whether they received intravenous Ig alone or with plasmapheresis, lost their donor-specific antibodies during follow-up.

17942771
Transplant glomerulopathy may occur in the absence of donor-specific antibody and C4d staining.
Transplant glomerulopathy (TGP) has been proposed to be a component of chronic antibody-mediated rejection (AMR). We have studied 36 patients with TGP and 51 patients with chronic allograft nephropathy (CAN) but without TGP for C4d staining and donor-specific anti-HLA antibodies (DSA) to investigate the alloantibody-mediated mechanisms. Allograft biopsies were stained with C4d staining and DSAs were studied by Luminex Flow Beads. Allograft biopsies were done at a mean of 5.3 +/- 5.0 and 5.6 +/- 4.6 yr after transplantation in patients with CAN and TGP, respectively. The mean creatinine level at the time of the biopsy was 2.7 +/- 1.2 mg/dl in each group. Proteinuria of >1.0 g/d was more common in patients with TGP (61 versus 25%; P = 0.002). Whereas three patients with TGP had a history of acute AMR, none of the patients with CAN had. Mean chronicity score of the biopsies were 1.7 +/- 0.7 in patients with CAN and 1.9 +/- 0.8 in patients with TGP. Biopsies from only two (4%) patients with CAN and four (11%) patients with TGP had diffuse C4d positivity. DSA were found in 36% of TGP and 33% of CAN patients. These results suggest that a substantial number of patients with TGP did not have positive C4d staining or DSA, indicating that a non-alloantibody-mediated process may be involved in the development of TGP in some patients.

17702722
Routine use of ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in potential living kidney donors.
Most transplant centers exclude prospective living kidney donors with hypertension from donation. Centers routinely identify hypertension using BP measured in the clinic, but it is not clear that clinic BP accurately detects the presence or absence of hypertension in potential donors. We therefore conducted a prospective study to determine the impact of routine ambulatory BP monitoring on diagnosis of hypertension in potential donors and the value of other baseline characteristics in predicting ambulatory BP results. We compared classification of hypertension status by clinic BP and by ambulatory BP monitoring in 178 potential living kidney donors. Of 63 individuals with hypertension by clinic BP, 62% had white-coat hypertension by ambulatory BP and were therefore eligible to donate. Of 115 individuals who were normotensive by clinic BP, 17% had masked hypertension by ambulatory BP and were excluded from donation. Individuals with masked hypertension were older, were more likely to be male, and had a somewhat higher clinic BP than individuals with sustained normotension. Individuals with white-coat hypertension had a somewhat lower clinic diastolic BP than individuals with sustained hypertension. Routine ambulatory BP monitoring may identify a large number of individuals with white-coat hypertension and a smaller but significant number of individuals with masked hypertension, ensuring adequate protection of potential donors and accurate assessment of donor risk. Differences in baseline characteristics are small and are not clinically useful in distinguishing individuals with masked hypertension from individuals with sustained normotension or individuals with white-coat hypertension from individuals with sustained hypertension, demonstrating the importance of ambulatory BP monitoring in this population.

19459817
Factors associated with failure to list HIV-positive kidney transplant candidates.
With improved survival in the antiretroviral era, data from ongoing studies suggest that HIV patients can be safely transplanted. The disproportionate burden of HIV-related end-stage renal disease in minority populations may impose additional obstacles to successful completion of the transplant evaluation. We retrospectively reviewed 309 potentially eligible HIV patients evaluated for kidney transplant at our institution since 2000. Only 20% of HIV patients have been listed, compared to 73% of HIV-negative patients evaluated over the same period (p < 0.00001). Failure to provide documentation of CD4 and viral load (36% of candidates) was the most common reason for failure to progress beyond initial evaluation. Other factors independently associated with failure to complete the evaluation included CD4 < 200 at initial evaluation (OR 15.17; 95% CI 1.94-118.83), black race (OR 2.33; 95% CI 1.07-5.06), and history of drug use (OR 2.56; 95% CI 1.22-5.37). More efficient medical record sharing and an awareness of factors associated with failure to list HIV-positive transplant candidates may enable transplant centers to more effectively advocate for these patients.

