17700107
The infected breast prosthesis after mastectomy reconstruction: successful salvage of nine implants in eight consecutive patients.
The use of tissue expanders and permanent implants has an established role in breast reconstruction after mastectomy. Periprosthetic infection, however, represents a known complication. The most conservative approach to severe or recalcitrant prosthetic infection remains removal of the device. However, removal makes subsequent reinsertion and reexpansion more difficult, with less predictable cosmetic results. The authors believe that timely surgical intervention directed toward salvage of infected breast prostheses can be successful, without demonstrating increased capsular contracture. The authors present nine consecutive cases of infected breast implants (nine implants in eight patients). All patients had previously undergone mastectomy for malignancy and immediate expander/implant reconstruction. Six patients had localized infections that failed to respond to oral antibiotics and two women initially presented with systemic infection. All patients were placed on intravenous antibiotics followed by drainage of fluid, manual debridement and curettage of the infected pocket, device exchange, and postoperative antibiotics. All nine infected breast prostheses responded to this approach and currently remain intact and without recurrent infection. Mean time to follow-up for all patients was 14.6 months (range, 10 to 25 months). In patients with severely infected breast prostheses, timely operative intervention can salvage the previously "unsalvageable" implant; in addition, the surgically replaced implants did not develop severe capsular contractures. Surgical salvage of severely infected breast prostheses after mastectomy is a treatment option that should be considered when dealing with severe or recalcitrant infection in a suitable patient.

17630176
Combined laparoscopic and radical vaginal treatment of primary vaginal leiomyosarcoma in a patient with unicornuate uterus and pelvic kidney.
We report a case of primary vaginal leiomyosarcoma occurring in a patient with a unicornuate uterus and pelvic kidney. The patient was treated with radical partial vaginectomy, unilateral groin dissection, total laparoscopic hysterectomy, and left pelvic laparoscopic lymphadenectomy, followed by adjuvant chemotherapy. Twenty-five months after her original procedure, the patient is alive and free of disease. The exact association between müllerian anomalies and primary malignancies of the genitourinary tract is unclear. It is nonetheless important to be aware of the close embryonic association between the genital and urinary tracts when evaluating such patients and choosing the appropriate surgical and therapeutic approach.

17509901
Islandized hemipectoralis muscle flap for sternoclavicular defect.


17479449
Thoracoacromial vessels as the recipients for supercharged muscle-sparing transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous flaps.
We describe the use of the thoracoacromial vessels in microvascular transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous (TRAM) flap breast reconstruction in two cases. The thoracoacromial vessels, used as recipient vessels for supercharged TRAM flaps, offer several advantages. Their location high on the anterior chest wall is ideal for anastomotic repair under the microscope and lends itself to medial placement of the TRAM flap. The thoracoacromial vessels are relatively easily exposed and are suited for microsurgical anastomosis by virtue of their caliber and topology. The dissection of these vessels takes less time than either the internal mammary or thoracodorsal systems. The location of the thoracoacromial vessels allows the flexibility of using either the ipsilateral pedicle for supercharging (deep inferior epigastric vessels on the same side as the superior epigastric pedicle) or contralateral supercharging (deep inferior epigastric vessels on the opposite side of the superior epigastric pedicle). The thoracoacromial vessels make an excellent alternative recipient for microvascular anastomosis in breast reconstruction.

