19109157
Epigenetic regulation of Foxp3 expression in regulatory T cells by DNA methylation.
Foxp3, a winged-helix family transcription factor, serves as the master switch for CD4(+) regulatory T cells (Treg). We identified a unique and evolutionarily conserved CpG-rich island of the Foxp3 nonintronic upstream enhancer and discovered that a specific site within it was unmethylated in natural Treg (nTreg) but heavily methylated in naive CD4(+) T cells, activated CD4(+) T cells, and peripheral TGFbeta-induced Treg in which it was bound by DNMT1, DNMT3b, MeCP2, and MBD2. Demethylation of this CpG site using the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (Aza) induced acetylation of histone 3, interaction with TIEG1 and Sp1, and resulted in strong and stable induction of Foxp3. Conversely, IL-6 resulted in methylation of this site and repression of Foxp3 expression. Aza plus TGFbeta-induced Treg resembled nTreg, expressing similar receptors, cytokines, and stable suppressive activity. Strong Foxp3 expression and suppressor activity could be induced in a variety of T cells, including human CD4(+)CD25(-) T cells. Epigenetic regulation of Foxp3 can be predictably controlled with DNMT inhibitors to generate functional, stable, and specific Treg.

18776119
Podocyte-selective deletion of dicer induces proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis.
Dicer is an enzyme that generates microRNA (miRNA), which are small, noncoding RNA that function as important regulators of gene and protein expression. For exploration of the functional roles of miRNA in glomerular biology, Dicer was inactivated selectively in mouse podocytes. Mutant mice developed proteinuria 4 to 5 weeks after birth and died several weeks later, presumably from kidney failure. Multiple abnormalities were observed in glomeruli of mutant mice, including foot process effacement, irregular and split areas of the glomerular basement membrane, podocyte apoptosis and depletion, mesangial expansion, capillary dilation, and glomerulosclerosis. Gene profiling revealed upregulation of 190 genes in glomeruli isolated from mutant mice at the onset of proteinuria compared with control littermates. Target sequences for 16 miRNA were significantly enriched in the 3'-untranslated regions of the 190 upregulated genes. Further suggesting validity of the in silico analysis, six of the eight top-candidate miRNA were identified in miRNA libraries generated from podocyte cultures; these included four members of the mir-30 miRNA family, which are known to degrade target transcripts directly. Among 15 upregulated target genes of the mir-30 miRNA, four genes known to be expressed and/or functional in podocytes were identified, including receptor for advanced glycation end product, vimentin, heat-shock protein 20, and immediate early response 3. Receptor for advanced glycation end product and immediate early response 3 are known to mediate podocyte apoptosis, whereas vimentin and heat-shock protein-20 are involved in cytoskeletal structure. Taken together, these results provide a knowledge base for ongoing investigations to validate functional roles for the mir-30 miRNA family in podocyte homeostasis and podocytopathies.

17516562
Foundations, promises and uncertainties of personalized medicine.
Personalized medicine introduces the promise to use molecular markers that signal the risk of disease or its presence before clinical signs and symptoms appear. This information underlies a new healthcare strategy focused on prevention and early intervention, rather than reaction to advanced stages of disease. Such a strategy can delay disease onset or minimize symptom severity. The molecular foundations that enable personalized medicine include detection of variation in nucleotide sequence of genes and in characteristic patterns of gene expression, proteins and metabolites. Genetic and molecular patterns are correlated with disease manifestations, drug responses, treatment prognosis, or prediction of predisposition to future disease states. However, the uncertainties for personalized medicine are considerable, including economic, ethical, legal, and societal questions. Although much of its promise remains unproven to date, the foundations of personalized medicine appear solid and evidence is accumulating rapidly pointing to its growing importance in healthcare (Fig. 1).

