21353554
Kinetic analysis reveals the fate of a microRNA following target regulation in mammalian cells.
Considerable details about microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis and regulation have been uncovered, but little is known about the fate of the miRNA subsequent to target regulation. To gain insight into this process, we carried out kinetic analysis of a miRNA's turnover following termination of its biogenesis and during regulation of a target that is not subject to Ago2-mediated catalytic cleavage. By quantitating the number of molecules of the miRNA and its target in steady state and in the course of its decay, we found that each miRNA molecule was able to regulate at least two target transcripts, providing in vivo evidence that the miRNA is not irreversibly sequestered with its target and that the nonslicing pathway of miRNA regulation is multiple-turnover. Using deep sequencing, we further show that miRNA recycling is limited by target regulation, which promotes posttranscriptional modifications to the 3' end of the miRNA and accelerates the miRNA's rate of decay. These studies provide new insight into the efficiency of miRNA regulation that help to explain how a miRNA can regulate a vast number of transcripts and that identify one of the mechanisms that impart specificity to miRNA decay in mammalian cells.

20827537
Monitoring microRNA activity and validating microRNA targets by reporter-based approaches.
An essential requirement for discovering microRNAs that may be relevant to an immune cell's function is to identify the microRNAs that are active in the cell and the genes they target. As several chapters in this volume describe, there are a number of technologies available for profiling microRNA expression, including oligonucleotide array-based approaches, real-time PCR, and, now, deep-sequencing. A complementary approach to expression profiling is the use of a microRNA reporter vector for assaying microRNA activity. In their simplest form, these vectors are comprised of a reporter gene tethered to tandem repeats of a sequence that is complementary to a specific microRNA. This technology enables the activity of a microRNA to be detected, and at single-cell resolution, and provides a means to help identify microRNAs that may have a role in cell function. This is particularly relevant for studying microRNAs in the highly heterogeneous cellular network of the immune system. Reporter vectors have also proved useful for validating microRNA target sites and 3' untranslated regions (UTR) that are under microRNA control. This chapter describes how to construct, produce, and use a reporter vector for assaying microRNA activity, and for validating a microRNA target.

