21331299
POTENTIAL APPLICATION OF GRAPE DERIVED POLYPHENOLS IN HUNTINGTON'S DISEASE.
Huntington's disease (HD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated with selective neuronal cell death. Abnormal aggregation of huntingtin protein with polyQ expansion has been shown to be causally linked to HD. Grape seed polyphenolic extract (GSPE) is a natural compound that has previously been shown to interfere with aggregations of proteins involved in neurological disorders, such as amyloid beta peptides (A?) and Tau protein. In this study we found that GSPE treatment significantly inhibits polyQ aggregation in phaeochromocytoma (PC)-12 cell line containing an ecdysone-inducible protein comprising the first 17 amino acid of huntingtin plus 103 glutamines fused with enhanced GFP. In vivo feasibility studies using the Q93httexon1 drosophila model of HD, we extended our in vitro evidence and found that flies fed with GSPE had a significantly improved lifespan compared to the control flies. Using the R6/2 rodent model of HD, we found that oral administration of 100 mg/kg/day GSPE (equivalent to 500mg per day in human) significantly attenuated the motor skill decay as well as extended the lifespan in the R6/2 mice relative to vehicle-control mice. Collectively, our studies strongly suggest that GSPE might be able to modulate the onset and/or progression of HD.

21247479
Preclinical study of dimebon on ?-amyloid-mediated neuropathology in Alzheimer's disease.
ABSTRACT: Dimebon is a retired non-selective antihistamine drug currently being investigated as a therapeutic agent for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Results from several completed clinical trials are mixed and contradictory. Proper interpretations of these clinical observations, as well as future development of dimebon in AD treatment are complicated by the lack of concrete information on the mechanisms by which dimebon might benefit AD. The present studies are designed specifically to assess whether dimebon might modulate ?-amyloid (A?)-mediated responses which are central to the development and progression of AD dementia. We found that dimebon is bioavailable in the brains of mice following oral administration. AD mice chronically treated with dimebon exhibited a trend of improvement in spatial memory function without affecting the levels of total A? as well as soluble oligomeric A? in the brain. The same trend of behavior improvement is also seen in wild type animals chronically treated with dimebon. Collectively, our preclinical studies using the TgCRND8 AD mouse model demonstrated that dimebon might have some beneficial effect in improving cognitive function independent of Alzheimer's disease-type A?-related mechanisms or global energy metabolism in the brain. Observations from our study and others suggesting dimebon might improve cognition in wild type mice and rats raises the possibility that dimebon might be able to benefit cognitive function in patients with other neurodegenerative disorders, such as Huntington's disease, or in the aging population. Additional studies will be necessary to clarify the mechanisms by which dimebon might directly or indirectly benefit cognitive function.

21134573
Food allergy herbal formula 2 protection against peanut anaphylactic reaction is via inhibition of mast cells and basophils.
Mast cells and basophils are key effector cells of IgE-mediated anaphylactic reactions. The Chinese herbal formula, food allergy herbal formula 2 (FAHF-2), protects against peanut anaphylaxis in mice. However, the mechanisms underlying this effect are not fully elucidated. To investigate whether FAHF-2 inhibits mast cell/basophil numbers and IgE-mediated activation. Mice with peanut allergy (PNA mice) were treated with FAHF-2 intragastrically for 7 weeks and challenged intragastrically with peanut 1 day and 4 weeks posttreatment. Peripheral blood basophil numbers and peritoneal mast cell numbers and Fc?RI expression were determined. Direct effects of FAHF-2 on the murine mast cell line MC/9, and effects of 4 fractions and 3 compounds isolated from FAHF-2 on rat basophilic leukemia cells (RBL-2H3) and human skin mast cells degranulation and on the IgE-mediated spleen tyrosine kinase signaling pathway, were determined. Although all sham-treated PNA mice developed anaphylaxis, FAHF-2-treated PNA mice were protected against anaphylaxis after peanut challenge at 1 day and 4 weeks posttherapy. Reduction of peripheral blood basophils began after 1 week of treatment and continued for at least 4 weeks posttherapy. The number and Fc?RI expression of peritoneal mast cells were also significantly decreased 4 weeks posttherapy. FAHF-2-treated MC/9 cells showed significantly reduced IgE-induced Fc?RI expression, Fc?RI ? mRNA subunit expression, proliferation, and histamine release on challenge. Fraction 2 from FAHF-2 inhibited RBL-2H3 cell and human mast cell degranulation. Three compounds from fraction 2-berberine, palmatine, and jatrorrhizine-inhibited RBL-2H3 cell degranulation via suppressing spleen tyrosine kinase phosphorylation. Food allergy herbal formula 2 reduction of basophils and mast cell numbers as well as suppression of IgE-mediated mast cell activation may contribute to FAHF-2's persistent protection against peanut anaphylaxis.

20579773
Carvedilol as a potential novel agent for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.
Oligomeric beta-amyloid (Abeta) has recently been linked to synaptic plasticity deficits, which play a major role in progressive cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here we present evidence that chronic oral administration of carvedilol, a nonselective beta-adrenergic receptor blocker, significantly attenuates brain oligomeric beta-amyloid content and cognitive deterioration in 2 independent AD mouse models. We found that carvedilol treatment significantly improved neuronal transmission, and that this improvement was associated with the maintenance of number of the less stable "learning" thin spines in the brains of AD mice. Our novel observation that carvedilol interferes with the neuropathologic, biochemical, and electrophysiological mechanisms underlying cognitive deterioration in AD supports the potential development of carvedilol as a treatment for AD.

19158422
Heterogeneity in red wine polyphenolic contents differentially influences Alzheimer's disease-type neuropathology and cognitive deterioration.
We recently found that moderate consumption of two unrelated red wines generate from different grape species, a Cabernet Sauvignon and a muscadine wine that are characterized by distinct component composition of polyphenolic compounds, significantly attenuated the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD)-type brain pathology and memory deterioration in a transgenic AD mouse model. Interestingly, our evidence suggests that the two red wines attenuated AD phenotypes through independent mechanisms. In particular, we previously found that treatment with Cabernet Sauvignon reduced the generation of AD-type amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptides. In contrast, evidence from our present study suggests that muscadine treatment attenuates Abeta neuropathology and Abeta-related cognitive deterioration in Tg2576 mice by interfering with the oligomerization of Abeta molecules to soluble high-molecular-weight Abeta oligomer species that are responsible for initiating a cascade of cellular events resulting in cognitive decline. Collectively, our observations suggest that distinct polyphenolic compounds from red wines may be bioavailable at the organism level and beneficially modulate AD phenotypes through multiple Abeta-related mechanisms. Results from these studies suggest the possibility of developing a "combination" of dietary polyphenolic compounds for AD prevention and/or therapy by modulating multiple Abeta-related mechanisms.

19158421
Identification of antihypertensive drugs which inhibit amyloid-beta protein oligomerization.
Recent studies suggest that certain cardiovascular antihypertensive agents decrease the incidence of Alzheimer's disease. Based on this evidence and the fact that Abeta aggregation into high-molecular-weight-soluble oligomeric Abeta species is known to directly induce cognitive impairment, we tested the possibility that certain antihypertensive compounds may affect the progression of Alzheimer's disease, at least in part by influencing the formation of Abeta oligomers. High throughput screening of 55 commercially available antihypertensive drugs identified four compounds that significantly reduced Abeta(1-42) oligomerization in a dose dependent manner. These four compounds, furosemide (diuretic), nitrendipine (calcium channel blocker), candesartan cilextil (angiotensin II receptor antagonist) and diazoxide (vasodilator) showed no detectable Abeta lowering activities in primary neuron cultures generated from Tg2576 mouse embryos. However, furosemide, nitrendipine and candesartan cilextil prevented oligomerization of both Abeta(1-40) and Abeta(1-42) in vitro. Furosemide also dissociated pre-aggregated Abeta(1-42) oligomers. Furthermore, short term furosemide treatment resulted in decreased amount of Abeta oligomers in the brain of Tg2576 mice. Our studies suggest that certain antihypertensive compounds may prevent AD-type neuropathology through inhibition of Abeta oligomer formation.

18562609
Grape-derived polyphenolics prevent Abeta oligomerization and attenuate cognitive deterioration in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive impairments in memory and cognition. Extracellular accumulation of soluble high-molecular-weight (HMW) Abeta oligomers has been proposed to be largely responsible for AD dementia and memory deficits in the Tg2576 mice, a model of AD. In this study, we found that a naturally derived grape seed polyphenolic extract can significantly inhibit amyloid beta-protein aggregation into high-molecular-weight oligomers in vitro. When orally administered to Tg2576 mice, this polyphenolic preparation significantly attenuates AD-type cognitive deterioration coincidentally with reduced HMW soluble oligomeric Abeta in the brain. Our study suggests that grape seed-derived polyphenolics may be useful agents to prevent or treat AD.

17965777
Valsartan lowers brain beta-amyloid protein levels and improves spatial learning in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease.
Recent epidemiological evidence suggests that some antihypertensive medications may reduce the risk for Alzheimer disease (AD). We screened 55 clinically prescribed antihypertensive medications for AD-modifying activity using primary cortico-hippocampal neuron cultures generated from the Tg2576 AD mouse model. These agents represent all drug classes used for hypertension pharmacotherapy. We identified 7 candidate antihypertensive agents that significantly reduced AD-type beta-amyloid protein (Abeta) accumulation. Through in vitro studies, we found that only 1 of the candidate drugs, valsartan, was capable of attenuating oligomerization of Abeta peptides into high-molecular-weight (HMW) oligomeric peptides, known to be involved in cognitive deterioration. We found that preventive treatment of Tg2576 mice with valsartan significantly reduced AD-type neuropathology and the content of soluble HMW extracellular oligomeric Abeta peptides in the brain. Most importantly, valsartan administration also attenuated the development of Abeta-mediated cognitive deterioration, even when delivered at a dose about 2-fold lower than that used for hypertension treatment in humans. These preclinical studies suggest that certain antihypertensive drugs may have AD-modifying activity and may protect against progressive Abeta-related memory deficits in subjects with AD or in those at high risk of developing AD.

19643919
Association of white matter hyperintensity measurements on brain MR imaging with cognitive status, medial temporal atrophy, and cardiovascular risk factors.
White matter hyperintensities (WMHs) are frequently characterized as markers of cerebrovascular disease, whereas medial temporal atrophy (MTA) is a recognized marker of Alzheimer disease (AD). Our purpose was to test the reliability of a visual rating system (VRS) in evaluating WMHs and MTA and in distinguishing healthy from cognitively impaired subjects. Subjects (n = 192) enrolled in the Florida Alzheimer's Disease Research Center were diagnosed with no cognitive impairment, nonamnestic mild cognitive impairment (na-MCI), amnestic MCI (a-MCI), or probable AD. The severity of WMHs was assessed on T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery axial MR images, and the severity of MTA was evaluated on 1.5-mm-thick coronal MR images by using a computer-based visual rating system. Cardiovascular risk factor scores were calculated as the sum of 10 independent cardiovascular risk factors. WMH and MTA scores were greater in subjects with probable AD, relative to those with no cognitive impairment and na-MCI. MTA scores differentiated subjects with a-MCI from those with no cognitive impairment and na-MCI. The total WMH score was significantly related to MTA (r = 0.39; P < .001) but not to cardiovascular risk factor scores (r = 0.07; P = not significant). The overall correct classification rate of probable AD versus no cognitive impairment by using MTA scores was 81.8%, improving to 86.5% when combined with WMH scores. Both MTA and WMH scores distinguished subjects with no cognitive impairment and probable AD. Combining MTA and WMH scores improved the correct classification rate, whereas WMH scores were significantly related to MTA scores, but not to cardiovascular risk factor scores. This finding suggests that among subjects with a-MCI and probable AD, WMHs on MR images are primarily associated with neurodegenerative disease.

