21029855
Egg's ZP3 structure speaks volumes.
Binding of mammalian sperm to eggs depends in part on ZP3, a glycoprotein in the egg's extracellular coat, the zona pellucida. In this issue, Han et al. (2010) describe the structure of an avian ZP3 homolog, providing insights into ZP3 processing and polymerization and the roles of the ZP3 polypeptide and its carbohydrate in sperm binding.

20691861
Isolation and manipulation of mouse gametes and embryos.
Many experimental approaches to answer questions about mammalian development begin with the isolation of mouse gametes and/or embryos. Here, methods used to isolate and store growing and fully-grown oocytes, ovulated (unfertilized) eggs, cleavage-stage embryos, and sperm from mice are described. Procedures used to carry out capacitation of sperm, binding of sperm to oocytes and ovulated eggs, and induction and assessment of the acrosome reaction in vitro are also described.

19875177
The multifunctional zona pellucida and mammalian fertilization.
An early step in mammalian fertilization is species-restricted binding of sperm to the oocyte's zona pellucida (ZP), a thick extracellular coat. Sperm bind to the ZP of unfertilized oocytes, but not to the ZP of fertilized oocytes. Shortly after binding to the unfertilized oocyte ZP, sperm undergo the acrosome reaction (AR). Three mouse ZP glycoproteins, called mZP1-3, constitute the mouse oocyte's ZP and participate in the process of fertilization. For example, sperm exposed to unfertilized oocyte mZP3 at nanomolar concentrations are inhibited from binding to oocytes and undergo the AR; mZP1 and mZP2 have no effect. mZP3 from fertilized oocytes has no effect on sperm binding and is unable to induce the AR. These properties of mZP3 strongly suggest that it is a receptor for sperm and inducer of the AR. Mapping of the mZP3 combining-site for sperm suggests that it is located near the C-terminus of the polypeptide, in a region encoded by exon-7 of the mZP3 gene. This region of mZP3 is a site of positive Darwinian selection. When mZP3 exon-7 is fused to the Fc fragment of human IgG and sperm are exposed to the chimeric protein, the sperm are inhibited from binding to oocytes, suggesting that the inhibitory activity of mZP3 is dependent on this region of its polypeptide.

19504560
Zona pellucida glycoprotein ZP3 and fertilization in mammals.
An early step in mammalian fertilization is species-restricted binding of sperm to the egg's zona pellucida (ZP), a thick extracellular coat that surrounds eggs. Sperm bind to the ZP of unfertilized eggs, but not to the ZP of fertilized eggs. Shortly after binding to the unfertilized egg ZP, sperm undergo the acrosome reaction, a form of cellular exocytosis that enables sperm to penetrate the ZP. Three glycoproteins, mZP1-3, constitute the mouse egg's ZP and participate in the process of fertilization. For example, sperm exposed to unfertilized egg mZP3 at nanomolar concentrations are inhibited from binding to eggs and undergo the acrosome reaction. Neither mZP1 nor mZP2 has an effect on sperm binding or the acrosome reaction. Furthermore, mZP3 from fertilized eggs has no effect on sperm binding and is unable to induce the acrosome reaction. These and other properties of mZP3 suggest that it is a receptor for sperm and inducer of the acrosome reaction. Mapping of the mZP3 combining-site for sperm suggests that it is located near the C-terminus of the polypeptide, just downstream of the ZP domain, in a region encoded by exon-7 of the mZP3 gene. This region of mZP3 is a site of positive Darwinian selection. When mZP3 exon-7 is fused to the Fc fragment of human IgG and sperm exposed to the chimeric protein, sperm are inhibited from binding to eggs. However, the chimeric protein does not induce the acrosome reaction. Therefore, polypeptide encoded by mZP3 exon-7 is necessary and sufficient for binding of mouse sperm.

18979240
Mammalian fertilization is dependent on multiple membrane fusion events.
Successful completion of fertilization in mammals is dependent on three membrane fusion events. These are (1) the acrosome reaction of sperm, (2) the fusion of sperm and egg plasma membranes to form a zygote, and (3) the cortical reaction of fertilized eggs. Extensive research into the molecular basis of each of these events has identified candidate proteins and factors involved in fusion of membranes during the mammalian fertilization process. Some of this information is provided here.

18649280
Mammalian fertilization: the egg's multifunctional zona pellucida.
The zona pellucida (ZP) is a specialized extracellular coat that surrounds the plasma membrane of mammalian eggs. Its presence is essential for successful completion of oogenesis, fertilization and preimplantation development. The ZP is composed of only a few glycoproteins which are organized into long crosslinked fibrils that constitute the extracellular coat. A hallmark of ZP glycoproteins is the presence of a ZP domain, a region of polypeptide responsible for polymerization of the glycoproteins into a network of interconnected fibrils. The mouse egg ZP consists of only three glycoproteins, called ZP1, ZP2, and ZP3, that are synthesized and secreted exclusively by growing oocytes. One of the glycoproteins, ZP3, serves as both a binding partner for sperm and inducer of sperm exocytosis, the acrosome reaction. Female mice lacking ZP3 fail to assemble a ZP around growing oocytes and are completely infertile. Sperm bind to the carboxy-terminal region of ZP3 polypeptide encoded by ZP3 exon-7 and binding is sufficient to induce sperm to complete the acrosome reaction. Whether sperm recognize and bind to ZP3 polypeptide, oligosaccharide, or both remains an unresolved issue. Purified ZP3 self-assembles into long homomeric fibrils under non-denaturing conditions. Apparently, sperm added to ZP3 bind to the fibrils and are prevented from binding to ovulated eggs in vitro. These, as well as other aspects of ZP structure and function are addressed in this article.

17566273
Features that affect secretion and assembly of zona pellucida glycoproteins during mammalian oogenesis.
For sperm to fertilize eggs, they must bind to and penetrate the zona pellucida (ZP) that surrounds the plasma membrane of all mammalian eggs. The ZP first appears during oocyte growth and increases in thickness as oocytes increase in diameter. The ZP is an extracellular matrix composed of long, crosslinked filaments. In mice, three glycoproteins, called mZP1-3, are synthesised and secreted by growing oocytes and assembled into a thick (-6.5 microm) extracellular coat over a 2-3 week period. Recently, we identified several regions of nascent ZP glycoproteins that affect their secretion and incorporation into the ZP (assembly) by growing oocytes. Among these are the ZP domain, the consensus furin cleavage site (CFCS) and the C-terminal propeptide (CTP) with its transmembrane domain (TMD), external hydrophobic patch (EHP), charged patch (CP), conserved cysteine (Cys) residue, and short cytoplasmic tail (CT). Particularly important is the ZP domain, a approximately 260 amino acid region with 8 conserved Cys residues that is common to a variety of extracellular proteins of diverse functions found in a wide range of multicellular eukaryotes. Our results show that the ZP domain functions as a polymerisation module and that its N-terminal half, including 4 conserved Cys residues, is largely responsible for this role. Additionally, two conserved hydrophobic sequences, one within the ZP domain (internal hydrophobic patch; IHP) and another within the CTP (EHP), apparently regulate polymerisation of nascent ZP glycoproteins. Collectively, our findings suggest a general mechanism for assembly of all ZP domain proteins based on coupling between proteolytic processing and polymerisation.

17559063
Purified mouse egg zona pellucida glycoproteins polymerize into homomeric fibrils under non-denaturing conditions.
The mouse egg's zona pellucida (ZP) is composed of three glycoproteins, called ZP1, ZP2, and ZP3, that migrate as relatively broad, single bands on SDS-PAGE. The glycoproteins are organized within the ZP as a network of long interconnected fibrils that exhibit a structural periodicity. Here, ZP2 and ZP3 were purified by HPLC to homogeneity and analyzed by Blue Native- (BN-) PAGE and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), as well as by SDS-PAGE. As opposed to SDS-PAGE, BN-PAGE, and TEM permit analysis of ZP2 and ZP3 under non-denaturing conditions. ZP2 and ZP3 migrate on BN-PAGE, not as single bands, but as several discrete oligomers that give rise to larger structures which remain at the origin of the gel. Consistent with this, ZP2 and ZP3 are visualized by TEM as long interconnected fibrils that consist of contiguous beads. Therefore, under non-denaturing conditions both purified ZP2 and ZP3 polymerize into higher order structures. These findings are of interest since purified ZP3 inhibits binding of mouse sperm to eggs and induces sperm to undergo the acrosome reaction in vitro. Results presented here suggest that these biological effects of ZP3 are due to binding of homomeric fibrils of ZP3 to sperm.

