20095901
Prevalence and patient awareness of medical comorbidities in an urban AIDS clinic.
Mortality in HIV-positive persons is increasingly due to non-HIV-related medical comorbidities. There are limited data on the prevalence and patient awareness of these comorbid conditions. Two hundred subjects at an urban HIV clinic were interviewed in 2005 to assess their awareness of 15 non-HIV-related medical comorbidities, defined as medical problems that are neither AIDS-defining by standard definitions, nor a direct effect of immune deficiency. Medical charts were subsequently reviewed to establish prevalence and concordance between self-report and chart documentation. Eighty-four percent of subjects self-reported at least 1 of 15 medical comorbidities and 92% had at least 1 condition chart-documented. The top 5 chart-documented conditions were hepatitis C (51.5%), pulmonary disease (28.5%), high blood pressure (27%), high cholesterol (24.5%), and obesity (22.5%). In multivariate analysis, higher number of non-HIV-related medical comorbidities was associated with older age, female gender, and intravenous drug use as route of HIV transmission. Across self-reported non-HIV-related medical comorbidities, the absolute concordance rate ranged from 67% to 96%, the sensitivity ranged from 0% to 79%; the positive predictive value ranged from 0% to 100%. While the vast majority of largely urban minority HIV-positive subjects were diagnosed with non-HIV-related medical comorbidities, there is significant room for improvement in patient awareness. In order to help patients optimally access and adhere to medication and medical care for these non-HIV-related medical comorbidities, interventions and educational campaigns to improve patient awareness that take cultural background, literacy, and educational level into account should be developed, implemented, and evaluated.

19892211
Psychiatric management of HIV/HCV-coinfected patients beginning treatment for hepatitis C virus infection: survey of provider practices.
To determine expert clinical practice in the management of psychiatric status of HIV/hepatitis C virus (HCV)-coinfected patients initiating pegylated interferon/ribavirin for the treatment of hepatitis C. Two hundred thirty-six expert providers were identified and invited by email to complete an online anonymous survey. Ninety-two providers (39%) completed the survey, 24 (26%) of whom are psychiatrists. More than one third of providers indicate that they use or offer the option of antidepressant use prophylactically in HIV-positive patients with no past or current depression beginning HCV treatment, and more than three quarters do so in patients with a history of depression but no current symptoms of depression. The most experienced nonpsychiatrist providers were more likely to use antidepressants prior to the start of treatment in HIV-coinfected patients as compared to in HCV monoinfected patients. There is consensus among providers to leave psychiatric medication unchanged in patients currently treated for unipolar depression. Many expert providers prescribe antidepressants to HIV/HCV-coinfected patients initiating Hepatitis C treatment in the absence of symptoms of depression, despite the lack of data supporting this approach in this population. Research is needed to provide an evidence base to guide the optimal psychiatric management of HIV/HCV-coinfected patients beginning hepatitis C treatment.

19416131
Review article: adherence to medication for chronic hepatitis C - building on the model of human immunodeficiency virus antiretroviral adherence research.
Treatment of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection with pegylated interferon/ribavirin achieves sustained virological response in up to 56% of HCV mono-infected patients and 40% of HCV/human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-co-infected patients. The relationship of patient adherence to outcome warrants study. To review comprehensively research on patient-missed doses to HCV treatment and discuss applicable research from adherence to HIV antiretroviral therapy. Publications were identified by PubMed searches using the keywords: adherence, compliance, hepatitis C virus, interferon and ribavirin. The term 'non-adherence' differs in how it is used in the HCV from the HIV literature. In HCV, 'non-adherence' refers primarily to dose reductions by the clinician and early treatment discontinuation. In contrast, in HIV, 'non-adherence' refers primarily to patient-missed doses. Few data have been published on the rates of missed dose adherence to pegylated interferon/ribavirin and its relationship to virological response. As HCV treatment becomes more complex with new classes of agents, adherence will be increasingly important to treatment success as resistance mutations may develop with suboptimal dosing of HCV enzyme inhibitors. HIV adherence research can be applied to that on HCV to establish accurate methods to assess adherence, investigate determinants of non-adherence and develop strategies to optimize adherence.

19086329
Hepatitis C patients' self-reported adherence to treatment with pegylated interferon and ribavirin.
Prior research on adherence to hepatitis C treatment has documented rates of dose reductions and early treatment discontinuation, but little is known about patients' dose-taking adherence. To assess the prevalence of missed doses of pegylated interferon and ribavirin and examine the correlates of dose-taking adherence in clinic settings. One hundred and eighty patients on treatment for hepatitis C (23% coinfected with HIV) completed a cross-sectional survey at the site of their hepatitis C care. Seven per cent of patients reported missing at least one injection of pegylated interferon in the last 4 weeks and 21% reported missing at least one dose of ribavirin in the last 7 days. Dose-taking adherence was not associated with HCV viral load. Self-reported dose non-adherence to hepatitis C treatment occurs frequently. Further studies of dose non-adherence (assessed by method other than self-report) and its relationship to HCV virological outcome are warranted.

