21445249
Serum IGF-1 affects skeletal acquisition in a temporal and compartment-specific manner.
Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) plays a critical role in the development of the growing skeleton by establishing both longitudinal and transverse bone accrual. IGF-1 has also been implicated in the maintenance of bone mass during late adulthood and aging, as decreases in serum IGF-1 levels appear to correlate with decreases in bone mineral density (BMD). Although informative, mouse models to date have been unable to separate the temporal effects of IGF-1 depletion on skeletal development. To address this problem, we performed a skeletal characterization of the inducible LID mouse (iLID), in which serum IGF-1 levels are depleted at selected ages. We found that depletion of serum IGF-1 in male iLID mice prior to adulthood (4 weeks) decreased trabecular bone architecture and significantly reduced transverse cortical bone properties (Ct.Ar, Ct.Th) by 16 weeks (adulthood). Likewise, depletion of serum IGF-1 in iLID males at 8 weeks of age, resulted in significantly reduced transverse cortical bone properties (Ct.Ar, Ct.Th) by 32 weeks (late adulthood), but had no effect on trabecular bone architecture. In contrast, depletion of serum IGF-1 after peak bone acquisition (at 16 weeks) resulted in enhancement of trabecular bone architecture, but no significant changes in cortical bone properties by 32 weeks as compared to controls. These results indicate that while serum IGF-1 is essential for bone accrual during the postnatal growth phase, depletion of IGF-1 after peak bone acquisition (16 weeks) is compartment-specific and does not have a detrimental effect on cortical bone mass in the older adult mouse.

21418509
Increased serum IGF-1 levels protect the musculoskeletal system but are associated with elevated oxidative stress markers and increased mortality independent of tissue igf1 gene expression.
Although the literature suggests a protective (anabolic) effect of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) on the musculoskeletal system during growth and aging, there is evidence that reductions in IGF-1 signaling are advantageous for promoting an increase in life span through reduction in oxidative stress-induced tissue damage. To better understand this paradox, we utilized the hepatocyte-specific IGF-1 transgenic (HIT) mice, which exhibit 3-fold increases in serum IGF-1, with normal IGF-1 expression in other tissues, and mice with an IGF-1 null background that exclusively express IGF-1 in the liver, which thereby deliver IGF-1 by the endocrine route only (KO-HIT mice). We found that in the total absence of tissue igf1 gene expression (KO-HIT), increases in serum IGF-1 levels were associated with increased levels of lipid peroxidation products in serum and increased mortality rate at 18?months of age in both genders. Surprisingly, however, we found that in female mice, tissue IGF-1 plays an important role in preserving trabecular bone architecture as KO-HIT mice show bone loss in the femoral distal metaphysis. Additionally, in male KO-HIT mice, increases in serum IGF-1 levels were insufficient to protect against age-related muscle loss.

20928887
Growth hormone mediates pubertal skeletal development independent of hepatic IGF-1 production.
Deficiencies in either growth hormone (GH) or insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) are associated with reductions in bone size during growth in humans and animal models. Liver-specific IGF-1-deficient (LID) mice, which have 75% reductions in serum IGF-1, were created previously to separate the effects of endocrine (serum) IGF-1 from autocrine/paracrine IGF-1. However, LID mice also have two- to threefold increases in GH, and this may contribute to the observed pubertal skeletal phenotype. To clarify the role of GH in skeletal development under conditions of significantly reduced serum IGF-1 levels (but normal tissue IGF-1 levels), we studied the skeletal response of male LID and control mice to GH inhibition by pegvisomant from 4 to 8 weeks of age. Treatment of LID mice with pegvisomant resulted in significant reductions in body weight, femur length (Le), and femur total area (Tt.Ar), as well as further reductions in serum IGF-1 levels by 8 weeks of age, compared with the mean values of vehicle-treated LID mice. Reductions in both Tt.Ar and Le were proportional after treatment with pegvisomant. On the other hand, the relative amount of cortical tissue formed (RCA) in LID mice treated with pegvisomant was significantly less than that in both vehicle-treated LID and control mice, indicating that antagonizing GH action, either directly (through GH receptor signaling inhibition) or indirectly (through further reductions in serum/tissue IGF-1 levels), results in disproportionate reductions in the amount of cortical bone formed. This resulted in bones with significantly reduced mechanical properties (femoral whole-bone stiffness and work to failure were markedly decreased), suggesting that compensatory increases of GH in states of IGF-1 deficiency (LID mice) act to protect against a severe inhibition of bone modeling during growth, which otherwise would result in bones that are too weak for normal and/or extreme loading conditions.

20926579
Elevated circulating IGF-I promotes mammary gland development and proliferation.
Animal studies have shown that IGF-I is essential for mammary gland development. Previous studies have suggested that local IGF-I rather than circulating IGF-I is the major mediator of mammary gland development. In the present study we used the hepatic IGF-I transgenic (HIT) and IGF-I knockout/HIT (KO-HIT) mouse models to examine the effects of enhanced circulating IGF-I on mammary development in the presence and absence of local IGF-I. HIT mice express the rat IGF-I transgene under the transthyretin promoter in the liver and have elevated circulating IGF-I and normal tissue IGF-I levels. The KO-HIT mice have no tissue IGF-I and increased circulating IGF-I. Analysis of mammary gland development reveals a greater degree of complexity in HIT mice as compared to control and KO-HIT mice, which demonstrate similar degrees of mammary gland complexity. Immunohistochemical evaluation of glands of HIT mice also suggests an enhanced degree of proliferation of the mammary gland, whereas KO-HIT mice exhibit mammary gland proliferation similar to control mice. In addition, HIT mice have a higher percentage of proliferating myoepithelial and luminal cells than control mice, whereas KO-HIT mice have an equivalent percentage of proliferating myoepithelial and luminal cells as control mice. Thus, our findings show that elevated circulating IGF-I levels are sufficient to promote normal pubertal mammary epithelial development. However, HIT mice demonstrate more pronounced mammary gland development when compared to control and KO-HIT mice. This suggests that both local and endocrine IGF-I play roles in mammary gland development and that elevated circulating IGF-I accelerates mammary epithelial proliferation.

20801951
Mammalian target of rapamycin inhibition abrogates insulin-mediated mammary tumor progression in type 2 diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes increases breast cancer risk and mortality, and hyperinsulinemia is a major mediator of this effect. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is activated by insulin and is a key regulator of mammary tumor progression. Pharmacological mTOR inhibition suppresses tumor growth in numerous mammary tumor models in the non-diabetic setting. However, the role of the mTOR pathway in type 2 diabetes-induced tumor growth remains elusive. Herein, we investigated whether the mTOR pathway is implicated in insulin-induced mammary tumor progression in a transgenic mouse model of type 2 diabetes (MKR mice) and evaluated the impact of mTOR inhibition on the diabetic state. Mammary tumor progression was studied in the double transgenic MMTV-Polyoma Virus middle T antigen (PyVmT)/MKR mice and by orthotopic inoculation of PyVmT- and Neu/ErbB2-driven mammary tumor cells (Met-1 and MCNeuA cells respectively). mTOR inhibition by rapamycin markedly suppressed tumor growth in both wild-type and MKR mice. In diabetic animals, however, the promoting action of insulin on tumor growth was completely blunted by rapamycin, despite a worsening of the carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. Taken together, pharmacological mTOR blockade is sufficient to abrogate mammary tumor progression in the setting of hyperinsulinemia, and thus mTOR inhibitors may be an attractive therapeutic modality for breast cancer patients with type 2 diabetes. Careful monitoring of the metabolic state, however, is important as dose adaptations of glucose- and/or lipid-lowering therapy might be necessary.

20499371
Sex-specific regulation of body size and bone slenderness by the acid labile subunit.
Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) is a crucial mediator of body size and bone mass during growth and development. In serum, IGF-1 is stabilized by several IGF-1-binding proteins (IGFBPs) and the acid labile subunit (ALS). Previous research using ALS knockout (ALSKO) mice indicated a growth retardation phenotype, and clinical reports of humans have indicated short stature and low bone mineral density (BMD) in patients with ALS deficiency. To determine the temporal and sex-specific effects of ALS deficiency on body size and skeletal development during growth, we characterized control and ALSKO mice from 4 to 16 weeks of age. We found that female ALSKO mice had an earlier-onset reduction in body size (4 weeks) but that both female and male ALSKO mice were consistently smaller than control mice. Interestingly, skeletal analyses at multiple ages showed increased slenderness of ALSKO femurs that was more severe in females than in males. Both male and female ALSKO mice appeared to compensate for their more slender bones through increased bone formation on their endosteal surfaces during growth, but ALSKO females had increased endosteal bone formation compared with ALSKO males. This study revealed age- and sex-specific dependencies of body size and bone size on the ALS. These findings may explain the heterogeneity in growth and BMD measurements reported in human ALS-deficient patients.

20499370
Elevated serum IGF-1 levels synergize PTH action on the skeleton only when the tissue IGF-1 axis is intact.
There is growing evidence that insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) and parathyroid hormone (PTH) have synergistic actions on bone and that part of the anabolic effects of PTH is mediated by local production of IGF-1. In this study we analyzed the skeletal response to PTH in mouse models with manipulated endocrine or autocrine/paracrine IGF-1. We used mice carrying a hepatic IGF-1 transgene (HIT), which results in a threefold increase in serum IGF-1 levels and normal tissue IGF-1 expression, and Igf1 null mice with blunted IGF-1 expression in tissues but threefold increases in serum IGF-1 levels (KO-HIT). Evaluation of skeletal growth showed that elevations in serum IGF-1 in mice with Igf1 gene ablation in all tissues except the liver (KO-HIT) resulted in a restoration of skeletal morphology and mechanical properties by adulthood. Intermittent PTH treatment of adult HIT mice resulted in increases in serum osteocalcin levels, femoral total cross-sectional area, cortical bone area and cortical bone thickness, as well as bone mechanical properties. We found that the skeletal response of HIT mice to PTH was significantly higher than that of control mice, suggesting synergy between IGF-1 and PTH on bone. In sharp contrast, although PTH-treated KO-HIT mice demonstrated an anabolic response in cortical and trabecular bone compartments compared with vehicle-treated KO-HIT mice, their response was identical to that of PTH-treated control mice. We conclude that (1) in the presence of elevated serum IGF-1 levels, PTH can exert an anabolic response in bone even in the total absence of tissue IGF-1, and (2) elevations in serum IGF-1 levels synergize PTH action on bone only if the tissue IGF-1 axis is intact. Thus enhancement of PTH anabolic actions depends on tissue IGF-1.

20200935
Elevated serum levels of IGF-1 are sufficient to establish normal body size and skeletal properties even in the absence of tissue IGF-1.
Use of recombinant insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) as a treatment for primary IGF-1 deficiency in children has become increasingly common. When untreated, primary IGF-1 deficiency may lead to a range of metabolic disorders, including lipid abnormalities, insulin resistance, and decreased bone density. To date, results of this therapy are considered encouraging; however, our understanding of the role played by IGF-1 during development remains limited. Studies on long-term treatment with recombinant IGF-1 in both children and animals are few. Here, we used two novel transgenic mouse strains to test the long-term effects of elevated circulating IGF-1 on body size and skeletal development. Overexpression of the rat igf1 transgene in livers of mice with otherwise normal IGF-1 expression (HIT mice) resulted in approximately threefold increases in serum IGF-1 levels throughout growth, as well as greater body mass and enhanced skeletal size, architecture, and mechanical properties. When the igf1 transgene was overexpressed in livers of igf1 null mice (KO-HIT), the comparably elevated serum IGF-1 failed to overcome growth and skeletal deficiencies during neonatal and early postnatal growth. However, between 4 and 16 weeks of age, increased serum IGF-1 fully compensated for the absence of locally produced IGF-1 because body weights and lengths of KO-HIT mice became comparable with controls. Furthermore, micro-computed tomography (microCT) analysis revealed that early deficits in skeletal structure of KO-HIT mice were restored to control levels by adulthood. Our data indicate that in the absence of tissue igf1 gene expression, maintaining long-term elevations in serum IGF-1 is sufficient to establish normal body size, body composition, and both skeletal architecture and mechanical function.

20068149
Insulin-mediated acceleration of breast cancer development and progression in a nonobese model of type 2 diabetes.
Epidemiologic studies suggest that type 2 diabetes (T2D) increases breast cancer risk and mortality, but there is limited experimental evidence supporting this association. Moreover, there has not been any definition of a pathophysiological pathway that diabetes may use to promote tumorigenesis. In the present study, we used the MKR mouse model of T2D to investigate molecular mechanisms that link T2D to breast cancer development and progression. MKR mice harbor a transgene encoding a dominant-negative, kinase-dead human insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) that is expressed exclusively in skeletal muscle, where it acts to inactivate endogenous insulin receptor (IR) and IGF-IR. Although lean female MKR mice are insulin resistant and glucose intolerant, displaying accelerated mammary gland development and enhanced phosphorylation of IR/IGF-IR and Akt in mammary tissue, in the context of three different mouse models of breast cancer, these metabolic abnormalities were found to accelerate the development of hyperplastic precancerous lesions. Normal or malignant mammary tissue isolated from these mice exhibited increased phosphorylation of IR/IGF-IR and Akt, whereas extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 phosphorylation was largely unaffected. Tumor-promoting effects of T2D in the models were reversed by pharmacological blockade of IR/IGF-IR signaling by the small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor BMS-536924. Our findings offer compelling experimental evidence that T2D accelerates mammary gland development and carcinogenesis,and that the IR and/or the IGF-IR are major mediators of these effects.

20048072
Insulin-like growth factor-I regulates the liver microenvironment in obese mice and promotes liver metastasis.
Among the mechanisms implicated in the tumor-promoting effects of obesity, signaling by insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) and insulin has received considerable attention. However, the emerging realization that obesity is associated with chronic inflammation has prompted other consideration of how the IGF-I axis may participate in cancer progression. In the present study, we used two mouse models of chronic (LID) and inducible (iLID) igf-1 gene deficiency in the liver to investigate the role of IGF-I in regulating the host microenvironment and colorectal carcinoma growth and metastasis in obese mice. Obese mice had a heightened inflammatory response in the liver, which was abolished in mice with chronic IGF-I deficiency (LID). In control animals changes to the hepatic microenvironment associated with obesity sustained the presence of tumor cells in the liver and increased the incidence of hepatic metastases after intrasplenic/portal inoculation of colon carcinoma cells. These changes did not occur in LID mice with chronic IGF-1 deficiency. In contrast, these changes occurred in iLID mice with acute IGF-1 deficiency, in the same manner as the control animals, revealing a fundamental difference in the nature of the requirement for IGF-1 on tumor growth and metastasis. In the setting of obesity, our findings imply that IGF-1 is critical to activate and sustain an inflammatory response in the liver that is needed for hepatic metastasis, not only through direct, paracrine effect on tumor cell growth, but also through indirect effects involving the tumor microenvironment.

20007694
The insulin-like growth factor-1 binding protein acid-labile subunit alters mesenchymal stromal cell fate.
Age-related osteoporosis is accompanied by an increase in marrow adiposity and a reduction in serum insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and the binding proteins that stabilize IGF-1. To determine the relationship between these proteins and bone marrow adiposity, we evaluated the adipogenic potential of marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) from mice with decreased serum IGF-1 due to knockdown of IGF-1 production by the liver or knock-out of the binding proteins. We employed 10-16-week-old, liver-specific IGF-1-deficient, IGFBP-3 knock-out (BP3KO) and acid-labile subunit knock-out (ALSKO) mice. We found that expression of the late adipocyte differentiation marker peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma was increased in marrow isolated from ALSKO mice. When induced with adipogenic media, MSC cultures from ALSKO mice revealed a significantly greater number of differentiated adipocytes compared with controls. MSCs from ALSKO mice also exhibited decreased alkaline-phosphatase positive colony size in cultures that were stimulated with osteoblast differentiation media. These osteoblast-like cells from ALSKO mice failed to induce osteoclastogenesis of control cells in co-culture assays, indicating that impairment of IGF-1 complex formation with ALS in bone marrow alters cell fate, leading to increased adipogenesis.

19959755
Insulin-sensitizing therapy attenuates type 2 diabetes-mediated mammary tumor progression.
Type 2 diabetes increases breast cancer risk and mortality, and hyperinsulinemia has been identified as a major factor linking these two diseases. Thus, we hypothesized that pharmacological reduction of elevated insulin levels would attenuate type 2 diabetes-mediated mammary tumor progression. We studied mammary tumor development in MKR(+/+) mice, a nonobese, hyperinsulinemic mouse model of type 2 diabetes. MKR(+/+) mice were either crossed with mice expressing the polyoma virus middle T oncogene specifically in the mammary gland or inoculated orthotopically with the mouse mammary tumor cell lines Met-1 and MCNeuA. MKR(+/+) or control mice harboring tumors were treated with CL-316243, a specific beta3-adrenergic receptor agonist, which sensitizes insulin action but has no direct effect on the mouse mammary epithelium or Met-1 and MCNeuA cells. CL-316243 treatment significantly reduced the elevated insulin levels in MKR(+/+) mice and, as a consequence, attenuated mammary tumor progression in the three tumor models tested. This effect was accompanied by reductions in phosphorylation of insulin and IGF-I receptors in transformed mammary tissue. Insulin-sensitizing treatment is sufficient to abrogate type 2 diabetes-mediated mammary tumor progression. Therefore, early administration of insulin-sensitizing therapy may reduce breast cancer risk and mortality in patients with type 2 diabetes.

19956655
High-efficient FLPo deleter mice in C57BL/6J background.
Conditional gene manipulation in mice becomes a routine for genetic studies of mammalian gene functions. Additional site-specific recombinases such as FLP or phi31 provide one more level of gene manipulation flexibility. The recombination activity of the currently available FLP deleter mice remains low. We generated a new FLP deleter mouse line with the mouse codon-optimized FLPo gene in C57BJ/6 background, which showed superior recombination efficacy in comparison to FLPe deleter mice. 100% complete removal of FRT-flanked Neo cassette was observed in all F1 progeny mice carrying both FLPo and Neo cassette, which can be transmitted to F2 generation independent of FLPo activity. Our new FLPo transgenic mice (on pure C57BJ/6 background) will largely facilitate the gene targeting process and is valuable for conditional gene manipulation.

19800274
Biological effects of growth hormone on carbohydrate and lipid metabolism.
This review will summarize the metabolic effects of growth hormone (GH) on the adipose tissue, liver, and skeletal muscle with focus on lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. The metabolic effects of GH predominantly involve the stimulation of lipolysis in the adipose tissue resulting in an increased flux of free fatty acids (FFAs) into the circulation. In the muscle and liver, GH stimulates triglyceride (TG) uptake, by enhancing lipoprotein lipase (LPL) expression, and its subsequent storage. The effects of GH on carbohydrate metabolism are more complicated and may be mediated indirectly via the antagonism of insulin action. Furthermore, GH has a net anabolic effect on protein metabolism although the molecular mechanisms of its actions are not completely understood. The major questions that still remain to be answered are (i) What are the molecular mechanisms by which GH regulates substrate metabolism? (ii) Does GH affect substrate metabolism directly or indirectly via IGF-1 or antagonism of insulin action?

19619004
Growth hormone protects against ovariectomy-induced bone loss in states of low circulating insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1).
Early after estrogen loss in postmenopausal women and ovariectomy (OVX) of animals, accelerated endosteal bone resorption leads to marrow expansion of long bone shafts that reduce mechanical integrity. Both growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) are potent regulators of bone remodeling processes. To investigate the role of the GH/IGF-1 axis with estrogen deficiency, we used the liver IGF-1-deficient (LID) mouse. Contrary to deficits in controls, OVX of LID mice resulted in maintenance of cortical bone mechanical integrity primarily owing to an enhanced periosteal expansion affect on cross-sectional structure (total area and cortical width). The serum balance in LID that favors GH over IGF-1 diminished the effects of ablated ovarian function on numbers of osteoclast precursors in the marrow and viability of osteocytes within the cortical matrix and led to less endosteal resorption in addition to greater periosteal bone formation. Interactions between estrogen and the GH/IGF-1 system as related to bone remodeling provide a pathway to minimize degeneration of bone tissue structure and osteoporotic fracture.

19497975
Elevated levels of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I in serum rescue the severe growth retardation of IGF-I null mice.
IGF-I plays a vital role in growth and development and acts in an endocrine and an autocrine/paracrine fashion. The purpose of the current study was to clarify whether elevated levels of IGF-I in serum can rescue the severe growth retardation and organ development and function of igf-I null mice. To address that, we overexpressed a rat igf-I transgene specifically in the liver of igf-I null mice. We found that in the total absence of tissue IGF-I, elevated levels of IGF-I in serum can support normal body size at puberty and after puberty but are insufficient to fully support the female reproductive system (evident by irregular estrous cycle, impaired development of ovarian corpus luteum, reduced number of uterine glands and endometrial hypoplasia, all leading to decreased number of pregnancies and litter size). We conclude that most autocrine/paracrine actions of IGF-I that determine organ growth and function can be compensated by elevated levels of endocrine IGF-I. However, in mice, full compensatory responses are evident later in development, suggesting that autocrine/paracrine IGF-I is critical for neonatal development. Furthermore, we show that tissue IGF-I is necessary for the development of the female reproductive system and cannot be compensated by elevated levels of serum IGF-I.

19257833
Serum IGF-1 determines skeletal strength by regulating subperiosteal expansion and trait interactions.
Strong correlations between serum IGF-1 levels and fracture risk indicate that IGF-1 plays a critical role in regulating bone strength. However, the mechanism by which serum IGF-1 regulates bone structure and fracture resistance remains obscure and cannot be determined using conventional approaches. Previous analysis of adult liver-specific IGF-1-deficient (LID) mice, which exhibit 75% reductions in serum IGF-1 levels, showed reductions in periosteal circumference, femoral cross-sectional area, cortical thickness, and total volumetric BMD. Understanding the developmental sequences and the resultant anatomical changes that led to this adult phenotype is the key for understanding the complex relationship between serum IGF-1 levels and fracture risk. Here, we identified a unique developmental pattern of morphological and compositional traits that contribute to bone strength. We show that reduced bone strength associated with low levels of IGF-1 in serum (LID mice) result in impaired subperiosteal expansion combined with impaired endosteal apposition and lack of compensatory changes in mineralization throughout growth and aging. We show that serum IGF-1 affects cellular activity differently depending on the cortical surface. Last, we show that chronic reductions in serum IGF-1 indirectly affect bone strength through its effect on the marrow myeloid progenitor cell population. We conclude that serum IGF-1 not only regulates bone size, shape, and composition during ontogeny, but it plays a more fundamental role-that of regulating an individual's ability to adapt its bone structure to mechanical loads during growth and development.

19150422
Type 2 diabetic mice demonstrate slender long bones with increased fragility secondary to increased osteoclastogenesis.
Type 2 diabetics often demonstrate normal or increased bone mineral density, yet are at increased risk for bone fracture. Furthermore, the anti-diabetic oral thiazolidinediones (PPARgamma agonists) have recently been shown to increase bone fractures. To investigate the etiology of possible structural and/or material quality defects, we have utilized a well-described mouse model of Type 2 diabetes (MKR). MKR mice exhibit muscle hypoplasia from birth with reduced mass by the pre-diabetic age of 3 weeks. A compensatory hyperplasia ensues during early (5 weeks) development; by 6-8 weeks muscle is normal in structure and function. Adult whole-bone mechanical properties were determined by 4-point bending to test susceptibility to fracture. Micro-computed tomography and cortical bone histomorphometry were utilized to assess static and dynamic indices of structure, bone formation and resorption. Osteoclastogenesis assays were performed from bone marrow-derived non-adherent cells. The 8-week and 16-week, but not 3-week, male MKR had slender (i.e., narrow relative to length) femurs that were 20% weaker (p<0.05) relative to WT control femurs. Tissue-level mineral density was not affected. Impaired periosteal expansion during early diabetes resulted from 250% more, and 40% less of the cortical bone surface undergoing resorption and formation, respectively (p<0.05). Greater resorption persisted in adult MKR on both periosteal and endosteal surfaces. Differences were not limited to cortical bone as the distal femur metaphysis of 16 week MKR contained less trabecular bone and trabecular separation was greater than in WT by 60% (p<0.05). At all ages, MKR marrow-derived cultures demonstrated the ability for enhanced osteoclast differentiation in response to M-CSF and RANK-L. Taken together, the MKR mouse model suggests that skeletal fragility in Type 2 diabetes may arise from reduced transverse bone accrual and increased osteoclastogenesis during growth that is accelerated by the diabetic/hyperinsulinemic milieu. Further, these results emphasize the importance of evaluating diabetic bone based on morphology in addition to bone mass.

18687786
The role of insulin receptor signaling in zebrafish embryogenesis.
Insulin receptor (IR) signaling is considered to be important in growth and development in addition to its major role in metabolic homeostasis. The metabolic role of insulin in carbohydrate and lipid metabolism is extensively studied. In contrast, the role of IR activation during embryogenesis is less understood. To address this, we examined the function of the IR during zebrafish development. Zebrafish express two isoforms of IR (insra and insrb). Both isoforms were cloned and show high homology to the human insulin receptor and can functionally substitute for the human IR in fibroblasts derived from insr gene-deleted mice. Gene expression studies reveal that these receptors are expressed at moderate levels in the central nervous system during development. Morpholino-mediated selective knockdown of each of the IR isoforms causes growth retardation and profound morphogenetic defects in the brain and eye. These results clearly demonstrate that IR signaling plays essential roles in vertebrate embryogenesis and growth.

17315038
Mechanisms of disease: metabolic effects of growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor 1.
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) 1 is a member of a family that is involved in growth, development, cell differentiation, and metabolism. IGF1, IGF2 and insulin act primarily through tyrosine-kinase-linked receptors--the IGF1 receptor (IGF1R) and insulin receptor (IR). The IGF1R binds IGF1 and IGF2 with high affinity and the IR binds insulin with high affinity; however, since both receptors share a high degree of structural and functional homology, the IGF1R can bind insulin and the IR can bind the IGFs with reduced affinity. These two receptors can, moreover, form heterodimers, which bind both ligands. Upon binding to the receptors, cascades of tyrosine and serine kinases are stimulated to facilitate growth or metabolism. The IGF2 receptor is a scavenger receptor, and is, therefore, not involved in mediation of growth or metabolic effects of the IGF family and will not be discussed in the current article. IGF1 is a major gene target of growth hormone and its product mediates many of the actions of growth hormone on growth and development; however, IGF1 has actions distinct from those of growth hormone in carbohydrate, lipid, and protein metabolism. For example, excess growth hormone causes insulin resistance and hyperglycemia, whereas IGF1 has insulin-like effects that reduce blood glucose levels and has been used experimentally to treat both type 1 and type 2 diabetes.

17264177
A familial insulin-like growth factor-I receptor mutant leads to short stature: clinical and biochemical characterization.
IGF-I/IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) signaling pathways play important roles in longitudinal growth. A novel Arg481Glu (R481Q) mutation in IGF-IR was detected in a family with intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation. The objective of the study was to explore the mechanism whereby the R481Q mutation may be causative in growth retardation. A 13-yr-old girl with short stature was studied for functional analysis of the R481Q mutation in the IGF-IR. Two members of a family who showed intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, with increased serum IGF-I levels, demonstrated a substitution of arginine for glutamine at 481 (R481Q) in the IGF-IR. This mutation results in the formation of an altered fibronectin type III domain within the alpha-subunit. NIH-3T3 fibroblasts that overexpress the human wild-type or R481Q mutant IGF-IR demonstrated normal cell surface ligand binding by 125I-IGF-I binding assay. However, the fold increase of IGF-I stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of the IGF-IR beta-subunit as well as downstream activation of ERK1/2 and Akt was reduced in cells overexpressing the mutant receptor. Additionally, basal and IGF-I-stimulated levels of cell proliferation were also reduced in cells overexpressing the mutant receptor. Our results demonstrate that NIH-3T3 cells overexpressing a mutant form of the Igf1r gene, in which arginine at 481 is substituted by glutamine, lead to reduced levels of the fold increase of IGF-IR beta-subunit phosphorylation as well as ERK1/2 and Akt phosphorylation and was accompanied by decreased cell proliferation. These results are postulated to be the cause of intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation in the described patients.

19436992
Apolipoprotein E deficiency abrogates insulin resistance in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Although it is known that lipid metabolism plays a role in insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes and in obesity, the mechanism is still largely unknown. Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) regulates plasma lipid levels and also plays a role in the uptake of lipids into various tissues. To investigate whether the suppression of whole-particle lipoprotein uptake into tissues affects insulin responsiveness and the diabetic condition, we examined the effect of an ApoE (also known as Apoe) gene deletion in MKR mice, a mouse model of type 2 diabetes. ApoE ( -/- ), MKR, ApoE ( -/- )/MKR and control mice were placed on a high-fat, high-cholesterol diet for 16 weeks. Glucose tolerance, serum insulin, blood glucose, insulin tolerance, tissue triacylglycerol content and atherosclerotic lesions were assessed. ApoE ( -/- )/MKR and ApoE ( -/- ) mice showed significantly improved blood glucose, glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. Reduced triacylglycerol content in liver and reduced fat accumulation in liver and adipose tissue were found in ApoE ( -/- )/MKR and ApoE ( -/- ) mice compared with control and MKR mice. ApoE ( -/- ) and ApoE ( -/- )/MKR mice demonstrated similarly large atherosclerotic lesions, whereas MKR and control mice had small atherosclerotic lesions. We demonstrated that ApoE deficiency abrogates insulin resistance in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes, suggesting that lipid accumulation in tissue is a major cause of insulin resistance in this mouse model.

18777452
Obesity and type 2 diabetes are associated with an increased risk of developing cancer and a worse prognosis; epidemiological and mechanistic evidence.
Both obesity and Type 2 diabetes are independently associated with an increased risk of developing cancer and an increased mortality. The etiology is yet to be determined but insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia maybe important factors. Hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia and inflammatory cytokines in addition to the insulin-like growth factors are also possible factors involved in the process.

18437163
Insulin-like growth factor-I protects cells from ER stress-induced apoptosis via enhancement of the adaptive capacity of endoplasmic reticulum.
Disruption of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis causes accumulation of unfolded and misfolded proteins in the ER, triggering the ER stress response, which can eventually lead to apoptosis when ER dysfunction is severe or prolonged. Here we demonstrate that human MCF-7 breast cancer cells, as well as murine NIH/3T3 fibroblasts, are rescued from ER stress-initiated apoptosis by insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I). IGF-I significantly augments the adaptive capacity of the ER by enhancing compensatory mechanisms such as the IRE1 alpha-, PERK- and ATF6-mediated arms of ER stress signalling. During ER stress, IGF-I stimulates translational recovery and induces expression of the key molecular chaperone protein Grp78/BiP, thereby enhancing the folding capacity of the ER and promoting recovery from ER stress. We also demonstrate that the antiapoptotic activity of IGF-I during ER stress may be mediated by a novel, as yet unidentified, signalling pathway(s). Application of signal transduction inhibitors of MEK (U1026), PI3K (LY294002 and wortmannin), JNK (SP600125), p38 (SB203580), protein kinases A and C (H-89 and staurosporine) and STAT3 (Stattic) does not prevent IGF-I-mediated protection from ER stress-induced apoptosis. Taken together, these data demonstrate that IGF-I protects against ER stress-induced apoptosis by increasing adaptive mechanisms through enhancement of ER stress-signalling pathways, thereby restoring ER homeostasis and preventing apoptosis.

