21401375
A study of multiple full-face treatments with low-energy settings of a 2940-nm Er:YAG fractionated laser.
Fractional Er:YAG 2940-nm laser resurfacing is a relatively new approach to the treatment of photodamaged skin. Typically, this approach uses fairly high delivered energies in order to create 'microscopic wounds' of tissue coagulation at various dermal depths. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy, safety and tolerability of low-energy, multiple-treatment, fractional Er:YAG laser resurfacing for the treatment of photoaged skin. Sixteen subjects with photoaged skin received six, lower-fluence laser treatments with a 2940-nm wavelength Er:YAG laser, using a fractionated handpiece and a maximum energy of 30 mJ per micro-spot. Subject satisfaction, treatment tolerability, and subject outcome assessment were performed. Of the 12 subjects who completed the trial, all recorded improvement in their treated skin; half reported over 50% improvement. Most patients reported none or only mild stinging and burning during and after treatment. There was no downtime associated with the procedure. No adverse events were reported. Patient satisfaction rates were high. Low-energy, multiple treatment, 2940-nm Er:YAG laser resurfacing with this novel device is a safe and well-tolerated method for the treatment of superficial to moderate photoaged skin.

18940541
Photodynamic therapy in skin rejuvenation.
Photodynamic therapy is a noninvasive technique used in the treatment of various skin disorders. This article will provide readers with an extensive review of the popular chosen topical photosensitizers, varied used light sources and lasers, and medical and cosmetic indications treated with photodynamic therapy.

17963137
Cutaneous photoaging treated with a combined 595/1064 nm laser.
The pulsed dye laser (PDL) has been used for a variety of vascular changes associated with photoaging. The Nd:YAG laser has been shown to be effective in the treatment of deeper facial vessels, as well as to stimulate new dermal collagen deposition. This study was undertaken to evaluate the safety and efficacy of sequential dual-wavelength PDL and Nd:YAG laser treatment of photoaged facial skin. Fifteen individuals, between the ages of 38 and 66 years old, with various stigmata of facial photoaging, were entered into the study. Five sequential combined PDL/Nd:YAG (Cynergy, Cynosure Inc., Westford, MA, USA) treatments were performed using a 10-mm handpiece at monthly intervals. PDL parameters included a 10-ms pulse duration and a fluence set at 1 J/cm2 below the purpura threshold. Nd:YAG parameters were set at a 50-ms pulse duration with fluences varying between 35 and 50 J/cm2, depending on patient comfort. Improvement was determined by evaluation of photographs taken before the first treatment and at 1 and 3 months following the last treatment, as well as the individual's self-assessment. Individuals tolerated treatments well with no serious, long-term, or permanent adverse effects. Improvement was most pronounced in telangiectasias and diffuse erythema, followed by epidermal dyspigmentation and lentigines. Some individuals were also noted to have improved smoothness, radiance, or pore size. The improvement was generally maintained at the 3-month follow-up. In addition, the average self-reported improvement was 1.7 (on a 0-4 scale) at 1 month and 2.4 at 3 months following the last treatment. A novel combined sequential PDL/Nd:YAG laser can be used to treat a variety of cutaneous changes associated with photoaging. Further studies may determine the relative impact of each laser and whether the total effect is simply additive or synergistic

17457764
Treatment of skin laxity of the lower face and neck in older individuals with a broad-spectrum infrared light device.
Non-ablative approaches with infrared and radiofrequency energy sources have been shown to reduce skin laxity, but studies have focused on individuals with early-stage, mild-to-moderate degenerative dermal changes. The purpose of this prospective study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of an infrared light device for the treatment of skin laxity in patients with soft tissue ptosis of the lower face and neck characteristic of the sixth decade of life and beyond. Thirteen females, aged 58-83 years old (average: 64 years), were treated with a filtered 1100-1800 nm infrared light-based device. All individuals presented with ptotic soft tissue, but varied in the extent of skin laxity from no visible laxity to having pendulous excess skin. Two treatment sessions were provided at monthly intervals. The individuals returned for follow-up visits at 1, 3 and 6 months after the second treatment. Twelve of the individuals completed the study. Changes were dramatic for those individuals in whom the skin envelope appeared to drape separately from deeper soft tissue. No treatment complications were noted. Infrared light source-induced skin tightening may be induced even in older individuals.

17359229
Laser- and light-based hair removal: an update.
A variety of laser technologies are now able to successfully remove unwanted hair. Successful removal is based on an understanding of laser physics and appropriate wavelengths, pulse durations and cooling of the skin. Although ruby lasers were among the first to be used, alexandrite, diode and neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet (Nd:YAG) lasers, as well as a variety of broad-spectrum intense pulsed light sources, are currently more commonly used for the treatment of unwanted hair. Darker skin types are more difficult to treat but can also be treated. Complications can occur after laser hair removal but can be reduced through an understanding of the fundamentals of laser removal. These complications include the obvious, such as scarring and pigmentary changes, and the not so obvious, such as reticulate erythema and uveitis. Laser hair removal is now widely accepted as a successful approach to remove unwanted hair in both men and women. The future will involve office-based laser and light source hair removal, as well as a variety of laser and light-based home devices.

17349556
Legal issues in dermatology: informed consent, complications and medical malpractice.
Legal considerations can arise in almost any aspect of a dermatology practice. A full textbook on health care law would be required to adequately cover the varied legal issues as they relate to dermatology. This article will focus on the relationship between informed consent and the development of complications that may lead to a cause of action based on negligence. Because it is the lack of informed consent that may form the basis of a medical malpractice claim, the issues of what constitutes a medical malpractice claim will be fully described.

