18928936
Cyclosporine and infliximab as rescue therapy for each other in patients with steroid-refractory ulcerative colitis.
In patients with severe corticosteroid-refractory ulcerative colitis, cyclosporine or infliximab may be added in an effort to induce remission. If the patient then fails either of these drugs, it is unknown whether success can be achieved by using the other agent. The aim of this study was to assess outcomes of using cyclosporine after failure of infliximab, and vice versa. We retrospectively reviewed the charts of 19 patients with corticosteroid-refractory ulcerative colitis who received either infliximab after failed cyclosporine or cyclosporine after failed infliximab. Acute salvage therapy was defined as having received the alternate drug within 4 weeks of discontinuing the first agent. Ten patients received infliximab after failing cyclosporine; 9 patients received cyclosporine after failing infliximab. Four patients (40%) in the infliximab-salvage group achieved remission, as did 3 (33%) in the cyclosporine-salvage group. Remission lasted a mean of 10.4 months (range, 4.4-17.03 mo) and 28.5 months (range, 5.0-41.5 mo), respectively. Severe adverse events included one patient who developed sepsis and died after receiving infliximab salvage. One patient who received cyclosporine salvage developed herpetic esophagitis, and another patient who received cyclosporine salvage developed pancreatitis and bacteremia. In patients with severe corticosteroid-refractory ulcerative colitis who fail treatment with either cyclosporine or infliximab, remission rates using acute salvage therapy by crossing over to the other drug occur in approximately one third of patients and have limited duration. Serious adverse events occurred in 16%, including 1 death, suggesting that the risks of acute salvage therapy may outweigh the benefits.

18266232
Treatment of choice for acute severe steroid-refractory ulcerative colitis is cyclosporine.


18177449
Adverse events associated with the use of cyclosporine in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
Intravenous cyclosporine (i.v. CsA) is an effective therapy for patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, data regarding its adverse events in these patients are limited. A retrospective chart review of the initial 111 consecutive patients with IBD treated with i.v. CsA followed by a predetermined duration of oral therapy. One hundred eleven patients (64 UC, 47 CD; mean age 33 yr, range 16-68) received i.v. CsA at 4 mg/kg/day, then oral CsA at 8 mg/kg/day, with dose adjustment based on serum creatinine. The mean treatment duration was 9.3 months (range 1 wk to 34 months). Major adverse events occurred in 17 (15.3%) patients. Nephrotoxicity (serum creatinine > or = 1.4 mg/dL [123 micromol/L] or a rise by at least 33% over baseline not responding to dose adjustment) sufficiently severe to warrant discontinuation of therapy occurred in 6 (5.4%) patients. Serious infection occurred in 7 (6.3%) patients, seizures in 4 (3.6%) patients, anaphylaxis in 1 (0.9%) patient, and death in 2 (1.8%) patients. Minor adverse events (transient effects with complete resolution either spontaneously or with dose adjustment) comprised: paresthesias (51%), hypomagnesemia (42%), hypertension (39%), hypertrichosis (27%), headache (23%), minor nephrotoxicity (defined as above but with restoration of normal serum creatinine with dose adjustment; 19% of patients), abnormal liver function tests (19%), minor infections (15%), hyperkalemia (13%), and gingival swelling (4%). In our initial experience, limited duration CsA therapy was frequently associated with adverse events although the majority of these were minor and responded to dose adjustment. Although not all severe adverse events can be clearly attributed to CsA use alone, its high incidence suggests that vigorous monitoring by experienced clinicians at tertiary care centers may be required.

18022870
Dilation of colonic strictures by intralesional injection of infliximab in patients with Crohn's colitis.
Intestinal stenosis is a frequent complication of Crohn's disease, often leading to repeated bowel obstruction and surgery. The prevalence of small bowel stenosis has ranged from 20% to 40% and from 7% to 15% in patients with colonic disease. Although balloon dilation is the initial preferred approach, many patients eventually restenose and require surgical resection or stricturoplasty. Infliximab, a chimeric IgG1 kappa monoclonal antibody against TNF-alpha, has been effective in the treatment of enteric as well as fistulous complications of Crohn's disease. Repeated systemic administration has been successful for active inflammatory disease yet has been reported to be ineffective in the treatment of strictures. Although the TREAT registry has shown systemic infliximab to be safe in the long term, there is concern regarding infectious as well as neoplastic complications. This report describes 3 patients refractory to all medical therapy including systemic infliximab. In all 3 patients, dilation of a colonic stricture was accomplished by injection of infliximab, via the sclerotherapy technique, into the distal and medial portions of the stricture. Infliximab was shown to be effective in the treatment of strictures in 3 patients.

20955442
The CHOICE trial: adalimumab demonstrates safety, fistula healing, improved quality of life and increased work productivity in patients with Crohn's disease who failed prior infliximab therapy.
Adalimumab induces and maintains remission in adults with Crohn's disease. To evaluate safety, fistula healing, quality of life and work productivity in adalimumab-treated patients who failed infliximab, including primary nonresponders. After a ?8-week infliximab washout, patients with moderate-to-severe Crohn's disease received open-label adalimumab as induction (160/80 mg at weeks 0/2) and maintenance (40 mg every other week) therapies. At/after 8 weeks, patients with flare/nonresponse could receive weekly therapy. Minimum study duration was 8 weeks, continuing until the commercial availability of adalimumab for Crohn's disease. Of 673 patients enrolled, 17% were infliximab primary nonresponders and 83% were initial responders. Three percent of patients had serious infections (mainly abscesses). Complete fistula healing was achieved by 34/88 (39%) patients with baseline fistulas. Improvements in quality of life and work productivity were sustained from week 4 to week 24 for all patients, as well as the subgroup of primary nonresponders. Blinded clinical trials have shown adalimumab to be both an effective first-line therapy for anti-TNF-naïve patients and an important treatment option for infliximab-refractory or -intolerant patients. This trial presents open-label experience to support further the safety and effectiveness of adalimumab in patients who failed infliximab therapy, including primary nonresponders (NCT00338650).

