20976299
COVERS Neonatal Pain Scale: Development and Validation.
Newborns and infants are often exposed to painful procedures during hospitalization. Several different scales have been validated to assess pain in specific populations of pediatric patients, but no single scale can easily and accurately assess pain in all newborns and infants regardless of gestational age and disease state. A new pain scale was developed, the COVERS scale, which incorporates 6 physiological and behavioral measures for scoring. Newborns admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit or Well Baby Nursery were evaluated for pain/discomfort during two procedures, a heel prick and a diaper change. Pain was assessed using indicators from three previously established scales (CRIES, the Premature Infant Pain Profile, and the Neonatal Infant Pain Scale), as well as the COVERS Scale, depending upon gestational age. Premature infant testing resulted in similar pain assessments using the COVERS and PIPP scales with an r = 0.84. For the full-term infants, the COVERS scale and NIPS scale resulted in similar pain assessments with an r = 0.95. The COVERS scale is a valid pain scale that can be used in the clinical setting to assess pain in newborns and infants and is universally applicable to all neonates, regardless of their age or physiological state.

19772373
Cultural competence of healthcare professionals caring for breastfeeding mothers in urban areas.
Breastfeeding is strongly influenced by cultural considerations. Therefore, culturally competent healthcare professionals can provide more appropriate breastfeeding support and information. The purpose of this study was to measure the general cultural competence of healthcare professionals caring for breastfeeding mothers in an urban area. Healthcare professionals involved in the care of breastfeeding mothers in New York, NY were surveyed utilizing Campinha-Bacote's Inventory for Assessing the Process of Cultural Competence Among Healthcare Professionals-Revised (IAPCC-R) and a demographic data instrument. Of 141 surveyed healthcare professionals, 128 completed the questionnaire. There were 18 physicians, 69 nurses, and 41 other allied health professionals in this sample. Of those surveyed, 76% reported a majority of their clients' cultural background differed from their own, 56% had studied cultural diversity in school, and 68% had attended a continuing education class on the subject. The mean score on the IAPCC-R was 68 +/- 9, which is culturally aware on Campinha-Bacote's continuum of culturally incompetent, culturally aware, culturally competent, and culturally proficient. There was no statistical difference in IAPCC-R scores whether or not the respondents had attended courses in school or worked with a more diverse population. Professionals who had attended continuing education courses on cultural diversity had significantly higher total scores (69 +/- 9 vs. 65 +/- 7, P = 0.021) and scores for cultural skill (14 +/- 2 vs. 13 +/- 2, P = 0.002) and desire (17 +/- 2 vs. 16 +/- 2, P = 0.011). Twenty-three percent of the participants achieved a score of cultural competence. They were more likely to have attended continuing education courses on cultural diversity (31% vs. 7%, P = 0.0003). The majority (77%) of healthcare professionals caring for breastfeeding mothers in urban areas did not achieve a score of cultural competence.

