20951080
The introduction of a diagnostic decision support system (DXplain™) into the workflow of a teaching hospital service can decrease the cost of service for diagnostically challenging Diagnostic Related Groups (DRGs).
In an era of short inpatient stays, residents may overlook relevant elements of the differential diagnosis as they try to evaluate and treat patients. However, if a resident's first principal diagnosis is wrong, the patient's appropriate evaluation and treatment may take longer, cost more, and lead to worse outcomes. A diagnostic decision support system may lead to the generation of a broader differential diagnosis that more often includes the correct diagnosis, permitting a shorter, more effective, and less costly hospital stay. We provided residents on General Medicine services access to DXplain, an established computer-based diagnostic decision support system, for 6 months. We compared charges and cost of service for diagnostically challenging cases seen during the fourth through sixth month of access to DXplain (intervention period) to control cases seen in the 6 months before the system was made available. 564 cases were identified as diagnostically challenging by our criteria during the intervention period along with 1173 cases during the control period. Total charges were $1281 lower (p=.006), Medicare Part A charges $1032 lower (p=0.006) and cost of service $990 lower (p=0.001) per admission in the intervention cases than in control cases. Using DXplain on all diagnostically challenging cases might save our medical center over $2,000,000 a year on the General Medicine Services alone. Using clinical diagnostic decision support systems may improve quality and decrease cost substantially at teaching hospitals.

20543306
Secondary use of clinical data.
Clinicians involved in clinical care generate daily volumes of important data. This data is important for continuity of care, referrals to specialists and back to the patient's medical home. The same data can be used to generate alerts to improve the practice and to generate care activities to ensure that all appropriate care services are provided for the patient given their known medical histories using electronic quality (eQuality) monitoring. For many years we have used patient records as a data source for human abstraction of clinical research data. With the advent of electronic health record (EHR) data we can now make use of computable EHR data that can perform retrospective research studies more rapidly and lower the activation energy necessary to ask the next important question using electronic studies (eStudies). Barriers to these eStudies include: the lack of interoperable data between and among practices, the lack of computable definitions of measures, the lack of training of health professionals to use Ontology based Informatics tools that allow the execution of this type of logic, common methods need to be developed to distribute computable best practice rules to ensure rapid dissemination of evidence, better translating research into practice.

19208197
BioProspecting: novel marker discovery obtained by mining the bibleome.
BioProspecting is a novel approach that enabled our team to mine data related to genetic markers from the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM) utilizing SNOMED CT and the Human Gene Onotology (HUGO). The Biomedical Informatics Research Collaborative was able to link genes and disorders using the Multi-threaded Clinical Vocabulary Server (MCVS) and natural language processing engine, whose output creates an ontology-network using the semantic encodings of the literature that is organized by these two terminologies. We identified relationships between (genes or proteins) and (diseases or drugs) as linked by metabolic functions and identified potentially novel functional relationships between, for example, genes and diseases (e.g. Article #1 ([Gene - IL27] = > {Enzyme - Dipeptidyl Carboxypeptidase 1}) and Article #2 ({Enzyme - Dipeptidyl Carboxypeptidase 1} < = [Disorder - Type II DM]) showing a metabolic link between IL27 and Type II DM). In this manuscript we describe our method for developing the database and its content as well as its potential to assist in the discovery of novel markers and drugs.

