20665381
A patient with chronic hepatitis B and regression of fibrosis during treatment.
We present a patient with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B, in whom significant regression of hepatic fibrosis was achieved after a lengthy antiviral treatment. A liver biopsy specimen obtained at initiation of treatment showed chronic hepatitis B with mild activity (histologic activity index: 7) and marked fibrosis (stage 4, in a scale of 0 to 6). A second biopsy specimen, obtained 10 years later, demonstrated almost complete resolution of necroinflammatory activity and fibrosis. One year after the second biopsy, seroconversion from HBsAg positive to anti-HBs positive status was achieved, and antiviral treatment was discontinued. This case is illustrative of the significant histologic improvement that can be accomplished in chronic hepatitis B when viral activity is suppressed long term. Lengthy antiviral treatment can achieve resorption of excess fibrous tissue, even in patients with marked fibrosis.

17414109
Liver failure and need for liver transplantation in patients with advanced hepatoportal sclerosis.
Hepatoportal sclerosis (HPS) is one of the causes of noncirrhotic portal hypertension. In general, hepatic synthetic function is preserved and treatment is aimed at relief of the portal hypertension. In this study, we present the clinical and pathologic features of HPS cases who underwent liver transplantation (LT). LT cases with confirmed gross and microscopic diagnosis of HPS are included. Weight of the explanted liver, presence of thrombi in the main blood vessels, and gross and microscopic characteristics were assessed. Clinical information was gathered from chart review. From 1995 to 2004, 8 LT patients were diagnosed with HPS. Cirrhosis resulting from alcohol (2), autoimmune hepatitis (2), and hepatitis B (1), or cryptogenic cirrhosis (3) was the presumed diagnoses pre-LT. Seven patients presented with bleeding varices and 5 had concomitant ascites. At the time of LT, mean values were: prothrombin time of 15.2 seconds, serum albumin 3.2 g/dL, serum bilirubin 3.5 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase 140 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase 39.4 IU/L, and alanine aminotransferase 34.7 IU/L. Explanted livers were shrunken, with weights ranging from 715 to 1199 g (mean 934). Nonocclusive portal vein thrombosis was present in 2 patients. On histologic examination, there was dense portal fibrosis, marked phlebosclerosis, and presence of variable degrees of megasinusoid formation. Four livers also had features of incomplete septal cirrhosis. None showed histologic features of the presumed underlying liver disease. In conclusion, HPS can cause hepatic synthetic dysfunction that may necessitate LT. Small liver volume, significant portal fibrosis, and phlebosclerosis may contribute to hepatic parenchymal loss and subsequent synthetic compromise.

