21538048
Establishment of fibrillin-deficient osteoprogenitor cell lines identifies molecular abnormalities associated with extracellular matrix perturbation of osteogenic differentiation.
Fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 are structural components of the extracellular matrix which are also involved in modulating local TGF? and BMP bioavailability. Loss of fibrillin-1 or fibrillin-2 is associated with perturbed osteoblast maturation principally as the result of unbalanced TGF? and BMP signaling. Here, we demonstrated that stable expression of small hairpin RNAs against fibrillin-1(Fbn1) or fibrillin-2 (Fbn2) transcripts in the clonal osteoprogenitor cell line Kusa-A1 led to the same phenotypic and molecular manifestations as germline Fbn1- or Fbn2-null mutations in primary calvarial osteoblast cultures. Proof-of-concept experiments are also presented showing that Fbn1- or Fbn2-silenced Kusa-A1 cell lines are suitable models to identify candidate determinants of osteogenesis which are under the control of extracellular microfibrils. Specific findings included: the inference of a potential role for fibrillin-1-mediated cell-matrix interactions in regulating Kusa-A1 proliferation; the possibility of fibrillin-2 involvement in modulating the activity of transcription factor Runx2 by restricting microRNA expression and/or processing; and the suggestion that fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 influence Notch signaling indirectly by differentially regulating BMP signaling. Collectively, the data reiterated the notion that fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 exert opposite effects on osteoblast differentiation through the discrete modulation of a broad network of interacting signaling molecules.

20855508
Fibrillin-1 and -2 differentially modulate endogenous TGF-? and BMP bioavailability during bone formation.
Extracellular regulation of signaling by transforming growth factor (TGF)-? family members is emerging as a key aspect of organ formation and tissue remodeling. In this study, we demonstrate that fibrillin-1 and -2, the structural components of extracellular microfibrils, differentially regulate TGF-? and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) bioavailability in bone. Fibrillin-2-null (Fbn2(-/-)) mice display a low bone mass phenotype that is associated with reduced bone formation in vivo and impaired osteoblast maturation in vitro. This Fbn2(-/-) phenotype is accounted for by improper activation of latent TGF-? that selectively blunts expression of osterix, the transcriptional regulator of osteoblast maturation, and collagen I, the structural template for bone mineralization. Cultured osteoblasts from Fbn1(-/-) mice exhibit improper latent TGF-? activation as well, but mature faster because of increased availability of otherwise matrix-bound BMPs. Additional in vitro evidence excludes a direct role of microfibrils in supporting mineral deposition. Together, these findings identify the extracellular microfibrils as critical regulators of bone formation through the modulation of endogenous TGF-? and BMP signaling.

19850904
Discrete contributions of elastic fiber components to arterial development and mechanical compliance.
Even though elastin and fibrillin-1 are the major structural components of elastic fibers, mutations in elastin and fibrillin-1 lead to narrowing of large arteries in supravalvular aortic stenosis and dilation of the ascending aorta in Marfan syndrome, respectively. A genetic approach was therefore used here to distinguish the differential contributions of elastin and fibrillin-1 to arterial development and compliance. Key parameters of cardiovascular function were compared among adult mice haploinsufficient for elastin (Eln(+/-)), fibrillin-1 (Fbn1(+/-)), or both proteins (dHet). Physiological and morphological comparisons correlate elastin haploinsufficiency with increased blood pressure and vessel length and tortuosity in dHet mice, and fibrillin-1 haploinsufficiency with increased aortic diameter in the same mutant animals. Mechanical tests confirm that elastin and fibrillin-1 impart elastic recoil and tensile strength to the aortic wall, respectively. Additional ex vivo analyses demonstrate additive and overlapping contributions of elastin and fibrillin-1 to the material properties of vascular tissues. Lastly, light and electron microscopy evidence implicates fibrillin-1 in the hypertension-promoted remodeling of the elastin-deficient aorta. These results demonstrate that elastin and fibrillin-1 have both differential and complementary roles in arterial wall formation and function, and advance our knowledge of the structural determinants of vascular physiology and disease.

19109253
p38 MAPK is an early determinant of promiscuous Smad2/3 signaling in the aortas of fibrillin-1 (Fbn1)-null mice.
Excessive transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling characterizes the progression of aortic aneurysm in mouse models of Marfan syndrome, a systemic disorder of the connective tissue that is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the extracellular matrix protein fibrillin-1. Fibrillin-1 mutations are believed to promote abnormal Smad2/3 signaling by impairing the sequestration of latent TGF-beta complexes into the extracellular matrix. Here we report that promiscuous Smad2/3 signaling is the cell-autonomous phenotype of primary cultures of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) explanted from the thoracic aortas of Fbn1 mutant mice with either neonatal onset or progressively severe aortic aneurysm. This cellular phenotype was characterized in VSMC isolated from Fbn1-null (mgN/mgN) mice, which recapitulate the most severe form of Marfan syndrome. We found that loss of fibrillin-1 deposition promotes the production of intracellular reactive oxygen species and abnormal accumulation of phosphorylated TGF-beta-activated kinase 1 and p38 MAPK, in addition to increasing the levels of endogenous phospho-Smad2. We showed that improper Smad2/3 signaling in Fbn1-null VSMC is in part stimulated by phospho-p38 MAPK, which is in turn activated in response to signals other than those mediated by the kinase activity of the ALK5 receptor. Consistent with these cell culture data, in vivo analyses documented that phospho-p38 MAPK accumulates earlier than phospho-Smad2 in the aortic wall of mgN/mgN mice and that systemic inhibition of phospho-p38 MAPK activity lowers the levels of phospho-Smad2 in this tissue. Collectively, these findings indicate that improper activation of p38 MAPK is a precursor of constitutive Smad2/3 signaling in the aortic wall of a mouse model of neonatal lethal Marfan syndrome.

