19431927
Fluorophotometry to evaluate the corneal epithelium in eyes undergoing contact lens corneal reshaping to correct myopia.
To determine whether use of Corneal Refractive Therapy (CRT, Paragon Vision Sciences) lenses have an adverse effect on the health of corneal epithelium by monitoring epithelial permeability by fluorophotometry. Eight patients with healthy eyes and whose refractive error was between -0.50 and -4.00 diopters (D) sphere and up to -1.75 D of astigmatism were enrolled. On the day of the fitting, two baseline fluorometric scans of the right eye were taken using the Ocumetrics Fluorotron Master. After 15 minutes, another two scans were taken of the right eye. The same fluorophotometry technique was repeated on day 1, 1 week, 1 month, and 3 months after the patient began overnight wear of the lenses. Patients' baseline corneal fluorescein levels and peak corneal fluorescence values after rinsing were compared to initial pre-fitting values to determine changes in corneal epithelial permeability. After patients used orthokeratology, uncorrected visual acuity was 20/20 or better in 9/16 eyes and 100% had achieved 20/40 or better by day 7. No adverse events were seen in patients utilizing orthokeratology, and eye examinations for these patients continued to be within normal limits. After nightly use of orthokeratology for 1 month, baseline fluorescence of the cornea (15.64 +/- 2.29 ng/mL vs 17.31 +/-5.43 ng/mL, P = .80) remained stable, and the post-15 minute scan peak corneal fluorescence values did not show significant changes from the pre-fitting (51.46 +/- 17.28 ng/mL) after use of orthokeratology (63.80 +/- 41.25 ng/mL) (P = .78). Reshaping of the cornea through the use of orthokeratology does not have adverse effects on corneal epithelium as evaluated by changes in corneal epithelial permeability.

17993829
Contact lens-related Fusarium infection: case series experience in New York City and review of fungal keratitis.
To report and define the clinical presentation, hygienic practices, treatment regimens, and visual sequelae of contact lens wearers infected with Fusarium keratitis in the New York City metropolitan area and to review the literature on Fusarium keratitis. A retrospective chart review was conducted on three patients diagnosed with Fusarium keratitis by corneal fungal culture in the New York City metropolitan area from October 2005 to February 2006. None of the patients had a history of recent ocular trauma before infection. All three patients used disposable soft contact lenses and ReNu with MoistureLoc 1 month before infection. All patients experienced a unilateral stabbing pain of the affected eye after removal of the contact lens. Patients had corneal ulcers ranging from 1 to 5 mm in diameter and were all initially treated with topical antibiotics and steroids for a period between 7 and 52 days. Antifungal treatment was eventually prescribed to all patients, with topical natamycin 5% every hour being the most common. One patient required corneal transplantation, and the other two patients recovered visual acuity comparable to their baseline acuity. A delay in diagnosis and prolonged treatment delay of Fusarium keratitis is associated with significant comorbidity. Physicians must have a higher index of suspicion for fungal keratitis in contact lens wearers to facilitate in early diagnosis and treatment.

17568211
Conductive keratoplasty.
Conductive keratoplasty is a noninvasive, in-office procedure for the correction of hyperopia, hyperopic astigmatism, and management of presbyopia. It serves as an alternative to laser-based refractive surgery with essentially no intraoperative or postoperative complications. In the past decade, photorefractive keratectomy and laser in-situ keratomileusis have been the most popular refractive surgical procedures to correct myopia, hyperopia and astigmatism. Although relatively safe, flap-related complications often result in undesirable visual acuity. Since US Food and Drugs Administration approval in 2002, conductive keratoplasty has become a promising technique to correct low to moderate hyperopia and astigmatism. The procedure was first used by Mendez and colleagues in 1993. It is a nonlaser, no cutting procedure that delivers radio-frequency energy to corneal stroma in a circular fashion to steepen the cornea. Multiple studies have shown that conductive keratoplasty offers equal or superior efficacy, predictability, stability and safety than currently used refractive procedures to correct hyperopia or hyperopic astigmatism. In addition, monovision conductive keratoplasty has been shown to be successful for the management of presbyopia. Conductive keratoplasty, an alternative to the laser-based procedure, is effective, predictable, and safe to correct low to moderate hyperopia, astigmatism, and manage presbyopia.

