21080247
Quality of care in inflammatory bowel disease.
Advances in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are published routinely in medical journals. Some treatments are sufficiently helpful that their conclusions are incorporated into clinical guidelines. However, such publications and proclamations may go unheeded among practitioners. Underuse, overuse, and misuse of clinical therapeutics, diagnostics, and routine medical processes are sufficiently prevalent among IBD practitioners that movements are afoot to determine the best methods for achieving a minimal uniformity of effective care. Such explorations are part of an effort to improve the quality of care. In this article, we review the background that has led to a push toward quality improvements in medicine in general, in gastroenterology in general, and within IBD specifically.

20678015
The changing faces of endoscopic sedation.
The practice of sedation for digestive endoscopy continues to evolve throughout the world. In many countries, there is a trend for increased utilization of sedation during routine endoscopic procedures. Sedation improves patient satisfaction with endoscopy and the willingness to comply with screening guidelines and it improves the quality of examination. Moderate sedation, using a benzodiazepine and an opioid, remains the standard method of sedation in most areas of the world, although propofol, a short-acting hypnotic agent, is being used increasingly in some countries. Controversy regarding the feasibility of endoscopist-directed propofol administration continues, in spite of overwhelming evidence supporting this practice. In the USA, recent revisions in policy by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services may threaten the practice of endoscopist-directed propofol administration. In this article, future trends in sedation practice, including fospropofol and computer-assisted personalized sedation, are discussed.

20594134
Current status of monoclonal antibody therapy for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.
Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis are complex diseases that have required the use of multiple modalities to aid in treatment. With an increasing understanding of the underlying pathogenetic mechanisms and identification of specific therapeutic targets, monoclonal antibody treatment has been an ideal strategy for inducing and maintaining remission in these patients. This article addresses approved agents and the supporting data justifying their use in Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, the safety of and immunologic reactions to these agents, as well as newer agents for treatment.

