19697298
Evaluating cognition in an elderly cohort via telephone assessment.
Longitudinal neuropsychological assessment provides the opportunity to observe the earliest transition to cognitive impairment in healthy, elderly individuals. We examined the feasibility, and its comparability to in-person assessment, of a telephone administered battery of established neuropsychological measures of cognitive functioning in healthy, elderly women. Fifty-four women (age = 79 +/- 7.7; education = 15.4 +/- 3.3) who were in self-reported good health were recruited from senior centers and other community sources. A two-way cross-over design was used in which participants were randomly assigned to receive either (1) in-person neuropsychological assessment followed by telephone assessment and (2) telephone assessment followed by in-person assessment, separated by approximately 4 weeks. Linear regression models were used to determine whether there were performance differences by method (in-person vs. telephone), and equivalence testing assessed comparability of the two methods. There were no statistically significant differences in performance between in-person and telephone assessments on most neuropsychological tests, with the exception of digit span backward, Oral Trail Making Test Part A, and delayed recall on the SRT, the latter likely related to non-comparable exposure (6-trials in-person vs. 3-trials telephone). Equivalence testing differences fell in the pre-specified clinical equivalence zones, providing evidence of comparability of the two methods. These pilot data support telephone administration of a neuropsychological battery that yields comparable performance to in-person assessment with respect to most instruments. Significant differences in scores on some measures suggest care should be taken in selecting specific measures used in a neuropsychological battery administered by telephone.

19382130
The MMSE orientation for time domain is a strong predictor of subsequent cognitive decline in the elderly.
The mini-mental state exam (MMSE) has been used to address questions such as determination of appropriate cutoff scores for differentiation of individuals with intact cognitive function from patients with dementia and rate of cognitive decline. However, little is known about the relationship of performance in specific cognitive domains to subsequent overall decline. To examine the specific and/or combined contribution of four MMSE domains (orientation for time, orientation for place, delayed recall, and attention) to prediction of overall cognitive decline on the MMSE. Linear mixed models were applied to 505 elderly nursing home residents (mean age = 85, > 12 years education = 27%; 79% F, mean follow-up = 3.20 years) to examine the relationship between baseline scores of these domains and total MMSE scores over time. Orientation for time was the only domain significantly associated with MMSE decline over time. Combination of poor delayed recall with either attention or orientation for place was associated with significantly increased decline on the MMSE. The MMSE orientation for time predicts overall decline on MMSE scores over time. A good functioning domain added to good functioning delayed recall was associated with slower rate of decline.

18805604
Cardiovascular risk and memory in non-demented elderly women.
To determine whether cardiovascular (CV) risk is associated with subtle memory deficits in non-demented, healthy older women with a family history of Alzheimer disease (AD). Baseline data of 375 participants from a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled primary prevention trial to test the efficacy of hormone replacement therapy in delaying AD and cognitive decline were analyzed. All subjects were women over 65 with a family history of AD who had normal cognition and no active heart disease at baseline. A baseline memory composite score was calculated, consisting of immediate and delayed recall of verbal and nonverbal material. Multiple linear regression was performed to examine the association of relative CV risk with memory functioning; age, ethnicity and education level were included as covariates. Mean baseline memory composite score was significantly higher in those with low relative CHD risk than those with high relative CHD risk. These findings suggest that subtle elevation of CHD risk may negatively affect memory functioning even in otherwise healthy, non-demented older women without a history of heart disease.

18161858
Increased longevity in offspring of mothers with Alzheimer's disease.
Life expectancy is a familial trait. However, the effectiveness of using the age at death of a deceased parent to estimate life expectancy in their offspring can vary depending on whether death in the parent was due to extrinsic versus intrinsic causes, as well as demographic characteristics such as sex. While Alzheimer's disease (AD) risk increases with increased age, mortality for individuals with AD is increased in contrast to comparably aged individuals without AD. Yet in most cases it is not the defining neuropathology of AD that directly terminates life but instead conditions and illnesses extrinsic to AD pathology that nevertheless have increased likelihood in its presence. For this reason, we hypothesized that offspring of AD mothers would have greater longevity than offspring of mothers without AD (insufficient numbers prevented a comparable analysis using fathers with AD). The longevity of 345 offspring of 100 deceased 60+ year old AD mothers was compared with 5,465 offspring in 1,312 deceased 60+ year old non-AD mothers. We used a proportional hazards model that accounted for clustered (nonindependent) observations due to the inclusion of several offspring from the same family. In both an unadjusted model and one that adjusted for the age at death in the mother, and the sex and birth year in the offspring we found evidence for increased longevity in the offspring of AD mothers. The results suggest that, in addition to genes that might directly affect pathways leading to AD, there may be familial/genetic factors not connected to specific pathophysiological processes in AD but instead associated with increased longevity that contribute to the familial aggregation observed in AD.

