18795171
Enduring mental health morbidity and social function impairment in world trade center rescue, recovery, and cleanup workers: the psychological dimension of an environmental health disaster.
The World Trade Center (WTC) attacks exposed thousands of workers to hazardous environmental conditions and psychological trauma. In 2002, to assess the health of these workers, Congress directed the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health to establish the WTC Medical Monitoring and Treatment Program. This program has established a large cohort of WTC rescue, recovery, and cleanup workers. We previously documented extensive pulmonary dysfunction in this cohort related to toxic environmental exposures. Our objective in this study was to describe mental health outcomes, social function impairment, and psychiatric comorbidity in the WTC worker cohort, as well as perceived symptomatology in workers' children. Ten to 61 months after the WTC attack, 10,132 WTC workers completed a self-administered mental health questionnaire. Of the workers who completd the questionnaire, 11.1% met criteria for probable post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 8.8% met criteria for probable depression, 5.0% met criteria for probable panic disorder, and 62% met criteria for substantial stress reaction. PTSD prevalence was comparable to that seen in returning Afghanistan war veterans and was much higher than in the U.S. general population. Point prevalence declined from 13.5% to 9.7% over the 5 years of observation. Comorbidity was extensive and included extremely high risks for impairment of social function. PTSD was significantly associated with loss of family members and friends, disruption of family, work, and social life, and higher rates of behavioral symptoms in children of workers. Working in 9/11 recovery operations is associated with chronic impairment of mental health and social functioning. Psychological distress and psychopathology in WTC workers greatly exceed population norms. Surveillance and treatment programs continue to be needed.

18363455
Trends in U.S. emergency department visits for anxiety-related mental health conditions, 1992-2001.
To describe trends in anxiety-related mental health visits to U.S. emergency departments, an expanding portal of access for mental health care. Data from 1992 through 2001 were obtained from the National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey using mental health-related ICD-9-CM, E- and V-codes as well as National Center for Health Statistics-assigned Patient Reason-for-Visit classification codes. Population-weighted anxiety-related emergency department visit rates were analyzed over time by age, gender, race, Hispanic ethnicity, insurance status, urban status, region of the country, urgency of presentation, and use of medication. There were 53 million mental health-related visits, increasing from 4.9% to 6.3% of all emergency department visits (p = .003) and from 17.1 to 23.6 per 1000 U.S. population across the decade (p = .000). Anxiety-related visits were common (16% of all mental health visits) and increased significantly from 3.5 to 5.0 visits per 1000 U.S. population over the decade (p = .011). Anxiety-related visits increased significantly among non-Hispanic whites, children (< 15 years), adults younger than 49 years, and the privately insured; changes among Medicare, Medicaid, and self-pay patients were not significant. Overall hospitalization rates declined from 23% to 21% between 1992 and 2001 (p = .037), but they did not change significantly for anxiety-related visits (8%), which remained the least likely visit type to be admitted of all mental health visits for the entire decade. In contrast to rural emergency departments, urban emergency departments witnessed significant increases in anxiety-related visits, rising from 2.9 to 5.2 per 1000 U.S. population across the decade (p trend = 0.007). Regionally, anxiety-related visits were highest in the Northeast, lowest in the West, and increased significantly in only the South and Northeast. During the decade, there was an expansion of anxiety-related visits to U.S. emergency departments, reflecting an increase in anxiety-related emergency department care-seeking, an increase in anxiety awareness among patients and practitioners, or both.

