20956293
Vaccination with a synthetic peptide from the influenza virus hemagglutinin provides protection against distinct viral subtypes.
Current influenza virus vaccines protect mostly against homologous virus strains; thus, regular immunization with updated vaccine formulations is necessary to guard against the virus' hallmark remodeling of regions that mediate neutralization. Development of a broadly protective influenza vaccine would mark a significant advance in human infectious diseases research. Antibodies with broad neutralizing activity (nAbs) against multiple influenza virus strains or subtypes have been reported to bind the stalk of the viral hemagglutinin, suggesting that a vaccine based on this region could elicit a broadly protective immune response. Here we describe a hemagglutinin subunit 2 protein (HA2)-based synthetic peptide vaccine that provides protection in mice against influenza viruses of the structurally divergent subtypes H3N2, H1N1, and H5N1. The immunogen is based on the binding site of the recently described nAb 12D1, which neutralizes H3 subtype viruses, demonstrates protective activity in vivo, and, in contrast to a majority of described nAbs, appears to bind to residues within a single ?-helical portion of the HA2 protein. Our data further demonstrate that the specific design of our immunogen is integral in the induction of broadly active anti-hemagglutinin antibodies. These results provide proof of concept for an HA2-based influenza vaccine that could diminish the threat of pandemic influenza disease and generally reduce the significance of influenza viruses as human pathogens.

20712812
Peripheral blood cytokine profiling during pregnancy and post-partum periods.
Pregnancy requires that the maternal immune system adapt to prevent rejection of the fetal semi-allograft. This immunologic adaptation may contribute to pregnancy-related alterations in disease susceptibility and severity of infections from viral pathogens such as influenza virus. As part of a larger study investigating the maternal systemic immune response during pregnancy, peripheral blood was collected three times during pregnancy and twice post-partum to measure serum levels of 23 cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors. This longitudinal study design allowed each woman's post-partum blood draw to serve as her own comparison, thus controlling for interpersonal variability in expression levels. When compared to the post-partum samples, significant pregnancy-related changes in IFN?, TNF?, VEGF, GCSF, Eotaxin, and MCP-1 expression were observed. These changes have significant immunologic effects in vivo and in culture. Pregnancy-associated changes to steady state serum cytokines may have important immunologic consequence.

20478536
Antiviral instruction of bone marrow leukocytes during respiratory viral infections.
Respiratory viral infections trigger a robust inflammatory response in the lung, producing cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors that promote infiltration of effector leukocytes. Whereas the role of chemokines and infiltrating leukocytes in antiviral immunity is well studied, the effect that lung cytokines have on leukocytes in distal hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues and their role in antiviral immunity is unknown. We show that, during infection with influenza or Sendai virus, the lung communicates with the sterile bone marrow, the primary site of hematopoiesis, through type I interferons. While in the bone marrow, leukocytes exposed to type I interferons activate an antiviral transcriptional program and become resistant to infection with different viruses. The protected bone marrow leukocytes are capable of migrating to the infected lung and contribute to virus clearance. These findings show that appropriate instruction of cells during their development in the bone marrow is needed for effective control of infection.

20174621
The virion host shut-off (vhs) protein blocks a TLR-independent pathway of herpes simplex virus type 1 recognition in human and mouse dendritic cells.
Molecular pathways underlying the activation of dendritic cells (DCs) in response to Herpes Simplex Virus type 1 (HSV-1) are poorly understood. Removal of the HSV virion host shut-off (vhs) protein relieves a block to DC activation observed during wild-type infection. In this study, we utilized a potent DC stimulatory HSV-1 recombinant virus lacking vhs as a tool to investigate the mechanisms involved in the activation of DCs by HSV-1. We report that the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines by conventional DC (cDC) during HSV-1 infection is triggered by both virus replication-dependent and replication-independent pathways. Interestingly, while vhs is capable of inhibiting the release of cytokines during infection of human and mouse cDCs, the secretion of cytokines by plasmacytoid DC (pDC) is not affected by vhs. These data prompted us to postulate that infection of cDCs by HSV triggers a TLR independent pathway for cDC activation that is susceptible to blockage by the vhs protein. Using cDCs isolated from mice deficient in both the TLR adaptor protein MyD88 and TLR3, we show that HSV-1 and the vhs-deleted virus can activate cDCs independently of TLR signaling. In addition, virion-associated vhs fails to block cDC activation in response to treatment with TLR agonists, but it efficiently blocked cDC activation triggered by the paramyxoviruses Sendai Virus (SeV) and Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV). This block to SeV- and NDV-induced activation of cDC resulted in elevated SeV and NDV viral gene expression indicating that infection with HSV-1 enhances the cell's susceptibility to other pathogens through the action of vhs. Our results demonstrate for the first time that a viral protein contained in the tegument of HSV-1 can block the induction of DC activation by TLR-independent pathways of viral recognition.

20159146
Immune response modeling of interferon beta-pretreated influenza virus-infected human dendritic cells.
The pretreatment of human dendritic cells with interferon-beta enhances their immune response to influenza virus infection. We measured the expression levels of several key players in that response over a period of 13 h both during pretreatment and after viral infection. Their activation profiles reflect the presence of both negative and positive feedback loops in interferon induction and interferon signaling pathway. Based on these measurements, we have developed a comprehensive computational model of cellular immune response that elucidates its mechanism and its dynamics in interferon-pretreated dendritic cells, and provides insights into the effects of duration and strength of pretreatment.

19939917
Hemagglutinin-pseudotyped green fluorescent protein-expressing influenza viruses for the detection of influenza virus neutralizing antibodies.
Influenza virus is a highly contagious virus that causes yearly epidemics and occasional pandemics of great consequence. Influenza virus neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) are promising prophylactic and therapeutic reagents. Detection of NAbs in serum samples is critical to evaluate the prevalence and spread of new virus strains. Here we describe the development of a simple, sensitive, specific, and safe screening assay for the rapid detection of NAbs against highly pathogenic influenza viruses under biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) conditions. This assay is based on the use of influenza viruses in which the hemagglutinin (HA) gene is replaced by a gene expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP). These GFP-expressing influenza viruses replicate to high titers in HA-expressing cell lines, but in non-HA-expressing cells, their replication is restricted to a single cycle.

19734214
IL-11 regulates autoimmune demyelination.
Current therapies for the autoimmune demyelinating disease multiple sclerosis (MS) target inflammation, but do not directly address neuroprotection or lesion repair. Cytokines of the gp130 family regulate survival and differentiation of both neural and immune cells, and we recently identified expression of the family member IL-11 in active MS plaques. In this study, we show that IL-11 regulates the clinical course and neuropathology of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a demyelinating model that mimics many of the clinical and pathologic features of MS. Importantly, the effects of IL-11 are achieved via a combination of immunoregulation and direct neuroprotection. IL-11R-alpha-null (IL-11Ralpha(-/-)) mice displayed a significant increase in clinical severity and neuropathology of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis compared with wild-type littermates. Inflammation, demyelination, and oligodendrocyte and neuronal loss were all exacerbated in IL-11Ra(-/-) animals. Conversely, wild-type mice treated with IL-11 displayed milder clinical signs and neuropathology than vehicle-treated controls. In cocultures of murine myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein(35-55)-specific CD4+ T lymphocytes and CD11c+ APCs, IL-11 treatment resulted in a significant decrease in T cell-derived effector cytokine production. This effect was generated via modulation of CD11c+ APC-mediated lymphocyte activation, and was associated with a decrease in the size of the CD11c+ cell population. Conversely, IL-11 strongly reduced apoptosis and potentiated mitosis in primary cultures of mouse oligodendrocyte progenitors. Collectively, these data reveal that IL-11 regulates inflammatory demyelination via a unique combination of immunoregulation and neuroprotection. IL-11 signaling may represent a therapeutic avenue to restrict CNS inflammation and potentiate oligodendrocyte survival in autoimmune demyelinating disease.

19717515
Cutting edge: stealth influenza virus replication precedes the initiation of adaptive immunity.
A timely immune response is crucial for the effective control of virus infection. The influenza virus NS1 protein interferes with the expression of key proinflammatory cytokines from infected cells in vitro. To investigate the effect of NS1 during the onset of immunity in vivo, we systematically studied the early events that occur in the lungs and draining lymph nodes upon infection with influenza virus. Strikingly, no sign of innate immunity was detected in the lungs for almost 2 days after infection until a sudden inflammatory burst, including IFNs, cytokines, and chemokines, occurred. This burst preceded the robust dendritic cell migration and T cell activation in the lymph nodes. An NS1-deficient virus triggered rapid inflammation in the lungs whereas a wild-type virus did not. Thus, we demonstrate that, in vivo, influenza virus uses the NS1 protein to replicate for almost 2 days after infection before detection by the immune system.

19464560
Alpha-C-galactosylceramide as an adjuvant for a live attenuated influenza virus vaccine.
There is a substantial need to develop better influenza virus vaccines that can protect populations that are not adequately protected by the currently licensed vaccines. While live attenuated influenza virus vaccines induce superior immune responses compared to inactivated vaccines, the manufacturing process of both types of influenza virus vaccines is time consuming and may not be adequate during a pandemic. Adjuvants would be particularly useful if they could enhance the immune response to live attenuated influenza virus vaccines so that the amount of vaccine needed for a protective dose could be reduced. The glycolipid, alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer), has recently been shown to have adjuvant activity for both inactivated and replicating recombinant vaccines. The goal of these experiments was to determine whether a derivative of alpha-GalCer, alpha-C-galactosylceramide (alpha-C-GalCer) can enhance the immune response elicited by a live attenuated influenza virus vaccine containing an NS1 protein truncation and reduce the amount of vaccine required to provide protection after challenge. Our results indicated that the adjuvant reduced both morbidity and mortality in BALB/c mice after challenge with wild type influenza virus. The adjuvant also increased the amount of influenza virus specific total IgG, IgG1, and IgG2a antibodies as well as IFN-gamma secreting CD8(+) T cells. By using knockout mice that are not able to generate NKT cells, we were able to demonstrate that the mechanism of adjuvant activity is dependent on NKT cells. Thus, our data indicate that stimulators of NKT cells represent a new avenue of adjuvants to pursue for live attenuated virus vaccines.

18981106
Antiviral-activated dendritic cells: a paracrine-induced response state.
Infection of immature dendritic cells (DCs) by virus stimulates their maturation into APC. Infected DCs can also expose uninfected DCs to a panoply of cytokines/chemokines via paracrine signaling. Mathematical modeling suggests that a high rate of paracrine signaling is likely to occur among DCs located in three-dimensional space. Relatively little is known about how secreted factors modify the early response to virus infection. We used a transwell experimental system that allows passage of secreted factors, but not direct contact, between virus-infected DCs and uninfected DCs to investigate paracrine signaling responses. Paracrine signaling from infected DCs induced an antiviral-primed DC state distinct from that of mature virus-infected DCs that we refer to as antiviral-activated DCs (AVDCs). AVDCs had increased surface MHC class II and CD86 levels, but in contrast to virus-infected DCs, their MHC class I levels were unchanged. Imaging flow cytometry showed that AVDCs had an increased rate of phagocytosis compared with naive DCs. Experiments with IFN-beta cytokine indicated that it may be responsible for CD86, but not MHC class II regulation in AVDCs. Both IFN-inducible and IFN-independent genes are up-regulated in AVDCs. Notably, AVDCs are relatively resistant to virus infection in comparison to naive DCs and achieve accelerated and augmented levels of costimulatory molecule expression with virus infection. AVDCs show a distinct antiviral-primed state of DC maturation mediated by DC paracrine signaling. Although further in vivo study is needed, the characteristics of the AVDC suggest that it is well suited to play a role in the early innate-adaptive transition of the immune system.

18974865
Interferon-beta pretreatment of conventional and plasmacytoid human dendritic cells enhances their activation by influenza virus.
Influenza virus produces a protein, NS1, that inhibits infected cells from releasing type I interferon (IFN) and blocks maturation of conventional dendritic cells (DCs). As a result, influenza virus is a poor activator of both mouse and human DCs in vitro. However, in vivo a strong immune response to virus infection is generated in both species, suggesting that other factors may contribute to the maturation of DCs in vivo. It is likely that the environment in which a DC encounters a virus would contain multiple pro-inflammatory molecules, including type I IFN. Type I IFN is a critical component of the viral immune response that initiates an antiviral state in cells, primarily by triggering a broad transcriptional program that interferes with the ability of virus to establish infection in the cell. In this study, we have examined the activation profiles of both conventional and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (cDCs and pDCs) in response to an influenza virus infection in the context of a type I IFN-containing environment. We found that both cDCs and pDCs demonstrate a greater activation response to influenza virus when pre-exposed to IFN-beta (IFN priming); although, the priming kinetics are different in these two cell types. This strongly suggests that type I IFN functions not only to reduce viral replication in these immune cells, but also to promote greater DC activation during influenza virus infections.

18802009
Estrogen inhibits dendritic cell maturation to RNA viruses.
Dendritic cells (DCs) play a central role in initiating and polarizing the immune response. Therefore, DC maturation represents a key control point in the shift from innate to adaptive immunity. It is suspected that during pregnancy, hormones are critical factors that modulate changes reported to occur in maternal immunity. Here we examined the effect of 17-beta-estradiol (E2) on the maturational response triggered by virus in human DCs and its influence on their ability to activate naive T cells. We developed an in vitro system to measure the response of DCs to virus infection with Newcastle disease virus (NDV) after a 24-hour E2 treatment. Using this system, we demonstrated that E2 pretreatment down-regulated the antiviral response to RNA viruses in DCs by profoundly suppressing type I interferon (IFN) synthesis and other important inflammatory products. In addition, the DCs capacity to stimulate naive CD4 T cells was also reduced. These results suggest an important role for E2 in suppressing the antiviral response and provide a mechanism for the reduced immunity to virus infection observed during pregnancy.

18729740
A comprehensive evaluation of human plasmacytoid dendritic cells using small volumes of human blood.
Elucidation of the role played by cells of the innate immune system, particularly the dendritic cell (DC) populations, has led to a precipitous growth in our understanding of immunity to pathogens and foreign antigens. Much of this information has been derived from studies using mouse model systems. However, mice and human DCs differ drastically in the relative distribution of the toll-like receptors (TLRs) critical for immune activation. This is particularly true for the plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), which are activated almost exclusively through TLR signaling. Variation in this DC subpopulation has been implicated in a number of pathological syndromes; therefore, a thorough understanding of their steady state and activation profiles in human patients is essential. A number of factors, including the relatively low numbers of these cells in blood, have precluded careful analysis in clinical trials. To overcome these limitations, we have developed a technique for studying the steady state and activation profile of pDCs collected from small amounts of human blood. This technique can be performed with 10,000 cells to obtain the immune transcriptome of the pDCs analyzed by quantitative PCR using amplified RNA. In addition, we have used multiplex enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays to measure secreted proteins. We demonstrate the validity of this technique and document its potential for use with blood from human study populations.

18636086
The tumour suppressor CYLD is a negative regulator of RIG-I-mediated antiviral response.
On detecting viral RNAs, the RNA helicase retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) activates the interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) signalling pathway to induce type I interferon (IFN) gene transcription. How this antiviral signalling pathway might be negatively regulated is poorly understood. Microarray and bioinformatic analysis indicated that the expression of RIG-I and that of the tumour suppressor CYLD (cylindromatosis), a deubiquitinating enzyme that removes Lys 63-linked polyubiquitin chains, are closely correlated, suggesting a functional association between the two molecules. Ectopic expression of CYLD inhibits the IRF3 signalling pathway and IFN production triggered by RIG-I; conversely, CYLD knockdown enhances the response. CYLD removes polyubiquitin chains from RIG-I as well as from TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1), the kinase that phosphorylates IRF3, coincident with an inhibition of the IRF3 signalling pathway. Furthermore, CYLD protein level is reduced in the presence of tumour necrosis factor and viral infection, concomitant with enhanced IFN production. These findings show that CYLD is a negative regulator of RIG-I-mediated innate antiviral response.

18354215
MDA5 participates in the detection of paramyxovirus infection and is essential for the early activation of dendritic cells in response to Sendai Virus defective interfering particles.
Defective interfering (DI) particles are byproducts of virus replication that potently enhance dendritic cell (DC) maturation by virus infection. DI particles have been reported for many different viruses and are strong inducers of type I IFNs. The cellular mechanisms involved in the response to DI particles are not known. In this study, we show that 1) DI particles are recognized by more than one viral sensor independently of TLRs and type I IFN signaling; 2) The helicase MDA5 participates in the detection of DI genomes as MDA5-deficient DCs respond inefficiently to Sendai virus stocks containing DI particles; 3) DI particles stimulate the expression of IRF3-responsive genes by a uniquely potent mechanism when compared with other prototypic viral stimulus; and 4) the efficient detection of DI particles overcomes virus immune antagonism. These data highlight the outstanding adjuvant capacity of DI particles in stimulating mouse and human DCs. They also offer biological relevance to the previously reported inhibition of MDA5 by different paramyxovirus V proteins. The unique mechanism by which DI particles trigger the maturation of DCs represents a novel strategy that could be further exploited for the development of potent adjuvant molecules.

18230041
A prospective, comparative study of the immune response to inactivated influenza vaccine in pediatric liver transplant recipients and their healthy siblings.
Annual influenza vaccination is routinely recommended for pediatric solid organ transplant recipients. However, there are limited data defining the immune response to the inactivated vaccine in this population. This prospective study compared the humoral and cell-mediated immune responses to the trivalent subvirion influenza vaccine in pediatric liver transplant recipients with those in their healthy siblings. All subjects received inactivated influenza vaccine. Hemagglutination inhibition and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot assays for New Caledonia and Shanghai strains were performed at baseline, after each vaccine dose, and 3 months after the series. Seroconversion was defined as a 4-fold increase in antibody titers; seroprotection was defined as an antibody titer > or =1:40. An increase in the number of T cells secreting IFN-gamma was considered to be a positive enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot response. After 1 dose of vaccine, transplant recipients achieved rates of antibody seroprotection and seroconversion that were similar to those achieved by their healthy siblings. However, for both influenza strains, IFN-gamma responses by enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot were significantly attenuated in transplant recipients after 2 doses of vaccine. No cases of influenza or vaccine-related serious adverse events were documented in the study. The diminished cell-mediated immune response to influenza vaccination that was observed in pediatric liver transplant recipients suggests that the current vaccine strategy may not provide optimal protection. Because of concerns regarding potential emergence of more virulent influenza strains, further studies are warranted to determine if IFN-gamma responses are predictive of efficacy and to identify the optimal vaccination strategy to protect populations with a high risk of infection.

17675303
Chromosome-specific and noisy IFNB1 transcription in individual virus-infected human primary dendritic cells.
The induction of interferon beta (IFNB1) is a key event in the antiviral immune response. We studied the role of transcriptional noise in the regulation of the IFNB1 locus in primary cultures of human dendritic cells (DCs), which are important 'first responders' to viral infection. In single cell assays, IFNB1 mRNA expression in virus-infected DCs showed much greater cell-to-cell variation than that of a housekeeping gene, another induced transcript and viral RNA. We determined the contribution of intrinsic noise by measuring the allelic origin of transcripts in each cell and found that intrinsic noise is a very significant part of total noise. We developed a stochastic model to investigate the underlying mechanisms. We propose that the surprisingly high levels of IFNB1 transcript noise originate from the complexity of IFNB1 enhanceosome formation, which leads to a range up to many minutes in the differences within each cell in the time of activation of each allele.

17475649
Cytokine-independent upregulation of MDA5 in viral infection.
The RNA helicases RIG-I and MDA5 detect virus infection of dendritic cells (DCs) leading to cytokine induction. Maximal sensitivity for virus detection by these helicases is obtained after their upregulation, which is thought to occur primarily through type I interferon (IFN) signaling. Here we demonstrate that in response to paramyxovirus infection, RIG-I upregulation requires type I IFN whereas MDA5 expression is increased by Sendai virus infection independently of signaling mediated by type I IFN, STAT1, tumor necrosis factor alpha, or NF-kappaB. This MDA5 upregulation is largely lost in IRF3 knockout DCs and is achieved in type I IFN-deficient cells expressing constitutively active IRF3.

