20461063
SERCA2a gene transfer enhances eNOS expression and activity in endothelial cells.
Congestive heart failure (HF) is associated with impaired endothelium-dependent nitric oxide-mediated vasodilatation. The aim of this study was to examine the effects of sarco/endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca(2+)-ATPase 2a (SERCA2a) gene transfer on endothelial function in a swine HF model. Two months after the creation of mitral regurgitation to induce HF, the animals underwent intracoronary injection of adeno-associated virus (AAV) carrying SERCA2a (n = 7) or saline (n = 6). At 4 months, coronary flow (CF) was measured in the mid-portion of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery. In the failing animals, CF was decreased significantly; SERCA2a gene transfer rescued CF to levels observed in sham-group [ml/min/g, 0.47 +/- 0.064 saline versus 0.89 +/- 0.116, SERCA2a; P < 0.05; 1.00 +/- 0. 185 sham P = NS (nonsignificant)]. In coronary arteries from HF animals, SERCA2a and endothelial isoform of nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) protein expression were decreased, but restored to normal levels by SERCA2a gene transfer. In human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAECs), SERCA2a overexpression increased eNOS expression, phosphorylation, eNOS promoter activity, Ca(2+) storage capacity, and enhanced histamine-induced calcium oscillations, eNOS activity, and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) production. Thus, SERCA2a gene transfer increases eNOS expression and activity by modulating calcium homeostasis to improve CF. These findings suggest that SERCA2a gene transfer improves vascular reactivity in the setting of HF.

20078230
Sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase as a therapeutic target for heart failure.
The cardiac isoform of the sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)ATPase (SERCA2a) plays a major role in controlling excitation/contraction coupling. In both experimental and clinical heart failure, SERCA2a expression is significantly reduced which leads to abnormal Ca(2+) handling and deficient contractility. A large number of studies in isolated cardiac myocytes and in small and large animal models of heart failure showed that restoring SERCA2a expression by gene transfer corrects the contractile abnormalities and improves energetics and electrical remodeling. Following a long line of investigation, a clinical trial is underway to restore SERCA2a expression in patients with heart failure using adeno-associated virus type 1. This review addresses the following issues regarding heart failure gene therapy: i) new insights on calcium regulation by SERCA2a; ii) SERCA2a as a gene therapy target in animal models of heart failure; iii) advances in the development of viral vectors and gene delivery; and iv) clinical trials on heart failure using SERCA2a. This review focuses on the new advances in SERCA2a- targeted gene therapy made in the last three years. In conclusion, SERCA2a is an important therapeutic target in various cardiovascular disorders. Ongoing clinical gene therapy trials will provide answers on its safety and applicability.

20051248
KChIP2 attenuates cardiac hypertrophy through regulation of Ito and intracellular calcium signaling.
Recent evidence shows that the auxiliary subunit KChIP2, which assembles with pore-forming Kv4-subunits, represents a new potential regulator of the cardiac calcium-independent transient outward potassium current (I(to)) density. In hypertrophy and heart failure, KChIP2 expression has been found to be significantly decreased. Our aim was to examine the role of KChIP2 in cardiac hypertrophy and the effect of restoring its expression on electrical remodeling and cardiac mechanical function using a combination of molecular, biochemical and gene targeting approaches. KChIP2 overexpression through gene transfer of Ad.KChIP2 in neonatal cardiomyocytes resulted in a significant increase in I(to)-channel forming Kv4.2 and Kv4.3 protein levels. In vivo gene transfer of KChIP2 in aortic banded adult rats showed that, compared to sham-operated or Ad.beta-gal-transduced hearts, KChIP2 significantly attenuated the developed left ventricular hypertrophy, robustly increased I(to) densities, shortened action potential duration, and significantly altered myocyte mechanics by shortening contraction amplitudes and maximal rates of contraction and relaxation velocities and decreasing Ca(2+) transients. Interestingly, blocking I(to) with 4-aminopyridine in KChIP2-overexpressing adult cardiomyocytes significantly increased the Ca(2+) transients to control levels. One-day-old rat pups intracardially transduced with KChIP2 for two months then subjected to aortic banding for 6-8 weeks (to induce hypertrophy) showed similar echocardiographic, electrical and mechanical remodeling parameters. In addition, in cultured adult cardiomyocytes, KChIP2 overexpression increased the expression of Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA2a) and sodium calcium exchanger but had no effect on ryanodine receptor 2 or phospholamban expression. In neonatal myocytes, KChIP2 notably reversed Ang II-induced hypertrophic changes in protein synthesis and MAP-kinase activation. It also significantly decreased calcineurin expression, NFATc1 expression and nuclear translocation and its downstream target, MCiP1.4. Altogether, these data show that KChIP2 can attenuate cardiac hypertrophy possibly through modulation of intracellular calcium concentration and calcineurin/NFAT pathway.

19825979
Mechanoelectrical remodeling and arrhythmias during progression of hypertrophy.
Despite a clear association between left ventricular (LV) mechanical dysfunction in end-stage heart failure and the incidence of arrhythmias, the majority of sudden cardiac deaths occur at earlier stages of disease development. The mechanisms by which structural, mechanical, and molecular alterations predispose to arrhythmias at the tissue level before the onset of LV dysfunction remain unclear. In a rat model of pressure overload hypertrophy (PoH) produced by ascending aortic banding, we correlated mechanical and structural changes measured in vivo with key electrophysiological changes measured ex vivo in the same animals. We found that action potential prolongation, a hallmark of electrical remodeling at the tissue level, is highly correlated with changes in LV wall thickness but not mechanical function. In contrast, conduction delays are not predicted by either mechanical or structural changes during disease development. Moreover, disrupted Cx43 phosphorylation at intermediate (increased) and late (decreased) stages of PoH are associated with moderate and severe conduction delays, respectively. Interestingly, the level of interaction between Cx43 and the cytoskeletal protein ZO-1 is exclusively decreased at the late stage of PoH. Closely coupled action potentials consistent with afterdepolarization-mediated triggered beats were readily observed in 6 of 15 PoH hearts but never in controls. Similarly, PoH (8/15) but not control hearts exhibited sustained episodes of ventricular tachycardia after rapid stimulation. The initiation and early maintenance of arrhythmias in PoH were formed by rapid and highly uniform activation wavefronts emanating from sites distal to the former site of stimulation. In conclusion, repolarization but not conduction delays are predicted by structural remodeling in PoH. Cx43 phosphorylation is disrupted at intermediate (increased) and late (decreased) stages, which are associated with conduction delays. Dephosphorylation of Cx43 is associated with loss of interaction with ZO-1 and severe conduction delays. Remodeling at all stages of PoH predisposes to triggers and focal arrhythmias.

19649297
Gene remodeling in type 2 diabetic cardiomyopathy and its phenotypic rescue with SERCA2a.
Diabetes-associated myocardial dysfunction results in altered gene expression in the heart. We aimed to investigate the changes in gene expression profiles accompanying diabetes-induced cardiomyopathy and its phenotypic rescue by restoration of SERCA2a expression. Using the Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima Fatty rat model of type 2 diabetes and the Agilent rat microarray chip, we analyzed gene expression by comparing differential transcriptional changes in age-matched control versus diabetic hearts and diabetic hearts that received gene transfer of SERCA2a. Microarray expression profiles of selected genes were verified with real-time qPCR and immunoblotting. Our analysis indicates that diabetic cardiomyopathy is associated with a downregulation of transcripts. Diabetic cardiomyopathic hearts have reduced levels of SERCA2a. SERCA2a gene transfer in these hearts reduced diabetes-associated hypertrophy, and differentially modulated the expression of 76 genes and reversed the transcriptional profile induced by diabetes. In isolated cardiomyocytes in vitro, SERCA2a overexpression significantly modified the expression of a number of transcripts known to be involved in insulin signaling, glucose metabolism and cardiac remodeling. This investigation provided insight into the pathophysiology of cardiac remodeling and the potential role of SERCA2a normalization in multiple pathways in diabetic cardiomyopathy.

18342232
Reversal of cardiac dysfunction after long-term expression of SERCA2a by gene transfer in a pre-clinical model of heart failure.
The aim of this study was to examine the effects of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase (SERCA2a) gene transfer in a swine heart failure (HF) model. Reduced expression and activity of SERCA2a have been documented in HF. Prior studies have reported the beneficial effects of short-term SERCA2a overexpression in rodent models. However, the effects of long-term expression of SERCA2a in pre-clinical large animal models are not known. Yorkshire-Landrace pigs were used (n = 16) to create volume overload by percutaneously severing chordae tendinae of the mitral apparatus with a bioptome to induce mitral regurgitation. At 2 months, pigs underwent intracoronary delivery of either recombinant adeno-associated virus type 1 (rAAV1) carrying SERCA2a under a cytomegalovirus promoter (rAAV1.SERCA2a) (n = 10; group 1) or saline (n = 6; group 2). At 2 months, study animals were found to be in a compensated state of volume-overload HF (increased left ventricular internal diastolic and systolic diameters [LVIDd and LVIDs]). At 4 months, gene transfer resulted in: 1) positive left ventricular (LV) inotropic effects (adjusted peak left ventricular pressure rate of rise (dP/dt)max/P, 21.2 +/- 3.2 s(-1) group 1 vs. 15.5 +/- 3.0 s(-1) group 2; p < 0.01); 2) improvement in LV remodeling (% change in LVIDs -3.0 +/- 10% vs. +15 +/- 11%, respectively; p < 0.01). At follow-up, brain natriuretic peptide levels remained stable in group 1 after gene transfer, in contrast to rising levels in group 2. Further, cardiac SERCA2a expression was significantly decreased in group 2 whereas in group 1 it was restored to normal levels. There was no histopathological evidence of acute myocardial inflammation or necrosis. Using a large-animal, volume-overload model of HF, we report that long-term overexpression of SERCA2a by in vivo rAAV1-mediated intracoronary gene transfer preserved systolic function, potentially prevented diastolic dysfunction, and improved ventricular remodeling.

21512506
Delivery of gelfoam-enabled cells and vectors into the pericardial space using a percutaneous approach in a porcine model.
Intrapericardial drug delivery is a promising procedure, with the ability to localize therapeutics with the heart. Gelfoam particles are nontoxic, inexpensive, nonimmunogenic and biodegradable compounds that can be used to deliver therapeutic agents. We developed a new percutaneous approach method for intrapericardial injection, puncturing the pericardial sac safely under fluoroscopy and intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) guidance. In a porcine model of myocardial infarction (MI), we deployed gelfoam particles carrying either (a) autologous mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) or (b) an adenovirus encoding enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) 48?h post-MI. The presence of MSCs and viral infection at the infarct zone was confirmed by immunoflourescence and PCR. Puncture was performed successfully in 16 animals. Using IVUS, we successfully determined the size of the pericardial space before the puncture, and safely accessed that space in setting of pericardial effusion and also adhesions induced by the MI. Intrapericardial injection of gelfoam was safe and reliable. Presence of the MSCs and eGFP expression from adenovirus in the myocardium were confirmed after delivery. Our novel percutaneous approach to deliver (stem-) cells or adenovirus was safe and efficient in this pre-clinical model. IVUS-guided delivery is a minimally invasive procedure that seems to be a promising new strategy to deliver therapeutic agents locally to the heart.Gene Therapy advance online publication, 21 April 2011; doi:10.1038/gt.2011.52.

