20934726
Internet-based assessment of postoperative neurocognitive function in cardiac and thoracic aortic surgery patients.
The primary purpose of this study was to determine the practicality of long-term, postoperative neurocognitive assessment via remote Internet-based testing in a cohort of patients who had undergone cardiac or thoracic aortic surgery within the previous 6 years. The secondary aim of this study was to examine the relationships among hypothermic circulatory arrest time, cardiopulmonary bypass time, and selective cerebral perfusion time with long-term postoperative neurocognitive function, as assessed by this novel testing method. Three hundred patients who had undergone cardiac and/or proximal aortic surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass (n = 207), thoracic aortic surgery with hypothermic circulatory arrest (n = 67), or thoracic aortic surgery with hypothermic circulatory arrest and selective cerebral perfusion (n = 26) within the previous 6 years underwent Internet-based neurocognitive assessment. The duration of hypothermic circulatory arrest was negatively associated with processing speed scores and memory scores; arrest duration greater than 21 to 24 minutes was negatively associated with response speed scores. These associations were independent of time since surgery, age at testing, and educational level. Neither cardiopulmonary bypass duration nor selective cerebral perfusion duration was associated with test score results. This study demonstrated the practicality of long-term neurocognitive assessment of patients who have undergone cardiac and thoracic aortic surgery by means of Internet-based computerized testing. Furthermore, there was a negative association between the duration of intraoperative hypothermic circulatory arrest and long-term postoperative neurocognitive function that needs further examination in prospective studies.

20880370
Adding emotional stressors to training in simulated cardiopulmonary arrest enhances participant performance.
Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) skills tend to degrade over time. There is mounting evidence that high-fidelity simulation (HFS) is advantageous to teaching ACLS. The aspects of HFS that enhance learning are not entirely clear, but the anxiety generated by a scenario may enhance retention through well-established learning pathways. We sought to determine whether an HFS with added emotional stress could provoke anxiety and, if so, whether or not participants learning ACLS would demonstrate better written and applied knowledge retention 6 months after their initial course. Twenty-five student volunteers from Year 1 and 2 at Mount Sinai School of Medicine were randomly assigned to a control group or an emotional content (EC) group for a sudden cardiac death management course. All subjects were monitored for heart rate and were assessed using the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Control group participants experienced an HFS in which actors were not scripted to add stress, whereas EC group participants were exposed to an emotionally charged environment using the same actors. Participants across the two groups were well matched by resting heart rates, baseline anxiety and prior ACLS knowledge. The EC group participants experienced greater anxiety than controls (mean state anxiety score: 35.0 versus 28.2 [p<0.05]; average heart rate [HR]: 94.6 bpm versus 72.9 bpm [p<0.05]; maximum HR: 120.8 bpm versus 95.3 bpm [p<0.05]). Six months later, written test scores were similar, but the EC group participants achieved higher practical competency examination ('mega code') scores than controls (32.5 versus 25.0; p<0.05). Independent t-tests and Spearman rank coefficients were employed where applicable. Simulation with added emotional stressors led to greater anxiety during ACLS instruction but correlated with enhanced performance of ACLS skills after this course. The quantitative and qualitative values of added stressors need further exploration, but these values represent important variables in simulation-based education.

20841364
The efficacy of post-cardiopulmonary bypass dosing of vancomycin in cardiac surgery.
Objective. Vancomycin is administered widely to patients undergoing cardiac surgery as prophylaxis against resistant Gram-positive sternal wound and venous donor site infections. The purpose of this study was to determine the efficacy of a standardized prebypass and postbypass dosing regimen of vancomycin by assessing plasma concentrations in the immediate postoperative period and postoperative surgical site infections (SSIs). Design. Retrospective cohort study. Setting . Cardiothoracic surgical intensive care unit in a tertiary care academic medical center. Methods. A total of 34 consecutive adult patients who had undergone cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) were analyzed retrospectively. Each patient received 1000 mg of vancomycin administered over 1 hour around the time of induction of anesthesia and 500 mg after discontinuation of CPB. Trough vancomycin levels were sampled in the intensive care unit 12 hours after the last dose given in the operating room. Along with patient characteristics, postoperative readmission rates and SSIs were recorded for 1 year after surgery. Results. The nadir serum vancomycin level before the next dose was 9.3 ± 4.5 µg/mL (mean ± standard deviation). One superficial SSI was noted. Readmission rate for SSIs was 2.94%. Conclusion . Vancomycin concentrations in the serum were greater than the minimum inhibitory concentration for most staphylococci ranging from 4 to 19.3 µg/mL producing acceptable therapeutic serum concentrations and low rate of infectious complications. Thus postbypass dosing is acceptable in vancomycin cardiac surgical prophylaxis.

20817562
Association of preanesthesia hypertension with adverse outcomes.
To investigate the incidence of preanesthesia hypertension, case cancellation for hypertension, and association with postoperative outcomes. Retrospective descriptive, univariate, and multivariate analyses of electronic anesthesia and hospital records. A large urban academic medical center. Adult elective surgical patients with preinduction blood pressure (BP) >140/90 mmHg during calendar years 2002 to 2008. None. Preinduction hypertension was present in 21,126 of 209,985 (10%) patients, and the incidence of adverse outcomes (elevated troponin or in-hospital death) was 1.3% overall and 2.8% for the subset of patients with baseline systolic BP >200 mmHg. Independent predictors of adverse outcome included increased baseline systolic BP, intraoperative diastolic BP <85 mmHg, increased intraoperative heart rate, blood transfusion, and anesthetic technique, controlling for standard risk factors. A total of 69 hypertensive patients (0.3%) had surgery cancelled before the induction of anesthesia; 29 of these cancellations occurred among the 1,330 patients with baseline SBP >200 mmHg (2.2%). Among 42 "cancelled" patients who returned for surgery hours to years later, the average preinduction BP was 192/102 mmHg, and adverse cardiovascular outcomes occurred in 4.8%. The increasing severity of preinduction hypertension was an independent risk factor for postoperative myocardial injury/infarction or in-hospital death. Only a small percentage of cases with patients presenting with severe hypertension were cancelled, and the delay of surgery did not result in interval normalization of blood pressure.

20579669
Noninvasive cerebral oxygenation may predict outcome in patients undergoing aortic arch surgery.
Surgical repair of the aortic arch remains technically challenging and is associated with considerable morbidity and mortality. Cerebral oximetry is a noninvasive technology that can monitor the regional oxygen saturation of the frontal cortex. We hypothesized that magnitude and duration of decreased intraoperative regional oxygen saturation was associated with postoperative organ dysfunction. Additionally, we sought to identify regional oxygen saturation threshold values that are predictive of organ dysfunction. The intraoperative regional oxygen saturation values of 30 patients undergoing aortic arch surgery were recorded and analyzed. Postoperative complications were categorized as "major" and "minor." Severe adverse outcome, extubation time, intensive care unit length of stay, and hospital length of stay data were collected and compared with the integrals of regional oxygen saturation and time (area under the threshold) spent beneath predetermined absolute threshold limits. Twenty subjects underwent hemiarch replacement, and 10 subjects received total aortic arch replacements. There were 30 major and 29 minor complications identified. Sixteen (53.3%) patients had at least 1 major complication. Logistic regression showed statistically significant associations between area under the threshold and severe adverse outcome incidence for regional oxygen saturation thresholds of 60% (P = .038) and 65% (P = .025). Patients who spent more than 30 minutes under the absolute threshold of 60% had an extended hospital stay of 4 days leading to an additional cost of $8300.00. Our findings lend evidence to support the association of decreased perioperative cerebral oxygenation values with poor outcomes after aortic arch surgery.

20529522
Intraoperative management of robotic-assisted versus open radical prostatectomy.
Minimally invasive surgery has been shown to decrease postoperative morbidity and length of stay for several laparoscopic procedures. We sought to retrospectively compare intraoperative surgical and anesthetic parameters, post-anesthetic care unit (PACU) length of stay, and hospital length of stay of patients who underwent robotic-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy (RAP) versus open radical retropubic prostatectomy (ORP). A retrospective investigation was performed using a urologic surgery database and an anesthesia electronic medical record. We queried information regarding 106 ORP patients from 2002 through 2007 and 575 RAP patients from 2007 through 2008. Patients in the RAP group compared with ORP patients had reductions in surgical time, anesthesia time, estimated blood loss, crystalloid administration, and PACU and hospital length of stays. Compared with ORP procedures, intraoperative respiratory rates, peak inspiratory pressures, and arterial pressures in RAP procedures were higher; tidal volumes and heart rates were decreased; but end-tidal carbon dioxide concentrations were not different. In the RAP group, intraoperative complications included severe bradycardia, corneal abrasions, and 2 patients required reintubation. Surgically, no rectal perforations were noted, and no operative mortalities occurred. Our data demonstrate the safety and efficacy of RAP due to a combination of surgical and anesthetic factors.

20472620
Central nervous system protection in cardiac surgery.
Neurological dysfunction and stroke following cardiac surgery and thoracic surgery requiring hypothermic circulatory arrest is a well-defined problem. The original studies in CABG patients identified risk factors, such as prior stroke and lower educational level. There is older evidence suggesting that higher perfusion pressures during cardiopulmonary bypass are helpful. Hyperthermia during rewarming on cardiopulmonary bypass and postoperative hyperthermia have been associated with adverse cognitive outcomes. Glucose management intraoperatively remains controversial, but most now advocate for moderate glucose control using insulin, if required. The subset of patients having thoracic aortic surgery requiring periods of aortic discontinuity are particularly problematic. A cerebral protection strategy should be determined, and this may include hypothermic circulatory arrest, selective cerebral perfusion, or retrograde cerebral perfusion. All of these techniques have been associated with good surgical outcomes, but there is little information on cognitive outcomes of thoracic aortic surgery.

20434926
Manifestation of aortic root abscess from acute bacterial endocarditis.


20338339
Invited commentary.


19897179
Safety and efficacy of repeated-dose intravenous ketamine for treatment-resistant depression.
A single subanesthetic (intravenous) IV dose of ketamine might have rapid but transient antidepressant effects in patients with treatment-resistant depression (TRD). Here we tested the tolerability, safety, and efficacy of repeated-dose open-label IV ketamine (six infusions over 12 days) in 10 medication-free symptomatic patients with TRD who had previously shown a meaningful antidepressant response to a single dose. On day 1, patients received a 40-min IV infusion of ketamine (.5 mg/kg) in an inpatient setting with continuous vital-sign monitoring. Psychotomimetic effects and adverse events were recorded repeatedly. The primary efficacy measure was change from baseline in the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) score. If patients showed a > or =50% reduction in MADRS scores on day 2, they received five additional infusions on an outpatient basis (days 3, 5, 8, 10, and 12). Follow-up visits were conducted twice-weekly for > or =4 weeks or until relapse. Ketamine elicited minimal positive psychotic symptoms. Three patients experienced significant but transient dissociative symptoms. Side effects during and after each ketamine infusion were generally mild. The response criterion was met by nine patients after the first infusion as well as after the sixth infusion. The mean (SD) reduction in MADRS scores after the sixth infusion was 85% (12%). Postketamine, eight of nine patients relapsed, on average, 19 days after the sixth infusion (range 6 days-45 days). One patient remained antidepressant-free with minimal depressive symptoms for >3 months. These pilot findings suggest feasibility of repeated-dose IV ketamine for the acute treatment of TRD.

19822810
Early on-cardiopulmonary bypass hypotension and other factors associated with vasoplegic syndrome.
Vasoplegic syndrome is a form of vasodilatory shock that can occur after cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). We hypothesized that the severity and duration of the decline in mean arterial pressure immediately after CPB is begun can be used as a predictor of patients will develop vasoplegia in the immediate post-CPB period and of poor clinical outcome. We quantified the decline in mean arterial pressure by calculating an area above the mean arterial blood pressure curve. We retrospectively analyzed 2823 adult cardiac surgery cases performed between July 2002 and December 2006. Of these 2823, 577 (20.4%) were vasoplegic after separation from CPB. We found that 1645 patients (58.3%) had a clinically significant decline in mean arterial pressure after starting CPB (area above the mean arterial blood pressure curve >0) and were significantly more likely to become vasoplegic (23.0% versus 16.9%; odds ratio, 1.26; 95% confidence interval, 1.12 to 1.43; P<0.001). These patients were also far more likely either to die in hospital or to have a length of stay >10 days (odds ratio, 3.30; 95% confidence interval, 1.44 to 7.57; P=0.005). Additional risk factors for developing vasoplegia that were identified included the additive euroSCORE, procedure type, prebypass mean arterial pressure, length of bypass, administration of pre-CPB vasopressors, core temperature on CPB, pre- and post-CPB hematocrit, the preoperative use of beta-blockers or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and the intraoperative use of aprotinin. The results of this investigation suggest that it is possible to predict vasoplegia intraoperatively before separation from CPB and that the presence of a clinically significant area above the mean arterial blood pressure curve serves as a predictor of poor clinical outcome.

19525127
Anticoagulation management in a patient with antiphospholipid antibodies requiring repeat sternotomy.


19309793
Controlling data flow enhances anesthesiology's role in perioperative care.


19288975
Riluzole for relapse prevention following intravenous ketamine in treatment-resistant depression: a pilot randomized, placebo-controlled continuation trial.
The N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor antagonist ketamine may have rapid, albeit transient, antidepressant properties. This study in patients with treatment-resistant major depression (TRD) aimed to (1) replicate the acute efficacy of single-dose intravenous (i.v.) ketamine; (2) test the efficacy of the glutamate-modulating agent riluzole in preventing post-ketamine relapse; and (3) examine whether pretreatment with lamotrigine would attenuate ketamine's psychotomimetic effects and enhance its antidepressant activity. Twenty-six medication-free patients received open-label i.v. ketamine (0.5 mg/kg over 40 min). Two hours prior to infusion, patients were randomized to lamotrigine (300 mg) or placebo. Seventeen patients (65%) met response criterion (50% reduction from baseline on the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale) 24 h following ketamine. Lamotrigine failed to attenuate the mild, transient side-effects associated with ketamine and did not enhance its antidepressant effects. Fourteen patients (54%) met response criterion 72 h following ketamine and proceeded to participate in a 32-d, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, flexible-dose continuation trial of riluzole (100-200 mg/d). The main outcome measure was time-to-relapse. An interim analysis found no significant differences in time-to-relapse between riluzole and placebo groups [log-rank chi(2) = 0.17, d.f. = 1, p = 0.68], with 80% of patients relapsing on riluzole vs. 50% on placebo. The trial was thus stopped for futility. This pilot study showed that a sub-anaesthetic dose of i.v. ketamine is well-tolerated in TRD, and may have rapid and sustained antidepressant properties. Riluzole did not prevent relapse in the first month following ketamine. Further investigation of relapse prevention strategies post-ketamine is necessary.

19020149
A mission-based productivity compensation model for an academic anesthesiology department.
We replaced a nearly fixed-salary academic physician compensation model with a mission-based productivity model with the goal of improving attending anesthesiologist productivity. The base salary system was stratified according to rank and clinical experience. The supplemental pay structure was linked to electronic patient records and a scheduling database to award points for clinical activity; educational, research, and administrative points systems were constructed in parallel. We analyzed monthly American Society of Anesthesiologist (ASA) unit data for operating room activity and physician compensation from 2000 through mid-2007, excluding the 1-yr implementation period (July 2004-June 2005) for the new model. Comparing 2005-2006 with 2000-2004, quarterly ASA units increased by 14% (P = 0.0001) and quarterly ASA units per full-time equivalent increased by 31% (P < 0.0001), while quarterly ASA units per anesthetizing location decreased by 10% (P = 0.046). Compared with a baseline year (2001), Instructor and Assistant Professor faculty compensation increased more than Associate Professor and Professor faculty (P < 0.001) in both pre- and postimplementation periods. There were larger compensation increases for the postimplementation period compared with preimplementation across faculty rank groupings (P < 0.0001). Academic and educational output was stable. Implementing a productivity-based faculty compensation model in an academic department was associated with increased mean supplemental pay with relatively fewer faculty. ASA units per month and ASA units per operating room full-time equivalent increased, and these metrics are the most likely drivers of the increased compensation. This occurred despite a slight decrease in clinical productivity as measured by ASA units per anesthetizing location. Academic and educational output was stable.

18946292
Manual editing of automatically recorded data in an anesthesia information management system.
Anesthesia information management systems allow automatic recording of physiologic and anesthetic data. The authors investigated the prevalence of such data modification in an academic medical center. The authors queried their anesthesia information management system database of anesthetics performed in 2006 and tabulated the counts of data points for automatically recorded physiologic and anesthetic parameters as well as the subset of those data that were manually invalidated by clinicians (both with and without alternate values manually appended). Patient, practitioner, data source, and timing characteristics of recorded values were also extracted to determine their associations with editing of various parameters in the anesthesia information management system record. A total of 29,491 cases were analyzed, 19% of which had one or more data points manually invalidated. Among 58 attending anesthesiologists, each invalidated data in a median of 7% of their cases when working as a sole practitioner. A minority of invalidated values were manually appended with alternate values. Pulse rate, blood pressure, and pulse oximetry were the most commonly invalidated parameters. Data invalidation usually resulted in a decrease in parameter variance. Factors independently associated with invalidation included extreme physiologic values, American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status classification, emergency status, timing (phase of the procedure/anesthetic), presence of an intraarterial catheter, resident or certified registered nurse anesthetist involvement, and procedure duration. Editing of physiologic data automatically recorded in an anesthesia information management system is a common practice and results in decreased variability of intraoperative data. Further investigation may clarify the reasons for and consequences of this behavior.

18922409
Providing safe sedation/analgesia: an anesthesiologist's perspective.
Over the past several years office-based procedures with sedation have become increasingly more common. It must be appreciated that not all procedures are well suited for this type of environment. Unacceptable ones would include those associated with significant fluid shifts, post-operative pain, bleeding or procedures of long duration. Since esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy are relatively non-invasive, of short duration, and not associated with either fluid shifts or significant post-procedure discomfort. In appropriate patients, these procedures are well-suited to office-based practice.

18693874
Extraction and mapping of drug names from free text to a standardized nomenclature.
Free text fields are often used to store clinical drug data in electronic health records. The use of free text facilitates rapid data entry by the clinician. Errors in spelling, abbreviations, and jargon, however, limit the utility of these data. We designed and implemented an algorithm, using open source tools and RxNorm, to extract and normalize drug data stored in free text fields of an anesthesia electronic health record. The algorithm was developed using a training set containing drug data from 49,518 cases, and validated using a validation set containing data from 14,655 cases. Overall sensitivity and specificity for the validation set were 92.2% and 95.7% respectively. The mains sources of error were misspellings and unknown but valid drug names. These preliminary results demonstrate that free text clinical drug data can be efficiently extracted and mapped to a controlled drug nomenclature.

18042871
Changes in utilization of intraoperative laboratory testing associated with the introduction of point-of-care testing devices in an academic department.
Availability of point-of-care testing (POCT) technology may lead to unnecessary testing and expense without improving outcomes. We tested the hypothesis that frequency of intraoperative blood testing (IBT) would increase in association with installation of POCT devices in our surgical suites. We performed a retrospective analysis of 38,115 electronic anesthesia records for cases performed in the 1 yr before and 1 yr after POCT installation. For each case, the frequency of IBT was tabulated and the change in frequency of IBT between the study periods was calculated for individual anesthesiologists, for the department as a whole, and for clusters of anesthetizing locations. For the department as a whole, there was no significant change between the before and after study periods in the 13% proportion of cases in which IBT was obtained. For cases in which IBT was used, there was no significant increase in the number of IBTs per case. We found no significant increase in the overall utilization of IBT associated with POCT presence in noncardiothoracic operating rooms.

17869986
Changing patterns of postoperative nausea and vomiting prophylaxis drug use in an academic anesthesia practice.
To characterize the evolution of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) prophylactic drug use. Retrospective data extraction and analysis of electronic anesthesia records. Anesthesia department of an urban academic medical center. 144,134 anesthetics given by 57 attending anesthesiologists were studied. Administered doses of droperidol, ondansetron, dexamethasone, and metoclopramide were tabulated for each year for each practitioner. Ondansetron use in the periods before and after the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) warning concerning droperidol was 8% and 35%, respectively. Use of PONV prophylaxis increased for all included patient and anesthetic factors. Among those who used droperidol before the revised FDA warning, 61% stopped using it altogether. Afterwards, 75% (27-100%) of droperidol use was in combination with another agent. We found a significant and sustained decrease in droperidol use after the FDA-mandated labeling revision. We also found a significant increase in ondansetron use--an increase that exceeded the amount needed to substitute for the decreased droperidol use. The changes may be related to multiple factors, including the FDA warning, a trend toward more PONV prophylaxis, and the increasing predominance of serotonin antagonists for this indication.

17711973
Perioperative interventions to modify risk of morbidity and mortality.
Perioperative myocardial ischemia is the single most important, potentially reversible risk factor for mortality and cardiovascular complications during and after noncardiac surgery. The influence of anesthetic choices and techniques on cardiac risk in noncardiac surgery is difficult to ascertain because of the low incidence of morbid cardiac outcomes in the surgical population as a whole. This article summarizes several areas (eg, perioperative betablockade, glucose management, and perioperative hemodynamics) that have been addressed in well-designed clinical trials.

17513642
The effect of an interactive visual reminder in an anesthesia information management system on timeliness of prophylactic antibiotic administration.
To reduce the incidence of surgical site infection, preoperative antibiotics should be administered within 60 min before surgical incision. The purpose of this study was to determine whether adding a visual interactive electronic reminder with a message related to antibiotic administration to our anesthesia information management system would increase compliance with prophylactic antibiotic guidelines. We retrospectively studied electronic anesthesia records of ambulatory and day-of-surgery admission surgical cases in which one of our usual prophylactic antibiotics was administered from June 2004 through December 2005, an interval that includes cases both before and after the February 2005 implementation of the new reminder. Compliance was defined as documented antibiotic administration within 60 min before the surgical procedure starting time. Noncompliant cases were divided into those in which dosing was too early or too late. Compliance for 4987 cases before and 9478 cases after the reminder was implemented increased from 82.4% to 89.1% (P < 0.01). This increase was found both for attending anesthesiologists assisted by a resident or nurse anesthetist (82.9% before vs 89.1% after, P < 0.01) and for attending anesthesiologists working alone (80.1% before vs 89.3% after, P < 0.01). The improvement in compliance was associated with a decrease in the incidence of antibiotics administered too late (i.e., after surgical incision) (15.2% before vs 8.1% after, P < 0.01), but with no significant change in the incidence of antibiotics administered too early (i.e., more than 60 min before skin incision) (2.4% before vs 2.8% after, P = 0.07). The implementation of a visual interactive electronic reminder regarding administration of preoperative antibiotics in an anesthesia information management system was associated with a sustained increase in compliance with surgical prophylactic antibiotic administration timing guidelines.

17325520
Central nervous system dysfunction after noncardiac surgery and anesthesia in the elderly.


19933513
Mathematical model for describing cerebral oxygen desaturation in patients undergoing deep hypothermic circulatory arrest.
Surgical treatment for aortic arch disease requiring periods of circulatory arrest is associated with a spectrum of neurological sequelae. Cerebral oximetry can non-invasively monitor patients for cerebral ischaemia even during periods of circulatory arrest. We hypothesized that cerebral desaturation during circulatory arrest could be described by a mathematical relationship that is time-dependent. Cerebral desaturation curves obtained from 36 patients undergoing aortic surgery with deep hypothermic circulatory arrest (DHCA) were used to create a non-linear mixed model. The model assumes that the rate of oxygen decline is greatest at the beginning before steadily transitioning to a constant. Leave-one-out cross-validation and jackknife methods were used to evaluate the validity of the predictive model. The average rate of cerebral desaturation during DHCA can be described as: Sct(o(2))[t]=81.4-(11.53+0.37 x t) (1-0.88 x exp (-0.17 x t)). Higher starting Sct(o(2)) values and taller patient height were also associated with a greater decline rate of Sct(o(2)). Additionally, a predictive model was derived after the functional form of a x log (b+c x delta), where delta is the degree of Sct(o(2)) decline after 15 min of DHCA. The model enables the estimation of a maximal acceptable arrest time before reaching an ischaemic threshold. Validation tests showed that, for the majority, the prediction error is no more than +/-3 min. We were able to create two mathematical models, which can accurately describe the rate of cerebral desaturation during circulatory arrest at 12-15 degrees C as a function of time and predict the length of arrest time until a threshold value is reached.

18848442
A survey of anesthesiologists' and nurses' attitudes toward the implementation of an Anesthesia Information Management System on a labor and delivery floor.
An anesthesia information management system (AIMS) is most frequently used in the operating room, but not on labor and delivery (L&D). The purpose of this study is to describe the implementation of an AIMS on L&D and the attitudes of practitioners (anesthesiologists and nurses) toward the system. The anesthesiology survey focused on satisfaction with the L&D AIMS, comparison of the L&D AIMS with a handwritten anesthesia record, and comparison of the L&D AIMS with the operating room AIMS. The nursing survey focused on nursing satisfaction with the L&D AIMS and comparison of the L&D AIMS with a handwritten anesthesia record. Most anesthesiologists (76%) were satisfied with the L&D AIMS and 73% would not want to revert back to the paper record. However, most anesthesiologists felt the operating room AIMS was either superior or equal to the L&D AIMS. Although few nurses (4%) preferred the anesthesiologists revert back to the handwritten record overall, the nurses were neutral in their assessment of the AIMS. Most of the criticism related to the location of the system; 56% believed it was not in a convenient location and 74% thought the AIMS equipment "got in their way". Overall, the anesthesiologists and nurses are satisfied with the L&D AIMS and would not want to switch back to a handwritten record. We conclude that AIMS should not be limited to the operating room setting and can successfully be used in L&D.

