21575861
High-Frequency Canonical Wnt Activation in Multiple Sarcoma Subtypes Drives Proliferation through a TCF/?-Catenin Target Gene, CDC25A.
Wnt canonical signaling is critical for normal development as well as homeostasis of several epithelial tissues, and constitutive activation of this pathway is commonly observed in carcinomas. We show here that 50% of human sarcomas (n = 45) and 65% of sarcoma cell lines (n = 23) of diverse histological subtypes exhibit upregulated autocrine canonical Wnt signaling. Furthermore, in Wnt autocrine cell lines, we identify alterations including overexpression or gene amplification of Wnt ligands and/or LRP5/6 coreceptors and epigenetic silencing of different cell surface Wnt antagonists. Mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene were observed in two nonautocrine Wnt-positive sarcoma cell lines. Finally, downregulation of the activated Wnt pathway inhibited sarcoma cell proliferation both in vitro and in vivo by a mechanism involving the downregulation of CDC25A.

21078818
Canonical and noncanonical Wnts use a common mechanism to activate completely unrelated coreceptors.
Wnt ligands signal through ?-catenin and are critically involved in cell fate determination and stem/progenitor self-renewal. Wnts also signal through ?-catenin-independent or noncanonical pathways that regulate crucial events during embryonic development. The mechanism of noncanonical receptor activation and how Wnts trigger canonical as opposed to noncanonical signaling have yet to be elucidated. We demonstrate here that prototype canonical Wnt3a and noncanonical Wnt5a ligands specifically trigger completely unrelated endogenous coreceptors-LRP5/6 and Ror1/2, respectively-through a common mechanism that involves their Wnt-dependent coupling to the Frizzled (Fzd) coreceptor and recruitment of shared components, including dishevelled (Dvl), axin, and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3). We identify Ror2 Ser 864 as a critical residue phosphorylated by GSK3 and required for noncanonical receptor activation by Wnt5a, analogous to the priming phosphorylation of low-density receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6) in response to Wnt3a. Furthermore, this mechanism is independent of Ror2 receptor Tyr kinase functions. Consistent with this model of Wnt receptor activation, we provide evidence that canonical and noncanonical Wnts exert reciprocal pathway inhibition at the cell surface by competition for Fzd binding. Thus, different Wnts, through their specific coupling and phosphorylation of unrelated coreceptors, activate completely distinct signaling pathways.

19349579
Canonical Wnts function as potent regulators of osteogenesis by human mesenchymal stem cells.
Genetic evidence indicates that Wnt signaling is critically involved in bone homeostasis. In this study, we investigated the functions of canonical Wnts on differentiation of adult multipotent human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) in vitro and in vivo. We observe differential sensitivities of hMSCs to Wnt inhibition of osteogenesis versus adipogenesis, which favors osteoblastic commitment under binary in vitro differentiation conditions. Wnt inhibition of osteogenesis is associated with decreased expression of osteoblastic transcription factors and inhibition of c-Jun N-terminal kinase and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase activation, which are involved in osteogenic differentiation. An hMSC subpopulation exhibits high endogenous Wnt signaling, the inhibition of which enhances osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation in vitro. In an in vivo bone formation model, high levels of Wnt signaling inhibit de novo bone formation by hMSCs. However, hMSCs with exogenous expression of Wnt1 but not stabilized beta-catenin markedly stimulate bone formation by naive hMSCs, arguing for an important role of a canonical Wnt gradient in hMSC osteogenesis in vivo.

17698587
Analysis of endogenous LRP6 function reveals a novel feedback mechanism by which Wnt negatively regulates its receptor.
The canonical Wnt pathway plays a crucial role in embryonic development, and its deregulation is involved in human diseases. The LRP6 single-span transmembrane coreceptor is essential for transmission of canonical Wnt signaling. However, due to the lack of immunological reagents, our understanding of LRP6 structure and function has relied on studies involving its overexpression, and regulation of the endogenous receptor by the Wnt ligand has remained unexplored. Using a highly sensitive and specific antibody to LRP6, we demonstrate that the endogenous receptor is modified by N-glycosylation and is phosphorylated in response to Wnt stimulation in a sustained yet ligand-dependent manner. Moreover, following triggering by Wnt, endogenous LRP6 is internalized and recycled back to the cellular membrane within hours of the initial stimulus. Finally, we have identified a novel feedback mechanism by which Wnt, acting through beta-catenin, negatively regulates LRP6 at the mRNA level. Together, these findings contribute significantly to our understanding of LRP6 function and uncover a new level of regulation of Wnt signaling. In light of the direct role that the Wnt pathway plays in human bone diseases and malignancies, our findings may support the development of novel therapeutic approaches that target Wnt signaling through LRP6.

21042278
Diverse mechanisms of Wnt activation and effects of pathway inhibition on proliferation of human gastric carcinoma cells.
Human gastric carcinomas are among the most treatment-refractory epithelial malignancies. Increased understanding of the underlying molecular aberrations in such tumors could provide insights leading to improved therapeutic approaches. In this study, we characterized diverse genetic aberrations leading to constitutive Wnt signaling activation in a series of human gastric carcinoma cell lines. Downregulation of TCF signaling by stable transduction of dominant negative TCF4 (DNTCF4) resulted in inhibition of proliferation in Wnt-activated AGS tumor cells. c-Myc downregulation and the associated upregulation of its repression target, p21 observed in these tumor cells, as well as the profound growth inhibition induced by c-Myc small hairpin RNA (shRNA) implied their c-Myc addiction. In striking contrast, Wnt-activated MKN-28 and MKN-74 tumor cells appeared refractory to DNTCF4 inhibition of proliferation despite comparably decreased c-Myc expression levels. The resistance of these same tumor cells to growth inhibition by c-Myc shRNA established that their refractoriness to DNTCF was because of their independence from c-Myc for proliferation. There was no correlation between this resistance phenotype and the presence or absence of constitutive mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and/or AKT pathway activation, commonly observed in gastrointestinal tumors. However, in both DNTCF-sensitive and -resistant tumor cells with MAPK and/or AKT pathway activation, the ability of small molecule antagonists directed against either pathway to inhibit tumor cell growth was enhanced by Wnt pathway inhibition. These findings support the concept that although certain Wnt-activated tumors may escape c-Myc dependence for proliferation, disruption of other oncogenic pathways can unmask cooperative antiproliferative effects for Wnt pathway downregulation.

19377513
Wnt pathway aberrations including autocrine Wnt activation occur at high frequency in human non-small-cell lung carcinoma.
Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer mortality worldwide. Non-small-cell lung carcinomas (NSCLCs), which represent around 80% of lung tumors, exhibit poor prognosis and are usually refractory to conventional chemotherapy. Elucidating the molecular and cellular mechanisms that are dysregulated in NSCLCs may lead to new possibilities for targeted therapy or enhanced efficacy of current therapies. Here we demonstrate Wnt pathway activation in around 50% of human NSCLC cell lines and primary tumors, through different mechanisms, including autocrine Wnt pathway activation involving upregulation of specific Wnt ligands. Downregulation of activated Wnt signaling inhibited NSCLC proliferation and induced a more differentiated phenotype. Together, our findings establish importance of activated Wnt signaling in human NSCLCs and offer the possibility of targeting upregulated Wnt signaling as a new therapeutic modality for this disease.

