21598262
Obstetric fistula in low and middle income countries.
Vesicovaginal fistula secondary to obstructed labor continues to be an all-too-common occurrence in underdeveloped nations throughout Africa and Asia. Vesicovaginal fistula remains largely an overlooked problem in developing nations as it affects the most marginalized members of society: young, poor, illiterate women who live in remote areas. The formation of obstetric fistula is a result of complex interactions of social, biologic, and economic influences. The key underlying causes of fistula are the combination of a lack of functional emergency obstetric care, poverty, illiteracy, and low status of women. In order to prevent fistula, some strategies include creation of governmental policy aimed toward reducing maternal mortality/morbidity and increasing availability of skilled obstetric care, as well as attempts to increase awareness about its prevention and treatment among policymakers, service providers, and communities. Whereas prevention will require the widespread development of infrastructure within these developing countries, treatment of fistula is an act which can be done "in the now." Treatment and subsequent reintegration of fistula patients requires a team of specialists including surgeons, nurses, midwives, and social workers, which is largely unavailable in developing countries. However, there is increasing support for training of fistula surgeons through standardized programs as well as establishment of rehabilitation centers in many nations. The eradication of fistula is dependent upon building programs that target both prevention and treatment. Mt Sinai J Med 78:352-361, 2011 © 2011 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

20730542
MRI pelvic landmark angles in the assessment of apical pelvic organ prolapse.
PURPOSE: The aim of the study was to evaluate the utility of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) pelvic landmark angles and lines in the assessment of apical vault prolapse. METHODS: Seventeen women were evaluated as part of a prospective surgical trial. Baseline data are presented as a pilot study of the utility of MRI in addition to this evaluation of 6 nulliparous volunteers without prolapse and 11 parous women with symptomatic >/= stage II uterine prolapse. Each patient underwent assessment for pelvic organ prolapse quantification (POPQ) and pelvic MRI. Pelvic landmark angles and lines were measured. Mann-Whitney Rank sum test and Spearman's Rank order correlation test were used to assess agreement. RESULTS: Women with prolapse had a significantly larger h angle, g angle, and e angle at rest than those without prolapse. Correlation between apical vault descent was measured clinically by POPQ point C with MRI measurements: h angle (r = 0.61, p = 0.01), g angle (r = 0.64, p = 0.005), and e angle (r = 0.62, p = 0.007). CONCLUSION: MRI measurements of pelvic landmark angles reliably differentiate between women with and without uterine prolapse and correlate best with POPQ point C.

20677926
Amniotic fluid cells are more efficiently reprogrammed to pluripotency than adult cells.
Recently, cultured human adult skin cells were reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, which have characteristics similar to human embryonic stem (hES) cells. Patient-derived iPS cells offer genetic and immunologic advantages for cell and tissue replacement or engineering. The efficiency of generating human iPS cells has been very low; therefore an easily and efficiently reprogrammed cell type is highly desired. Here, we demonstrate that terminally differentiated human amniotic fluid (AF) skin cells provide an accessible source for efficiently generating abundant-induced pluripotent stem (AF-iPS) cells. By induction of pluripotency with the transcription factor quartet (OCT3/4, SOX2, KLF4, and c-MYC) the terminally differentiated, cultured AF skin cells formed iPS colonies approximately twice as fast and yielded nearly a two-hundred percent increase in number, compared to cultured adult skin cells. AF-iPS cells were identical to hES cells for morphological and growth characteristics, antigenic stem cell markers, stem cell gene expression, telomerase activity, in vitro and in vivo differentiation into the three germ layers and for their capacity to form embryoid bodies (EBs) and teratomas. Our findings provide a biological interesting conclusion that these fetal AF cells are more rapidly, easily, and efficiently reprogrammed to pluripotency than neonatal and adult cells. AF-iPS cells may have a "young," more embryonic like epigenetic background, which may facilitate and accelerate pluripotency. The ability to efficiently and rapidly reprogram terminally differentiated AF skin cells and generate induced pluripotent stem cells provides an abundant iPS cell source for various basic studies and a potential for future patient-specific personalized therapies.

17903078
Patients' return to referring physicians and its relation to their infertility duration.
To determine if length of patient-reported infertility prior to referral to a specialist is related to the likelihood that the patient will return to the referring physician for obstetrical care. A review of our medical record database identified 430 consecutive pregnant patients, discharged between January 1, 2003, and March 1, 2004. The name of the referring and discharge obstetrician(s), duration of infertility, prior use of clomiphene citrate, and number of previous clomiphene treatment cycles were recorded. Of the 430 patients, 305 (71%) had information about the referring and discharge obstetrician(s) and complete records regarding prior treatment. Median duration of infertility was 1.3 years (range 0.2-12 years). Fifty-five percent (167 of 305) of patients returned to their referring physician for obstetrical care. If patients were referred prior to 6 months of treatment by the referring obstetrician, 76% (35 of 46) returned. If patients were referred after 6 months to 1 year of treatment, 67% (82 of 122) returned. If after 1-2 years, 35% (33 of 94), and after more than 2 years, 40% (10 of 25) returned to their referring physician. Overall, 25% of patients (77 of 305) patients had preliminary treatment with clomiphene citrate. If the referring physician did not give the patient clomiphene citrate, 55% (128 of 232) returned to that physician; if the patient had been given one to four clomiphene cycles, 54% (37 of 69) returned, and if given more than four cycles, 25% (2 of 8) returned. Although many factors may affect a patient's decision to return to the referring doctor, patient satisfaction with the referring physician may be related to timely referral to a specialist.

17618778
Anterior intravaginal slingplasty tunneller device for stress incontinence and posterior intravaginal slingplasty for apical vault prolapse: a 2-year prospective multicenter study.
The purpose of this study was to report the outcome for (1) anterior intravaginal slingplasty in the treatment of urodynamic stress incontinence and (2) posterior intravaginal slingplasty for apical prolapse (> or = stage II). This was a 2-year prospective multicenter study: patients, 430; anterior intravaginal slingplasty, 144; posterior intravaginal slingplasty, 164; both procedures, 122 (552 tapes total). At 6 and 12 months, the results of the Pelvic Floor Impact Questionnaire, cough stress test, and Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantitation were assessed. Statistical analyses used paired t-tests. Of the women in the study, 95% (42 women) had a negative cough stress test result through 12 months (n = 44 women), and 96% (127 women) had a negative cough stress test result at 6 months (n = 132). At 6 months, apical support was optimal in 95.3% (143/150 women) and was satisfactory in 2.7% (4/150 women) and at 12 months, 98.1% (52/53 women), 1.9% (1/53 women). Seventeen of 430 patients (4.0%) had vaginal mesh extrusion. Pelvic Floor Impact Questionnaire scores significantly improved (P < .0001). Anterior intravaginal slingplasty and posterior intravaginal slingplasty are safe and effective when performed with other procedures. For anterior intravaginal slingplasty, the rates of perforation and retention are low, but early extrusions are seen. Patients showed improvements in the Pelvic Floor Impact Questionnaire, regardless of extrusion.

