21311618
Cerebrospinal fluid leaks of temporal bone origin: selection of surgical approach.
Cerebrospinal fluid leaks of the temporal bone are rare, often occult, and sometimes challenging to localize and repair. This is a retrospective study of eight patients with spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid leak and six patients with cerebrospinal fluid leak or encephalocele discovered during chronic ear surgery who were treated in a tertiary medical center over a 5-year period. All received preoperative temporal bone computed tomography, and six also underwent magnetic resonance imaging, one computed tomography cisternography, and one radionuclide cisternography. All patients initially underwent a transmastoid surgical approach. Additional exposure was necessary in three patients; two underwent middle fossa craniotomy and another required minicraniotomy. Primary surgical repair was successful in six of the eight patients with spontaneous leaks and in all six chronic ear patients. Both recurrences required intradural middle fossa repair. An individualized approach should be taken for repair of temporal bone cerebrospinal fluid leaks. In this series, most were successfully repaired in a single stage using a transmastoid or combined approach. The transmastoid approach provides information about the precise size and location of the dural defect. A primary transcranial approach is needed for defects that are multiple, located in the petrous apex, and in revision cases.

21125456
Recurrent vasospasm after endovascular treatment in subarachnoid hemorrhage.
the frequency and predictors of recurrent symptomatic and angiographic vasospasm after angioplasty or intra-arterial chemical vasodilatation (IACV) in patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) are not well characterized. a retrospective review of serial clinical and angiographic data was conducted between 7/2001-6/2008 on spontaneous SAH patients who underwent endovascular therapy for symptomatic vasospasm. of 318 SAH patients, symptomatic vasospasm occurred in 80 (25%) and endovascular intervention was performed on 69 (22%) patients. Of these 69 patients, all received IACV in 274 vessels and 33 also underwent angioplasty in a total of 76 vessels. Recurrent angiographic vasospasm occurred in the same vessel segment in 9/23 (39%) patients who received both angioplasty + IACV compared to 40/49 (82%) of patients who received IACV alone (P < 0.001). Recurrent symptomatic vasospasm occurred in 10/26 (38%) angioplasty + IACV patients compared to 28/37 (76%) patients who received IACV alone (P = 0.003). The modified-Fisher Score, A1 spasm, distal and multi-vessel vasospasm predicted recurrent angiographic spasm after IACV alone (P < 0.05). Procedural complications occurred in 4% of IACV alone patients and 6% of angioplasty + IACV patients (P = 0.599). recurrent angiographic or symptomatic vasospasm is not uncommon after angioplasty + IACV, but appears to occur significantly less than after IACV alone, without any increase in procedural complications.

21116923
Nitric oxide in early brain injury after subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Nitric Oxide (NO) is the major regulator of cerebral blood flow. In addition, it inhibits platelet adherence and aggregation, reduces adherence of leukocytes to the endothelium, and suppresses vessel injury. NO is produced on demand by nitric oxide synthase and has a very short half life. Hence maintenance of its cerebral level is crucial for normal vascular physiology. Time dependent alterations in cerebral NO level and the enzymes responsible for its synthesis are found after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Cerebral NO level decreases, recovers and increases within the first 24 h after SAH. Each change in cerebral NO level elicits a different pathological response form already compromised brain. These response range from constriction, platelet aggregation and vascular injury that occurs during the early hours and delayed occurring vasospasm, neuronal and axonal damage. This review summarizes the underlying mechanism and the consequence of alteration in cerebral NO level on brain during the first 72 h after SAH.

20717752
Trend in outcome and financial impact of subdural hemorrhage.
Little current data exists regarding outcome, cost, and length of stay (LOS) after subdural hemorrhage (SDH). We sought to examine predictors of discharge disposition, ICU and hospital LOS and direct, indirect, ICU, surgical, and diagnostic costs for SDH. A retrospective review was conducted of 216 SDH patients, aged >18 years admitted to our hospital between 1/2001 and 12/2008. Discharge disposition was characterized as dead, poor or good. Multivariable logistic regression analysis was performed to identify predictors of disposition, LOS, and cost. Of 216 SDH patients, the median age was 74 (19-95), and the median admission Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 14 (3-15). The SDH was characterized as acute in 14%, subacute in 44%, chronic in 12%, and mixed in 30%. Surgical evacuation was performed in 139 (64%) patients. Death occurred in 29 (13%) patients and poor disposition in 43 (20%). Significant predictors of death included age, admission GCS, and hospital LOS (P < 0.05). Longer hospital LOS was associated with poor disposition, while shorter ICU LOS was associated with good disposition (P < 0.01). Median hospital LOS was 8 (1-99) days. Median total direct costs for hospitalization were $10,670 ($907-238,856). ICU and hospital LOS were significant predictors of all measures of cost (P < 0.05). SDH size, chronicity, and surgical intervention were not predictors of any outcome. There was no significant change in any outcome variable between 2001 and 2008. Despite good admission neurological status, death or poor discharge disposition is common after SDH. LOS and costs remain high and have not improved in the last decade.

20198500
Hemangiopericytoma: collision with meningioma and recurrence.
Intracranial hemangiopericytomas are a rare type of primary brain tumor, representing only about 0.5% of all primary brain tumors. Even more rare is the co-existence of two juxtaposed primary brain tumors, termed a "collision" tumor. This report provides the first documentation in the literature of a hemangiopericytoma colliding with a meningioma, and recurring after treatment with gross total resection. Surgical samples were fully evaluated with hematoxylin and eosin and reticulin staining, as well as immunohistochemical analysis. Results were classically representative of a hemangiopericytoma (World Health Organization grade II) and of a meningioma (World Health Organization grade I). This report of a unique collision tumor not only augments the repertoire of collision tumor combinations described in literature but also provides follow-up on the clinical outcome of the patient, thereby raising clinically relevant issues ranging from presentation to treatment paradigms.

19895201
Adenosine A(2A) receptors in early ischemic vascular injury after subarachnoid hemorrhage. Laboratory investigation.
The role of adenosine A(2A) receptors in the early vascular response after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is unknown. In other forms of cerebral ischemia both activation and inhibition of A(2A) receptors is reported to be beneficial. However, these studies mainly used pharmacological receptor modulation, and most of the agents available exhibit low specificity. The authors used adenosine A(2A) receptor knockout mice to study the role of A(2A) receptors in the early vascular response to SAH. Subarachnoid hemorrhage was induced in wild-type mice (C57BL/6) and A(2A) receptor knockout mice by endovascular puncture. Cerebral blood flow, intracranial pressure, and blood pressure were recorded, and cerebral perfusion pressure was deduced. Animals were sacrificed at 1, 3, or 6 hours after SAH or sham surgery. Coronal brain sections were immunostained for Type IV collagen, the major protein of the basal lamina. The internal diameter of major cerebral arteries and the area fraction of Type IV collagen-positive microvessels (< 100 ?m) were determined. The initial increase in intracranial pressure and decrease in cerebral perfusion pressure at SAH induction was similar in both types of mice, but cerebral blood flow decline was significantly smaller in A(2A) receptor knockout mice as compared with wild-type cohorts. The internal diameter of major cerebral vessels decreased progressively after SAH. The extent of diameter reduction was significantly less in A(2A) receptor knockout mice than in wild-type mice. Type IV collagen immunostaining decreased progressively after SAH. This decrease was significantly less in A(2A) receptor knockout mice than in wild-type mice. These results demonstrate that global inactivation of A(2A) receptors decreases the intensity of the early vascular response to SAH. Early inhibition of A(2A) receptors after SAH might reduce cerebral injury.

19474379
Intracranial tumors: cisternal angle as a measure of midbrain compression for assessing risk of postembolization clinical deterioration.
To identify objective imaging characteristics that are predictors of clinical deterioration after embolization of large intracranial tumors. This HIPAA-compliant retrospective study was approved by the institutional review board, and informed consent was waived. The records of twelve patients with large intracranial tumors who underwent embolization were analyzed for imaging characteristics that would portend acute neurologic deterioration following embolization. The degree of midbrain compression was calculated by using the cisternal angle (the angle formed at the intersection of a line drawn along the midsagittal plane and a line drawn along the anterior aspect of the cerebral peduncle). Angiograms were evaluated for the degree of pre- and postembolization tumor blush. Neurologic status before and after embolization was evaluated. The Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to compare the cisternal angles ipsilateral and contralateral to the tumor. The cisternal angle was measured in 100 control subjects with no mass lesions to evaluate its normal distribution. Of the 12 patients, three experienced acute clinical deterioration after embolization. A feature common to these patients was substantial preprocedure midbrain compression, as indicated by a cisternal angle of less than 25 degrees , which was significantly less than the mean angle in the control group. Another consistent risk factor was a strong initial tumor blush pattern and a major blush reduction following embolization. Cisternal angle is an objective measure of midbrain compression. The presence of a cisternal angle less than 25 degrees (indicating severe midbrain compression), strong tumor blush, and major postprocedure blush reduction are predictors of clinical deterioration after embolization.

19190447
Novel surgical treatment of a transverse-sigmoid sinus aneurysm presenting as pulsatile tinnitus: technical case report.
Pulsatile tinnitus is a relatively common, potentially incapacitating condition that is often vascular in origin. We present a case of disabling pulsatile tinnitus caused by a transverse-sigmoid sinus aneurysm that was surgically treated with self-tying U-clips (Medtronic, Inc., Memphis, TN). We also review the literature and discuss other described interventions. A 48-year-old woman presented with a 5-year history of progressive pulsatile tinnitus involving the right ear. Her physical examination was consistent with a lesion that was venous in origin. Angiography demonstrated a wide-necked venous aneurysm of the transverse-sigmoid sinus that had eroded the mastoid bone. The patient underwent a retromastoid suboccipital craniectomy to expose the aneurysm and surrounding anatomy. The aneurysm dome was tamponaded and the aneurysm neck was coagulated until the dome had shrunk to a small remnant. The linear defect in the transverse sigmoid junction was then reconstructed with a series of U-clips and covered with Gelfoam hemostatic sponge (Pfizer, Inc., New York, NY). The patient awakened without neurological deficit and with immediate resolution of her tinnitus. A postoperative angiogram demonstrated obliteration of the aneurysm, with minimal stenosis in the region of the repair and good flow through the dominant right transverse-sigmoid junction. This technical case report describes a novel definitive surgical treatment of venous sinus aneurysms. This technique does not necessitate long-term anticoagulation, has a low likelihood of reintervention, and provides immediate resolution of pulsatile tinnitus.

18794447
A rare prevertebral ordinary lipoma presenting as obstructive sleep apnea: computed tomographic and magnetic resonance imaging findings.


18424979
Combined endoscope-assisted transclival clipping and endovascular stenting of a basilar trunk aneurysm: case report.
We describe a patient with a mid-basilar aneurysm treated with combined endoscope-assisted transsphenoidal clipping and endovascular stenting. A 28-year-old woman was transferred to the cranial base surgery center with an acute Grade III subarachnoid hemorrhage. Cerebral angiography demonstrated a small basilar trunk aneurysm that was not amenable to acute endovascular treatment. The patient underwent sublabial transsphenoidal/transclival endoscope-assisted clipping of the aneurysm and subsequent stenting of the affected segment. The aneurysm was repaired with a low-profile Weck clip (Weck Closure Systems Research, Triangle Park, NC) that permitted a watertight closure of the clival dura using cardiac Medtronic U-clips (Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN). Postoperatively, the patient had no evidence of cerebrospinal fluid leakage. Watertight dural closure was possible due to the use of a low-profile aneurysm clip that did not protrude through the dural defect, as well as self-tying sutures.

17666272
Intracranial mucocele: an unusual complication of cerebrospinal fluid leakage repair with middle turbinate mucosal graft.


17471108
Petrous apex aspergillosis as a long-term complication of cholesterol granuloma.
Aspergillus infection of the petrous apex is a rare and devastating condition. To date, only two such cases have been reported, which resulted from direct extension of chronic Aspergillus otitis media. We present a case of petrous apex aspergillosis occurring years after surgical drainage of a petrous apex granuloma cyst. Because of the potential lethal nature of this condition, aggressive surgical therapy should be considered early in this illness and may provide the best chance for survival.

17410718
Acute cerebral vascular injury after subarachnoid hemorrhage and its prevention by administration of a nitric oxide donor.
Structural changes in brain parenchymal vessels occur within minutes after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). These changes include platelet aggregation, activation of vascular collagenases, and destruction of perivascular collagen IV. Because collagen IV is an important component of the basal lamina, the authors attempted to further define changes in vascular structure (length and luminal diameter) and their relationship to vascular permeability immediately after SAH. In addition, the authors explored whether such alterations were attenuated by administration of a nitric oxide (NO) donor. Endovascular perforation was used to induce SAH in rats. Two sets of experiments were performed. The first established changes in vascular structure and permeability (collagen IV and endothelial barrier antigen [EBA] dual immunofluorescence) during the first 24 hours after SAH. In the second, the investigators examined the effects of an NO donor on vascular structure, permeability, and collagenase activity (in situ zymography). In this second study, animals received intravenous infusion of the NO donor S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO, 1 microM/8 microl/min) 15 minutes after induction of SAH and were killed 3 hours after SAH onset. Controls were naive unoperated animals for the first study and saline-infused SAH animals for the second. The authors found a time-dependent decrease in area fraction, length, and luminal diameter of collagen IV- and EBA-immunofluorescent vessels after SAH. The greatest change occurred at 3 hours after onset of SAH. Administration of GSNO was associated with striking preservation of collagen IV and EBA immunofluorescence compared with saline treatment. Zymography indicated decreased collagenase activity in GSNO-treated SAH animals compared with saline-treated SAH animals. These results demonstrate changes in the structure and permeability of brain parenchymal microvessels after SAH and their reversal by treatment with an NO donor.

17903795
Clinical improvement related to thrombolysis of third ventricular blood clot in a patient with thalamic hemorrhage.
Intraventricular extension of hemorrhage after intraparenchymal hemorrhage is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Clinical improvement is reported in a patient with thalamic hemorrhage with intraventricular extension after third and fourth ventricular blood clot resolution with instillation of urokinase intraventricularly. A 49-year-old man with hypertension collapsed while at work. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head revealed a left thalamic hemorrhage with extension into the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles and associated hydrocephalus. A left frontal intraventricular catheter (IVC) was placed and intraventricular urokinase was administered at a dose of 25,000 U every 12 hours. The CT scan revealed resolution of the lateral ventricular dilatation and blood clot but no decrease in third or fourth ventricular hemorrhage. No clinical improvement was noted. The IVC was reinserted on the right side with the catheter tip placed through the foramen of Monroe into the third ventricle. Twelve hours after receiving the first dose of urokinase through the new catheter, the patient's condition improved. The CT scan showed a reduction in the volume of blood of the third and fourth ventricles. This case report shows that treatment of hydrocephalus with an IVC was not sufficient to provide a therapeutic effect. Substantial clinical improvement occurred only after the blood clot was cleared from the third and fourth ventricles.

17895147
Spontaneous caudate hemorrhage associated with ingestion of a decongestant containing phenylpropanolamine.
Intracerebral hemorrhage has been associated with phenylpropanolamine, a sympathomimetic agent contained in many over-the-counter medications. Caudate hemorrhage is infrequent, usually related to hypertension, and has not been reported following ingestion of medications containing phenylpropanolamine. We report an unusual case of caudate hemorrhage which developed in a patient taking an over-the-counter nasal decongestant containing phenylpropanolamine.

