21597003
Inhibitors of {gamma}-secretase stabilize the complex and differentially affect processing of amyloid precursor protein and other substrates.
?-Secretase inhibitors (GSIs) are drugs used in research to inhibit production of A? and in clinical trials to treat Alzheimer's disease (AD). They inhibit proteolytic activities of ?-secretase noncompetitively by unknown mechanisms. Here, we used cortical neuronal cultures expressing endogenous levels of enzymes and substrates to study the effects of GSIs on the structure and function of ?-secretase. We show that GSIs stabilize the interactions between the C-terminal fragment of presenilin (PS-CTF), the central component of the ?-secretase complex, and its partners the APH-1/nicastrin and PS1-NTF/PEN-2 subcomplexes. This stabilization dose-dependently correlates with inhibition of N-cadherin cleavage, a process limited by enzyme availability. In contrast, production of amyloid precursor protein (APP) intracellular domain (AICD) is insensitive to low concentrations of GSIs and is limited by substrate availability. Interestingly, APP is processed by both PS1- and PS2-containing ?-secretase complexes, while N-cadherin and ephrinB1 are processed only by PS1-containing complexes. Paradoxically, low concentrations of GSIs specifically increased the levels of A? without affecting its catabolism, indicating increased A? production. Our data reveal a mechanism of ?-secretase inhibition by GSIs and provide evidence that distinct ?-secretase complexes process specific substrates. Furthermore, our observations have implications for GSIs as therapeutics because processing of functionally important substrates may be inhibited at lower concentrations than A?.-Barthet, G., Shioi, J., Shao, Z., Ren, Y., Georgakopoulos, A., Robakis, N. K. Inhibitors of ?-secretase stabilize the complex and differentially affect processing of amyloid precursor protein and other substrates.

21107857
Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate regulates epidermal growth factor receptor activation.
Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate [PI(4,5)P(2) or PIP(2)] is a direct modulator of a diverse array of proteins in eukaryotic cells. The functional integrity of transmembrane proteins, such as ion channels and transporters, is critically dependent on specific interactions with PIP(2) and other phosphoinositides. Here, we report a novel requirement for PIP(2) in the activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Down-regulation of PIP(2) levels either via pharmacological inhibition of PI kinase activity, or via manipulation of the levels of the lipid kinase PIP5K1? and the lipid phosphatase synaptojanin, reduced EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation, whereas up-regulation of PIP(2) levels via overexpression of PIP5K1? had the opposite effect. A cluster of positively charged residues in the juxtamembrane domain (basic JD) of EGFR is likely to mediate binding of EGFR to PIP(2) and PIP(2)-dependent regulation of EGFR activation. A peptide mimicking the EGFR juxtamembrane domain that was assayed by surface plasmon resonance displayed strong binding to PIP(2). Neutralization of positively charged amino acids abolished EGFR/PIP(2) interaction in the context of this peptide and down-regulated epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced EGFR auto-phosphorylation and EGF-induced EGFR signaling to ion channels in the context of the full-length receptor. These results suggest that EGFR activation and downstream signaling depend on interactions of EGFR with PIP(2) and point to the basic JD's critical involvement in these interactions. The addition of this very different class of membrane proteins to ion channels and transporters suggests that PIP(2) may serve as a general modulator of the activity of many diverse eukaryotic transmembrane proteins through their basic JDs.

19661068
Peptide EphB2/CTF2 generated by the gamma-secretase processing of EphB2 receptor promotes tyrosine phosphorylation and cell surface localization of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors.
Presenilin 1, a protein involved in the development of familial Alzheimer disease, is an important functional component of the gamma-secretase complex that processes many cell surface receptors including the EphB2 tyrosine kinase receptors (Litterst, C., Georgakopoulos, A., Shioi, J., Ghersi, E., Wisniewski, T., Wang, R., Ludwig, A., and Robakis, N. K. (2007) J. Biol. Chem. 282, 16155-16163). Recent evidence reveals that cytosolic peptides produced by the combined metalloproteinase/gamma-secretase processing of cell surface proteins function in signal transduction and protein phosphorylation. Here we show that peptide EphB2/CTF2 released to the cytosol by the gamma-secretase processing of EphB2 receptor, has tyrosine kinase activity, and directly phosphorylates the N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) subunits in both cell lines and primary neuronal cultures. This phosphorylation occurs in the absence of Src kinases and is resistant to Src inhibitors revealing a novel pathway of NMDAR tyrosine phosphorylation independent of Src activity. EphB2/CTF2, but not a kinase-deficient mutant of EphB2/CTF2, promotes the cell surface expression of NMDAR. Because NMDAR plays central roles in synaptic plasticity and function, our results provide a potential link between the gamma-secretase function of presenilin 1 and learning and memory.

19008223
p120 catenin recruits cadherins to gamma-secretase and inhibits production of Abeta peptide.
The gamma-secretase complex cleaves many transmembrane proteins, including amyloid precursor protein, EphB and ErbB tyrosine kinase receptors, Notch1 receptors, and adhesion factors. Presenilin 1, the catalytic subunit of gamma-secretase, associates with the cadherin/catenin cell-cell adhesion/communication system and promotes cadherin processing (Georgakopoulos, A., et al. (1999) Mol. Cell 4, 893-902; Marambaud, P., et al. (2002) EMBO J. 21, 1948-1956), but the mechanism by which gamma-secretase and cadherins associate is unclear. Here we report that p120 catenin (p120ctn), a component of the cadherin-catenin complex, recruits gamma-secretase to cadherins, thus stimulating their processing while inhibiting production of Abeta peptide and the amyloid precursor protein intracellular domain. This function of p120ctn depends on both p120ctn-cadherin and p120ctn-presenilin 1 binding, indicating that p120ctn is the central factor that bridges gamma-secretase and cadherin-catenin complexes. Our data show that p120ctn is a unique positive regulator of the gamma-secretase processing of cadherins and a negative regulator of the amyloid precursor protein processing. Furthermore, our data suggest that specific members of the gamma-secretase complex may be used to recruit different substrates and that distinct PS1 sequences are required for processing of APP and cadherins.

18184791
Wild-type but not FAD mutant presenilin-1 prevents neuronal degeneration by promoting phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase neuroprotective signaling.
The role of presenilin-1 (PS1) in neuronal phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling was investigated in primary neuronal cultures from wild-type (WT) and PS1 null (PS1-/-) embryonic mouse brains. Here we show that in PS1-/- cultures, the onset of neuronal maturation coincides with a decrease in the PI3K-dependent phosphorylation-activation of Akt and phosphorylation-inactivation of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3). Mature PS1-/- neurons show increased activation of apoptotic caspase-3 and progressive degeneration preceded by dendritic retraction. Expression of exogenous WT PS1 or constitutively active Akt in PS1-/- neurons stimulates PI3K signaling and suppresses both caspase-3 activity and dendrite retraction. The survival effects of PS1 are sensitive to inhibitors of PI3K kinase but insensitive to gamma-secretase inhibitors. Familial Alzheimer disease (FAD) mutations suppress the ability of PS1 to promote PI3K/AKT signaling, prevent phosphorylation/inactivation of GSK-3 and promote activation of caspase-3. These mutation effects are reversed upon coexpression of constitutively active Akt. Together, our data indicate that the neuroprotective role of PS1 depends on its ability to activate the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway and that PS1 FAD mutations increase GSK-3 activity and promote neuronal apoptosis by inhibiting the function of PS1 in this pathway. These observations suggest that stimulation of PI3K/Akt signaling may be beneficial to FAD patients.

17428795
Ligand binding and calcium influx induce distinct ectodomain/gamma-secretase-processing pathways of EphB2 receptor.
Binding of EphB receptors to ephrinB ligands on the surface of adjacent cells initiates signaling cascades that regulate angiogenesis, axonal guidance, and neuronal plasticity. These functions require processing of EphB receptors and removal of EphB-ephrinB complexes from the cell surface, but the mechanisms involved are poorly understood. Here we show that the ectodomain of EphB2 receptor is released to extracellular space following cleavage after EphB2 residue 543. The remaining membrane-associated fragment is cleaved by the presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase activity after EphB2 residue 569 releasing an intracellular peptide that contains the cytoplasmic domain of EphB2. This cleavage is inhibited by presenilin 1 familial Alzheimer disease mutations. Processing of EphB2 receptor depends on specific treatments: ephrinB ligand-induced processing requires endocytosis, and the ectodomain cleavage is sensitive to peptide inhibitor N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Leu-leucinal but insensitive to metalloproteinase inhibitor GM6001. The ligand-induced processing takes place in endosomes and involves the rapid degradation of the extracellular EphB2. EphrinB ligand stimulates ubiquitination of EphB2 receptor. Calcium influx- and N-methyl-d-aspartic acid-induced processing of EphB2 is inhibited by GM6001 and ADAM10 inhibitors but not by N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Leu-leucinal. This processing requires no endocytosis and promotes rapid shedding of extracellular EphB2, indicating that it takes place at the plasma membrane. Our data identify novel cleavages and modifications of EphB2 receptor and indicate that specific conditions determine the proteolytic systems and subcellular sites involved in the processing of this receptor.

17254019
FAD mutants unable to increase neurotoxic Abeta 42 suggest that mutation effects on neurodegeneration may be independent of effects on Abeta.
Strong support for a primary causative role of the Abeta peptides in the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD) neurodegeneration derives from reports that presenilin familial AD (FAD) mutants alter amyloid precursor protein processing, thus increasing production of neurotoxic Abeta 1-42 (Abeta 42). This effect of FAD mutants is also reflected in an increased ratio of peptides Abeta 42 over Abeta 1-40 (Abeta 40). In the present study, we show that several presenilin 1 FAD mutants failed to increase production of Abeta 42 or the Abeta 42/40 ratio. Our data suggest that the mechanism by which FAD mutations promote neurodegeneration and AD may be independent of their effects on Abeta production.

