21442400
Utility of Doppler tissue imaging-derived indices in identifying subclinical systolic ventricular dysfunction in children with restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) is characterized by irreversible diastolic dysfunction with preserved systolic function. The aim of this study was to investigate the presence of impaired ventricular contractility even in the presence of normal ejection fraction (EF) in children with RCM. Longitudinal Doppler tissue velocities were obtained from apical 4-chamber view at three locations-the left-ventricular (LV) lateral wall, the septum, and the right ventricle-in 8 children age 3-17 years old with RCM who had LV EF >55%. Peak systolic velocity (S'), acceleration during isovolumic contraction (IVA), and myocardial performance index (MPI) were measured. Data from the RCM group were compared with those from 24 age- and sex-matched controls. Both S' and IVA were markedly lower at the septum (S' 6.2 ± 1.7 vs. 9.2 ± 1.6, P < 0.001; IVA 1.8 ± 0.5 vs. 3.9 ± 1.5, P < 0.001). MPI, a measure of both diastolic and systolic function, was statistically significantly greater in the RCM group at all 3 locations (P < 0.005). S' and IVA identify global subclinical systolic dysfunction in RCM with normal EF. These findings suggest that pre-ejection abnormality and subclinical systolic dysfunction coexist with diastolic dysfunction in children with RCM.

19830091
Resolution of cor pulmonale after medical management in a patient with cblC-type methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria: a case report.
We describe a 3-year-old Hispanic male with cblC-type methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria who presented to the emergency department with progressive tachypnea, vomiting, and edema secondary to pulmonary embolism and cor pulmonale. With aggressive medical management, there was complete resolution of right heart failure and pulmonary hypertension after 3 months. Pulmonary embolism is rare in the pediatric population. Children with cblC-type methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria may be at increased risk for thrombus formation and pulmonary embolism due to chronic hyperhomocystinemia, a risk factor for thrombus formation in the adult population. Aspirin therapy may be indicated in children with inborn errors of metabolism that predispose to hyperhomocystinemia.

19767224
High prevalence of structural heart disease in children with cblC-type methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria.
To characterize the frequency and nature of cardiovascular defects in patients with CblC-type methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria (cblC), an inborn error of cobalamin (vitamin B12) metabolism resulting in accumulation of methylmalonic acid and homocysteine. A retrospective observational study was conducted investigating 10 patients with cblC ranging in age from 2 weeks to 24 years (mean 4.4 years +/- 7.5 years, median 0.6 years). All patients underwent a complete 2-D echocardiogram including quantitative assessment of left ventricular systolic function. Structural heart defects were detected in 50% of patients with cblC. Heart defects included left ventricular (LV) non-compaction (3), secundum atrial septal defect (2), muscular ventricular septal defect (1), dysplastic pulmonary valve without pulmonary stenosis (1) and mitral valve prolapse with mild mitral regurgitation (1). One patient had resolved cor pulmonale and right heart failure secondary to pulmonary embolism. All patients had quantitatively normal LV systolic function. Diverse and clinically significant structural heart defects appear to be highly prevalent in cblC, perhaps due to abnormal DNA and histone methylation during embryogenesis. The specific cardiac defects detected in our cohort were variable, and studies with a larger number of patients are needed to establish which forms are most common. Routine and periodic cardiovascular evaluation may be indicated in patients with cblC.

19447648
Multisite near-infrared spectroscopy predicts elevated blood lactate level in children after cardiac surgery.
To determine if a relationship exists between regional oxyhemoglobin saturation (rSO(2)) measured at various body locations by near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) and blood lactate level in children after cardiac surgery. A prospective, observational study. A pediatric cardiac intensive care unit in a university hospital. Twenty-three children undergoing repair of congenital heart disease. Patients with single-ventricle physiology and/or residual intracardiac shunts were excluded. None. Cerebral, splanchnic, renal, and muscle rSO(2) values were recorded every 30 seconds via NIRS for 24 hours postoperatively. Blood lactate levels measured minimally at 0, 2, 4, 6 and 24 hours postoperatively were correlated with rSO(2) values derived by averaging all values recorded during the 60 minutes preceding the blood draw. Twenty-three patients were enrolled with 163 lactate measurements and more than 39,000 rSO(2) observations analyzed. Cerebral rSO(2) had the strongest inverse correlation with lactate level followed by splanchnic, renal, and muscle rSO(2) (r = -0.74, p < 0.0001, r = -0.61, p < 0.0001, r = -0.57, p < 0.0001, and r = -0.48, p < 0.0001, respectively). The correlation improved by averaging the cerebral and renal rSO(2) values (r = -0.82, p < 0.0001). Furthermore, an averaged cerebral and renal rSO(2) value <or=65% predicted a lactate level >or=3.0 mmol/L with a sensitivity of 95% and a specificity of 83% (p = 0.0001). Averaged cerebral and renal rSO(2) less than 65% as measured by NIRS predicts hyperlactatemia (>3 mmol/L) in acyanotic children after congenital heart surgery. Hence, this noninvasive, continuous monitoring tool may facilitate the identification of global hypoperfusion caused by low cardiac output syndrome in this population.

19121449
Relation of coarctation of the aorta to the occurrence of ascending aortic dilation in children and young adults with bicuspid aortic valves.
Children with bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) have aortic dilation that is present and progressive from birth irrespective of the functional state of the valve. There are no published data comparing aortic dilation in children with BAV with and without aortic coarctation (CoA). The objectives of this study were to (1) compare differences in aortic dimensions and rates of dilation between children with isolated BAV with those of children with BAV and CoA and (2) identify risk factors for the development of aortic dilation. Patients with BAV with CoA (group A) and without CoA (group B) were identified from our echocardiographic database (1993 to 2006). Aortic measurements at 4 levels were obtained, and z scores were compared. Criteria for exclusion were severe aortic regurgitation/stenosis, previous aortic valvuloplasty, complex left-sided cardiac disease, ventricular septal defects, and Turner, Noonan, Williams, and Marfan syndromes. There were 600 echocardiograms in 247 patients. Group A had 192 echocardiograms in 53 patients (median age 11.3 years; range 0 to 30; median follow-up 7 years), and group B had 382 in 194 patients (median age 8.7 years; range 0 to 29; median follow-up 4 years). Group B had significantly greater ascending aorta dimensions (p<0.05) and significantly faster rates of aortic dilation (p<0.0001). The ascending aorta in patients with BAV and CoA did not dilate to the same degree as in patients with isolated BAV. In conclusion, valve morphologic characteristics and function and age at CoA repair had none to minimal impact on aortic dimensions.

18603059
Extubation in the operating room after congenital heart surgery in children.
Early extubation in the operating room after surgery for congenital heart disease has been described; however, postoperative mechanical ventilation in the intensive care unit remains common practice in many institutions. The goal of this study was to identify perioperative factors associated with not proceeding with planned operating room extubation. We performed a retrospective chart review of 224 patients (aged 1 month to 18 years, median 20 months) undergoing surgery for congenital heart defects requiring cardiopulmonary bypass. Patients mechanically ventilated preoperatively were excluded. A stepwise logistic regression model was used to test for the independent influence of various perioperative factors on extubation in the operating room. Overall, 79% of patients were extubated in the operating room. Younger age and longer cardiopulmonary bypass time were the strongest predictors for not extubating. Each step down to a younger age group (<2, 2-4, 4-6, 6-12, >12 months) reduced the chance of extubation in the operating room by 56%. Cardiopulmonary bypass time for more than 150 minutes was associated with an 11.8-fold increased risk of not being extubated. Male gender and high inotrope requirement after cardiopulmonary bypass were also significantly associated with fewer children being extubated. Extubation in the operating room after surgery for congenital heart disease was successful in the majority of patients. The strongest independent risk factors for failure of this strategy included younger age and longer cardiopulmonary bypass time.

18489945
Echocardiographic evaluation and surgical implications of common atrioventricular canal defects with absent or diminutive ostium primum defect.
Common atrioventricular canal defects without ostium primum defects are rare, and their accurate identification has important surgical implications. Retrospective echocardiographic database review identified subjects with common atrioventricular canal defects with absent or diminutive ostium primum defects. Surgical reports and initial and postoperative echocardiograms were reviewed to identify the imaging planes necessary to characterize this anomaly and the surgical challenges imposed by the diagnosis. Fourteen subjects were identified (93% with trisomy 21) with either absent (n = 6) or diminutive (n = 8) ostium primum defects. Malaligned conal septum was present in 50% of subjects with absent primum defects and 12.5% of subjects with diminutive defects. Immediate or long-term complications of the 11 postoperative patients included atrioventricular block (n = 4) and moderate (n = 5) or severe (n = 3) mitral regurgitation. In conclusion, echocardiographic features for the identification of common atrioventricular canal defects with absent or diminutive ostium primum defects are described. Surgical challenges involve attaining adequate exposure of the mitral component and achieving mitral valve competence.

18387980
Near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) in children.
Near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) is a noninvasive method for the in vivo monitoring of tissue oxygenation. Originally used predominantly to assess cerebral oxygenation, NIRS has gained widespread popularity in many clinical settings in all age groups. Changes in regional tissue oxygenation as detected by NIRS may reflect the delicate balance between oxygen delivery and consumption in more than one organ system. However, more studies are required to establish the ability of NIRS monitoring to improve patient outcome. This review provides a comprehensive description of NIRS in children.

17786376
Congenital muscular ventricular septal aneurysm: report of four cases and review of the literature.
We describe a rare association between congenital muscular ventricular septal aneurysm (MuVSA) and right heart lesions, with emphasis on echocardiographic diagnosis, clinical presentation, and outcome. Our four cases of MuVSA occurred in combination with either pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum (PAIVS; three patients) or absent pulmonary valve syndrome with severe tricuspid stenosis (one patient). MuVSA and right heart lesions were detected in utero in three patients. The three patients with PAIVS and MuVSA survived with no significant morbidity from the septal aneurysm at 3- to 5-year follow-up. The presence of MuVSA did not negatively affect the outcome of our patients.

17610970
Echocardiographic diagnosis of clinically silent congenital coronary artery anomalies.
The incidence of congenital coronary anomalies is mainly derived from autopsy series and pre-participation exams in athletes. Limited data exist regarding the spectrum of coronary anomalies that can be detected in asymptomatic patients. We sought to describe echocardiographically detected congenital coronary artery anomalies in asymptomatic children after implementing a screening protocol mandating identification of coronary artery origin and proximal course in all initial studies. Our database was searched from 1/1/1993 to 3/31/2006 and all echocardiograms coded for coronary anomalies were identified. Clinically "silent" congenital coronary anomalies were culled from that group. Of the 168 "silent" coronary anomalies detected, 111 were anomalies of aortic origin, including 59 patients with "high coronary takeoff" and 30 patients with "wrong sinus" origin of either the left or right coronary artery. Small coronary fistulas were seen in 57. Associated congenital heart defects were found in 53% of individuals with coronary anomalies. This study comprises the largest group of echocardiographically detected, "silent" but potentially clinically significant, congenital coronary anomalies in children. Prospective echocardiographic diagnosis of "high coronary takeoff", a risk factor for injury during cardio-pulmonary bypass, and asymptomatic intraseptal coronary stenosis are described for the first time.

17564653
Continuous positive airway pressure and lung separation during cardiopulmonary bypass to facilitate congenital heart surgery via the right thorax in children.
We describe a fast track anesthesia technique that facilitates congenital heart surgery via right axillary thoracotomy in children. Continuous positive airway pressure on the dependent lung, before and during cardiopulmonary bypass, approximates the heart towards the chest wall incision, and significantly improves the surgeon's access to the heart.

