21358635
Generation of anterior foregut endoderm from human embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells.
Directed differentiation of human embryonic stem (hES) cells and human induced pluripotent stem (hiPS) cells captures in vivo developmental pathways for specifying lineages in vitro, thus avoiding perturbation of the genome with exogenous genetic material. Thus far, derivation of endodermal lineages has focused predominantly on hepatocytes, pancreatic endocrine cells and intestinal cells. The ability to differentiate pluripotent cells into anterior foregut endoderm (AFE) derivatives would expand their utility for cell therapy and basic research to tissues important for immune function, such as the thymus; for metabolism, such as thyroid and parathyroid; and for respiratory function, such as trachea and lung. We find that dual inhibition of transforming growth factor (TGF)-? and bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signaling after specification of definitive endoderm from pluripotent cells results in a highly enriched AFE population that is competent to be patterned along dorsoventral and anteroposterior axes. These findings provide an approach for the generation of AFE derivatives.

20535210
Patient-specific induced pluripotent stem-cell-derived models of LEOPARD syndrome.
The generation of reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from patients with defined genetic disorders holds the promise of increased understanding of the aetiologies of complex diseases and may also facilitate the development of novel therapeutic interventions. We have generated iPSCs from patients with LEOPARD syndrome (an acronym formed from its main features; that is, lentigines, electrocardiographic abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary valve stenosis, abnormal genitalia, retardation of growth and deafness), an autosomal-dominant developmental disorder belonging to a relatively prevalent class of inherited RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase signalling diseases, which also includes Noonan syndrome, with pleomorphic effects on several tissues and organ systems. The patient-derived cells have a mutation in the PTPN11 gene, which encodes the SHP2 phosphatase. The iPSCs have been extensively characterized and produce multiple differentiated cell lineages. A major disease phenotype in patients with LEOPARD syndrome is hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. We show that in vitro-derived cardiomyocytes from LEOPARD syndrome iPSCs are larger, have a higher degree of sarcomeric organization and preferential localization of NFATC4 in the nucleus when compared with cardiomyocytes derived from human embryonic stem cells or wild-type iPSCs derived from a healthy brother of one of the LEOPARD syndrome patients. These features correlate with a potential hypertrophic state. We also provide molecular insights into signalling pathways that may promote the disease phenotype.

17148580
Development of the hemangioblast defines the onset of hematopoiesis in human ES cell differentiation cultures.
The onset of hematopoiesis in the mouse embryo and in the embryonic stem (ES) cell differentiation model is defined by the emergence of the hemangioblast, a progenitor with both hematopoietic and vascular potential. While there is evidence for the existence of a hemangioblast in the mouse, it is unclear if this progenitor develops during the establishment of the human hematopoietic system. In this report, we have mapped hematopoietic development in human ES cell (hESC) differentiation cultures and demonstrated that a comparable hemangioblast population exists. The human hemangioblasts were identified by their capacity to generate blast colonies that display both hematopoietic and vascular potential. These colony-forming cells express the receptor tyrosine kinase KDR (VEGF receptor 2) and represent a transient population that develops in BMP-4-stimulated embryoid bodies (EBs) between 72 and 96 hours of differentiation, prior to the onset of the primitive erythroid program. Two distinct types of hemangioblasts were identified, those that give rise to primitive erythroid cells, macrophages, and endothelial cells and those that generate only the primitive erythroid population and endothelial cells. These findings demonstrate for the first time the existence of the human hemangioblast and in doing so identify the earliest stage of hematopoietic commitment.

