21605533
Combined robotic radical prostatectomy and robotic radical nephrectomy.
A 60-year-old man with prostatic adenocarcinoma and an enhancing left-sided renal mass underwent successful combined robotic radical prostatectomy and robotic radical nephrectomy. We describe the initial report of this combined robotic procedure to remove 2 synchronous urological malignancies and describe our technique. An analysis was conducted of the operating room and postanesthesia care unit charges of this procedure compared with the 2 procedures performed independently.

21333205
Robotic prostatectomy in a patient with hemophilia.
Given the rich blood supply to the prostate and the adjacent Santorini's plexus, radical prostatectomy is associated with significant blood loss even in patients with normal coagulation profiles. In patients with hemophilia, any surgical procedure carries a risk of significant hemorrhage due to a deficiency of factors in the coagulation cascade. For these reasons, hemophiliac patients have often been encouraged to undergo radiation or other forms of nonsurgical treatment for clinically localized prostate cancer. However, the decreased blood loss associated with a laparoscopic/robotic approach and appropriate perioperative factor transfusions can minimize the risk of hemorrhage during robotic-assisted radical prostatectomy. We present the case report of a successful robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy in a patient with mild hemophilia A, with an estimated blood loss for the procedure of 20 mL. We will focus on the perioperative management of the patient's factor replacement.

20546878
Complications associated with patient positioning in urologic surgery.
The impact of patient positioning can be profound. Urological surgeons must often exercise strategic positioning in order to access retroperitoneal and pelvic organs. However, the potential for position-related morbidity, particularly peripheral neuropraxia and compartment syndrome can be substantial. The purpose of the following review is to summarize the current literature on positioning-related concerns as they pertain to the practicing urologist. To our knowledge, this is the first such review of its kind in the urological literature.

20529522
Intraoperative management of robotic-assisted versus open radical prostatectomy.
Minimally invasive surgery has been shown to decrease postoperative morbidity and length of stay for several laparoscopic procedures. We sought to retrospectively compare intraoperative surgical and anesthetic parameters, post-anesthetic care unit (PACU) length of stay, and hospital length of stay of patients who underwent robotic-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy (RAP) versus open radical retropubic prostatectomy (ORP). A retrospective investigation was performed using a urologic surgery database and an anesthesia electronic medical record. We queried information regarding 106 ORP patients from 2002 through 2007 and 575 RAP patients from 2007 through 2008. Patients in the RAP group compared with ORP patients had reductions in surgical time, anesthesia time, estimated blood loss, crystalloid administration, and PACU and hospital length of stays. Compared with ORP procedures, intraoperative respiratory rates, peak inspiratory pressures, and arterial pressures in RAP procedures were higher; tidal volumes and heart rates were decreased; but end-tidal carbon dioxide concentrations were not different. In the RAP group, intraoperative complications included severe bradycardia, corneal abrasions, and 2 patients required reintubation. Surgically, no rectal perforations were noted, and no operative mortalities occurred. Our data demonstrate the safety and efficacy of RAP due to a combination of surgical and anesthetic factors.

