21375368
Differential gene expression in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Abstract Our objective was to analyze gene expression pattern in muscles from patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) compared to controls. Biopsied skeletal muscles from three ALS, three MMN and three control subjects had total RNA extracted and subjected to genome-wide gene expression analysis using Affymetrix GeneChip Exon 1.0 ST array. The most significant expression pattern differences were confirmed with RT-PCR in four additional ALS patients. Results showed that over 3000 genes were identified across the groups using q < 10%. Among 50 genes that were overexpressed only in the ALS group were: leucine-rich repeat kinase-2, follistatin, collagen type XIX alpha-1, ceramide kinase-like, sestrin-3 and CXorf64. No genes were significantly overexpressed in MMN alone. Underexpressed genes only in ALS included actinin ?3, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase-2 and homeobox C10; whereas only in MMN: hemoglobin A1 and CXorf64. Ankyrin repeat domain-1 was overexpressed in both groups. Underexpressed genes in both groups included myosin light chain kinase-2, enolase-3 and 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase-1. Validation analysis using RT-PCR confirmed the data for leucine-rich repeat kinase-2, follistatin, collagen type XIX alpha-1, ceramide kinase-like, sestrin-3 and CXorf64. In conclusion, there is differential tissue-specific gene expression in patients with ALS relative to MMN and controls. Further studies are necessary to evaluate the identified genes in larger patient groups and different tissues.

18621890
Successful repair of popliteal artery pseudoaneurysm after tibial lengthening osteotomy in a 7-year-old boy.
Popliteal artery injury is a known but rare complication of elective orthopedic procedures. This case report describes the diagnosis and treatment of a popliteal artery pseudoaneurysm and arteriovenous fistula after a tibial lengthening osteotomy in a 7-year-old boy.

17479449
Thoracoacromial vessels as the recipients for supercharged muscle-sparing transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous flaps.
We describe the use of the thoracoacromial vessels in microvascular transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous (TRAM) flap breast reconstruction in two cases. The thoracoacromial vessels, used as recipient vessels for supercharged TRAM flaps, offer several advantages. Their location high on the anterior chest wall is ideal for anastomotic repair under the microscope and lends itself to medial placement of the TRAM flap. The thoracoacromial vessels are relatively easily exposed and are suited for microsurgical anastomosis by virtue of their caliber and topology. The dissection of these vessels takes less time than either the internal mammary or thoracodorsal systems. The location of the thoracoacromial vessels allows the flexibility of using either the ipsilateral pedicle for supercharging (deep inferior epigastric vessels on the same side as the superior epigastric pedicle) or contralateral supercharging (deep inferior epigastric vessels on the opposite side of the superior epigastric pedicle). The thoracoacromial vessels make an excellent alternative recipient for microvascular anastomosis in breast reconstruction.

