20629103
Characterization of immunologic defects in patients with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) with intestinal disease.
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is a heterogeneous disorder commonly presenting with recurrent sinopulmonary infections. In all, 6%-10% of CVID patients develop an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)-like disorder, making these patients a unique population to investigate immune-mediated gastrointestinal disease. This study examined whether defects in peripheral and/or intestinal lymphocytes are involved in disruption of the intestinal mucosa in CVID patients with inflammatory intestinal diseases. Peripheral blood (PB) T cells from healthy controls; CD or UC; CVID; and CVID with IBD were stimulated for 48 hours with anti-CD3+CD28 or phytohemagglutinin (PHA) + phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA); cytokine production was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Cytokine expression from unstimulated lamina propria lymphocytes (LPLs) was compared by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Immunohistochemistry of mucosal biopsies was performed. Cell populations were quantified by morphometry. CVID/IBD PB T cells stimulated by anti-CD3+CD28 had trends for reduced IL-2, IL-10, IFN-?, and TNF-? compared to controls. These differences were not apparent following stimulation by PHA/PMA. Constitutive production of inflammatory cytokines by LPLs was not detected. Histologically, CVID patients had reduced/absent plasma cells with reductions in intestinal IgM and IgA. CVID patients with and without gastrointestinal (GI) disease exhibited increased CD3+ T cells, specifically CD8+, in the colon compared to normal and IBD controls, suggesting immune dysregulation. Intestinal inflammation in CVID patients with IBD-like disease may be mediated by abnormal cytokine production through a T-cell receptor-mediated pathway. However, the variability observed suggests multiple, rather than singular, mechanisms are involved. Histologic features such as reduced intestinal plasma cells and lack of intestinal immunoglobulins may be useful markers in diagnosing CVID in a patient with GI disease refractory to conventional therapies.

20377107
Innate and adaptive immunosenescence.
To review the effect of increasing age on the immune system and some of its clinical implications. MEDLINE and PubMed searches were performed cross-referencing the keywords immunosenescence, aging, and immunity. Articles were reviewed for additional citations. Articles were reviewed and selected based on relevance to subject matter. The study of immunosenescence is complex and not completely understood. Aging affects both the innate and adaptive arms of the immune response. With increased age, there may be a decrease in phagocytosis, alteration of cellular migration, changes in cell populations and numbers, and a decreased ability to produce specific antibodies. Clinically, these changes potentially increase morbidity and mortality in elderly individuals through an increased rate of infections, malignancy, and autoimmunity. The process of aging is accompanied by diverse changes in immunity. Several therapeutic approaches are under investigation, including cytokine therapy, hormonal replacement, antioxidant supplementation, and caloric restriction, to attenuate or potentially reverse immunosenescence.

19671377
Autoimmunity in common variable immunodeficiency.
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is the most common clinically significant primary immune defect. Although the hallmark of CVID is hypogammaglobulinemia, the intrinsic dysregulation of the immune system leads to defective T-cell activation and proliferation, as well as dendritic cell and cytokine defects. Although 70% to 80% of patients have had recurrent sinopulmonary infections, autoimmunity and inflammatory complications are also common. The most common autoimmune conditions are immune thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic anemia, but other autoimmune complications arise, including rheumatoid arthritis, pernicious anemia, primary biliary cirrhosis, thyroiditis, sicca syndrome, systemic lupus, and inflammatory bowel disease. Treatment of autoimmunity includes high-dose immunoglobulins, corticosteroids, selected immunosuppressants, and other immune modulators. This review focuses on autoimmune conditions associated with CVID, potential mechanisms of immune dysregulation, and therapeutic strategies.

19665769
Pathogenesis and treatment of gastrointestinal disease in antibody deficiency syndromes.
Primary humoral immune deficiencies are characterized by limited antibody responses secondary to either impaired B-lymphocyte development or B-cell responses to T-lymphocyte signals. Given that the gastrointestinal tract is the largest lymphoid organ in the body, it is not surprising that intestinal diseases are common in immunodeficiency. These gastrointestinal diseases can be classified into one of 4 groups, infection, malignancy, inflammatory, and autoimmune, and can mimic other known disease processes, such as inflammatory bowel disease and celiac sprue. The exact pathogenesis of these gastrointestinal disorders in the setting of systemic immunodeficiency is still under investigation. However, studies suggest that defects in antibody deficiency alone do not result in gastrointestinal disease but rather that defects in cellular immunity are also involved. Treatment is difficult given an already immunocompromised state, and often therapy with immunomodulators is required for more severe processes.

19637385
Gastrointestinal manifestations in primary immune disorders.
The gastrointestinal tract is the largest lymphoid organ in the body containing T and B lymphocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells. Despite the fact that these cells are constantly confronted with antigen primarily in the form of food and bacteria, immune responses in the gut are tightly regulated to maintain homeostasis. Without this balance of active immunity and tolerance, mucosal inflammation may ensue, and manifest as Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, pernicious anemia, or celiac sprue. Therefore, it is not unreasonable that inflammatory diseases of the gut are commonly encountered in patients with primary immune deficiencies. The exact pathogenesis of gastrointestinal diseases in the setting of primary immunodeficiency remains unknown, however, both humoral and cell-mediated immunity appear to play a role in preventing intestinal inflammation. Patients presenting with atypical gastrointestinal disease and/or failure to respond to conventional therapy should be evaluated for an underlying primary immune disorder in order to initiate appropriate treatment, such as immunoglobulin or in more severe cases bone marrow transplantation, to prevent long term complications.

17910333
Assessment and clinical interpretation of reduced IgG values.


17304889
Thymoma and immunodeficiency (Good syndrome): a report of 2 unusual cases and review of the literature.
Good syndrome is a rare cause of combined B- and T-cell immunodeficiency that occurs in association with a thymoma. Patients affected with Good syndrome have increased susceptibility to bacterial, fungal, viral, and opportunistic infections. To describe 2 unusual cases of infections in patients with Good syndrome and review the literature. Case 1 describes a 51-year-old woman with Good syndrome who presented with a 10-day history of diarrhea, nausea, and fevers. During her hospitalization she became pancytopenic and underwent a bone marrow biopsy and evaluation of her peripheral blood smear. Case 2 describes an 89-year-old man with Good syndrome who presented with a nonhealing leg ulcer, which underwent biopsy. A literature search through MEDLINE was performed. Keywords included Good syndrome, thymoma, hypogammaglobulinemia, immunodeficiency, and infection. The peripheral blood smear in patient 1 showed ring-formed parasites in red blood cells suggestive of babesiosis. She began treatment with azithromycin, atovaquone, and doxycycline and recovered completely. Patient 2 underwent a biopsy of the foot. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for human herpesvirus 8 consistent with Kaposi sarcoma. The concomitant occurrence of immunodeficiency and thymoma is known as Good syndrome. In contrast to other humoral immune defects, patients with this syndrome can develop opportunistic infections, and the prognosis appears less favorable compared with X-linked agammaglobulinemia or common variable immunodeficiency. Immunological investigations, including T-cell subsets, B cells, and quantitative immunoglobulins, should be considered part of the routine diagnostic evaluation in patients with a thymoma and recurrent infections.

17291293
Epithelia: lymphocyte interactions in the gut.
The mucosal immune system is governed by a unique set of rules and regulations. The local microenvironment dictates the necessity for these differences. The intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) sits at the interface between an antigen-rich lumen and a lymphocyte-rich lamina propria (LP). The cross talk that occurs between these compartments serves to maintain intestinal homeostasis. IECs have the capacity to talk to LP lymphocytes, activating populations of unique regulatory T cells. These cells have the capacity to talk back to the epithelium, influencing epithelial cell growth and differentiation. This review looks at this cross talk and places it in the context of mucosal immunoregulation.

