21574890
Preserved Emotional Modulation of Motor Response Time Despite Psychomotor Slowing in Young-Old Adults.
ABSTRACT Whereas aging affects cognitive and psychomotor processes negatively, the impact of aging on emotional processing is less clear. Using an "old-new" binary decision task, we ascertained the modulation of response latencies after presentation of neutral and emotional pictures in "young" (M = 27.1 years) and "young-old" adults with a mean age below 60 (M = 57.7 years). Stimuli varied on valence (pleasant, neutral, and unpleasant) and arousal (high and low) dimensions. Young-old adults had significantly longer reaction times. However, young and young-old adults showed the exact same pattern of response time modulation by emotional stimuli: Response latencies were longer for high-arousal than for low-arousal pictures and longer for negative than for positive or neutral stimuli. This result suggests that the specific effects of implicitly processed emotional valence and arousal information on behavioral response time are preserved in young-old adults despite significant age-related psychomotor decline.

21519950
Emotional processing affects movement speed.
Emotions can affect various aspects of human behavior. The impact of emotions on behavior is traditionally thought to occur at central, cognitive and motor preparation stages. Using EMG to measure the effects of emotion on movement, we found that emotional stimuli differing in valence and arousal elicited highly specific effects on peripheral movement time. This result has conceptual implications for the emotion-motion link and potentially practical implications for neurorehabilitation and professional environments where fast motor reactions are critical.

18992700
The effects of withdrawal of dopaminergic medication in nursing home patients with advanced parkinsonism.
To determine the effects of dopaminergic medication withdrawal in an elderly, demented and minimally ambulatory nursing home population with parkinsonism in New York City. In our double-blind, randomized study, 11 patients (7 males, 4 females) were randomized into 2 groups: one group underwent levodopa medication withdrawal (experimental group) and the other group continued on their levodopa (control group). Patients were evaluated weekly over the course of a month with a neurologic examination and a series of assessment tools, including the motor UPDRS (Unified Parkinson's disease rating scale), Hoehn and Yahr staging scale, the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Nursing Assistant Behavioral Detection Form. An academic nursing home in New York City. The patients had a mean age of 82.00 +/- 10.14 years, with a mean MMSE score of 9.50 +/- 6.60 out of 30.00 maximum. The control and experimental groups did not differ significantly with respect to age (P = .52), dementia severity (P = .35), nor severity of PD symptoms as measured by the UPDRS (P = .22) and Hoehn and Yahr staging (P = .65). Overall, no significant changes were observed between the control and experimental groups in cognitive, behavioral, and motor function across each time period. Of interest, 2 of the drug withdrawal patients showed modest improvements in cognitive function as measured by the MMSE. Our findings suggest that in patients with advanced parkinsonism and dementia, dopaminergic medication withdrawal may be a feasible way to reduce polypharmacy and potential medication-related side effects, with a minimal risk of worsening motor deterioration. Therefore, our findings may have potential implications for a medication intervention that could prevent potential deleterious side effects and improve health-related quality of life in this frail population.

17597235
Prevalence of movement disorders in an elderly nursing home population.
We studied the prevalence of movement disorders in a large nursing home population (397 patients, mean age 86 years) in New York City. Patients were first evaluated by specially trained research coordinators and final clinical diagnoses were confirmed by a movement disorder specialist. A movement disorder was identified in 21% of patients (83/397). The most frequent movement disorders were essential tremor (ET) (8.8%) and parkinsonism (7.1%). Only half of those admitted with a diagnosis of parkinsonism were confirmed in their diagnosis by the movement disorder specialists. Three percent of patients exhibited drug-induced tremor, 1.3% had dystonia, 0.5% had myoclonus and 0.3% had generalized dyskinesias. Overall, our findings underline the high frequency of movement disorders in a nursing home population. The discrepancy between our findings and the prevalence rates for parkinsonism reported on the initial transfer diagnosis emphasizes the difficulty of accurate diagnosis of movement disorders and in particular parkinsonism.

