21527639
Dislocation of ricin toxin A chains in human cells utilizes selective cellular factors.
Ricin is a potent A-B toxin that is transported from the cell surface to the cytosol where it inactivates ribosomes leading to cell death. Ricin enters cells via endocytosis where only a minute number of ricin molecules reach the ER (endoplasmic reticulum) lumen. Subsequently, the ricin A chain traverses the ER bilayer by a process referred to as dislocation or retrograde translocation to gain access to the cytosol. In order to study the molecular processes of ricin A chain dislocation, we have established for the first time a human cell system in which enzymatically attenuated ricin A chains (RTAE177D and RTA?) are expressed in the cell and directed to the ER. Using this human cell based system, ricin A chains were found to undergo a rapid dislocation event that was quite distinct than the dislocation of a canonical ER soluble misfolded protein, ?1-antitrypsinHKnull. Remarkably, ricin A chain dislocation occurred via a membrane integrated intermediate and utilized the ER protein SEL1L (suppressor of lin-12-like) for transport across the ER bilayer to inhibit protein synthesis. The data support a model that ricin A chain dislocation occurs via a novel strategy of utilizing the hydrophobic nature of the ER membrane and selective ER components to gain access to the cytosol.

20978345
The cytomegalovirus-encoded chemokine receptor US28 promotes intestinal neoplasia in transgenic mice.
US28 is a constitutively active chemokine receptor encoded by CMV (also referred to as human herpesvirus 5), a highly prevalent human virus that infects a broad spectrum of cells, including intestinal epithelial cells (IECs). To study the role of US28 in vivo, we created transgenic mice (VS28 mice) in which US28 expression was targeted to IECs. Expression of US28 was detected in all IECs of the small and large intestine, including in cells expressing leucine rich repeat containing GPCR5 (Lgr5), a marker gene of intestinal epithelial stem cells. US28 expression in IECs inhibited glycogen synthase 3? (GSK-3?) function, promoted accumulation of ?-catenin protein, and increased expression of Wnt target genes involved in the control of the cell proliferation. VS28 mice showed a hyperplastic intestinal epithelium and, strikingly, developed adenomas and adenocarcinomas by 40 weeks of age. When exposed to an inflammation-driven tumor model (azoxymethane/dextran sodium sulfate), VS28 mice developed a significantly higher tumor burden than control littermates. Transgenic coexpression of the US28 ligand CCL2 (an inflammatory chemokine) increased IEC proliferation as well as tumor burden, suggesting that the oncogenic activity of US28 can be modulated by inflammatory factors. Together, these results indicate that expression of US28 promotes development of intestinal dysplasia and cancer in transgenic mice and suggest that CMV infection may facilitate development of intestinal neoplasia in humans.

20430023
TRAM1 is involved in disposal of ER membrane degradation substrates.
ER quality control consists of monitoring protein folding and targeting misfolded proteins for proteasomal degradation. ER stress results in an unfolded protein response (UPR) that selectively upregulates proteins involved in protein degradation, ER expansion, and protein folding. Given the efficiency in which misfolded proteins are degraded, there likely exist cellular factors that enhance the export of proteins across the ER membrane. We have reported that translocating chain-associated membrane protein 1 (TRAM1), an ER-resident membrane protein, participates in HCMV US2- and US11-mediated dislocation of MHC class I heavy chains (Oresic, K., Ng, C.L., and Tortorella, D. 2009). Consistent with the hypothesis that TRAM1 is involved in the disposal of misfolded ER proteins, cells lacking TRAM1 experienced a heightened UPR upon acute ER stress, as evidenced by increased activation of unfolded protein response elements (UPRE) and elevated levels of NF-kappaB activity. We have also extended the involvement of TRAM1 in the selective degradation of misfolded ER membrane proteins Cln6(M241T) and US2, but not the soluble degradation substrate alpha(1)-antitrypsin null(HK). These degradation model systems support the paradigm that TRAM1 is a selective factor that can enhance the dislocation of ER membrane proteins.

19121997
TRAM1 participates in human cytomegalovirus US2- and US11-mediated dislocation of an endoplasmic reticulum membrane glycoprotein.
The human cytomegalovirus proteins US2 and US11 have co-opted endoplasmic reticulum (ER) quality control to facilitate the destruction of major histocompatibility complex class I heavy chains. The class I heavy chains are dislocated from the ER to the cytosol, where they are deglycosylated and subsequently degraded by the proteasome. We examined the role of TRAM1 (translocating chain-associated membrane protein-1) in the dislocation of class I molecules using US2- and US11-expressing cells. TRAM1 is an ER protein initially characterized for its role in processing nascent polypeptides. Co-immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that TRAM1 can complex with the wild type US2 and US11 proteins as well as deglycosylated and polyubiquitinated class I degradation intermediates. In studies using US2- and US11-TRAM1 knockdown cells, we observed an increase in levels of class I heavy chains. Strikingly, increased levels of glycosylated heavy chains were observed in TRAM1 knockdown cells when compared with control cells in a pulse-chase experiment. In fact, US11-mediated class I dislocation was more sensitive to the lack of TRAM1 than US2. These results provide further evidence that these viral proteins may utilize distinct complexes to facilitate class I dislocation. For example, US11-mediated class I heavy chain degradation requires Derlin-1 and SEL1L, whereas signal peptide peptidase is critical for US2-induced class I destabilization. In addition, TRAM1 can complex with the dislocation factors Derlin-1 and signal peptide peptidase. Collectively, the data support a model in which TRAM1 functions as a cofactor to promote efficient US2- and US11-dependent dislocation of major histocompatibility complex class I heavy chains.

19004944
Human cytomegalovirus-encoded immune modulators partner to downregulate major histocompatibility complex class I molecules.
Throughout the course of natural evolution with its host, the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) has developed a variety of strategies to avoid immune recognition and clearance. The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigen presentation pathway is a major target of the virus. HCMV encodes at least six gene products that modulate the processing of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident MHC class I molecules. Here, we show that two virus-encoded proteins, US2 and US3, coordinate their functions toward the common goal of attenuating class I protein surface expression. In cells stably expressing both US2 and US3, class I molecules were almost completely downregulated from the cell surface. In addition, pulse-chase analysis revealed that the proteasome-dependent turnover of class I molecules occurs more rapidly in cells expressing both US2 and US3 than either US2 or US3 alone. The ability of US3 to retain class I molecules in the ER produces a target-rich environment for US2 to mediate the destruction of class I heavy chains. In fact, expression of US3 enhanced the association between US2 and class I molecules, thus encouraging their dislocation and degradation. This immune evasion strategy ensures that viral antigens are not presented on the cell surface during the early phase of HCMV infection, a critical time of replication and viral proliferation.

18811591
Cln6 mutants associated with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis are degraded in a proteasome-dependent manner.
NCLs (neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses), a group of inherited neurodegenerative lysosomal storage diseases that predominantly affect children, are the result of autosomal recessive mutations within one of the nine cln genes. The wild-type cln gene products are composed of membrane and soluble proteins that localize to the lysosome or the ER (endoplasmic reticulum). However, the destiny of the Cln variants has not been fully characterized. To explore a possible link between ER quality control and processing of Cln mutants, we investigated the fate of two NCL-related Cln6 mutants found in patient samples (Cln6(G123D) and Cln6(M241T)) in neuronal-derived human cells. The point mutations are predicted to be in the putative transmembrane domains and most probably generate misfolded membrane proteins that are subjected to ER quality control. Consistent with this paradigm, both mutants underwent rapid proteasome-mediated degradation and complexed with components of the ER extraction apparatus, Derlin-1 and p97. In addition, knockdown of SEL1L [sel-1 suppressor of lin-12-like (Caenorhabditis elegans)], a member of an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex involved in ER protein extraction, rescued significant amounts of Cln6(G123D) and Cln6(M241T) polypeptides. The results implicate ER quality control in the instability of the Cln variants that probably contributes to the development of NCL.

18420789
Endoplasmic reticulum chaperones participate in human cytomegalovirus US2-mediated degradation of class I major histocompatibility complex molecules.
Inhibition of cell-surface expression of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules by human cytomegalovirus (HCMV, a beta-herpesvirus) promotes escape from recognition by CD8+ cytotoxic T cells. The HCMV US2 and US11 gene products induce class I downregulation during the early phase of HCMV infection by facilitating the degradation of class I heavy chains. The HCMV proteins promote the transport of the class I heavy chains across the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane into the cytosol by a process referred to as 'dislocation', which is then followed by proteasome degradation. This process has striking similarities to the degradation of misfolded ER proteins mediated by ER quality control. Even though the major steps of the dislocation reaction have been characterized, the cellular proteins, specifically the ER chaperones involved in targeting class I for dislocation, have not been fully delineated. To elucidate the chaperones involved in HCMV-mediated class I dislocation, we utilized a chimeric class I heavy chain with an affinity tag at its carboxy terminus. Interestingly, US2 but not US11 continued to target the class I chimera for destruction, suggesting a structural limitation for US11-mediated degradation. Association studies in US2 cells and in cells that express a US2 mutant, US2-186HA, revealed that class I specifically interacts with calnexin, BiP and calreticulin. These findings demonstrate that US2-mediated class I destruction utilizes specific chaperones to facilitate class I dislocation. The data suggest a more general model in which the chaperones that mediate protein folding may also function during ER quality control to eliminate aberrant ER proteins.

18086679
A bipartite trigger for dislocation directs the proteasomal degradation of an endoplasmic reticulum membrane glycoprotein.
Polypeptides are organized into distinct substructures, termed protein domains, that are often associated with diverse functions. These modular units can act as binding sites, areas of post-translational modification, and sites of complex multimerization. The human cytomegalovirus US2 gene product is organized into discrete domains that together catalyze the proteasome-dependent degradation of class I major histocompatibility complex heavy chains. US2 co-opts the endogenous ER quality control pathway in order to dispose of class I. The US2 endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-lumenal region is the class I binding domain, whereas the carboxyl terminus can be referred to as the degradation domain. In the present study, we examined the role of the US2 transmembrane domain in virus-mediated class I degradation. Replacement of the US2 transmembrane domain with that of the CD4 glycoprotein completely blocked the ability of US2 to induce class I destruction. A more precise mutagenesis revealed that subregions of the US2 transmembrane domain differ in their ability to trigger class I degradation. Collectively, the data support a model in which US2-mediated class I degradation occurs as a highly regulated process where the US2 transmembrane domain and cytoplasmic tail work in concert to eliminate class I molecules. Host factors, including a signal peptidase complex, probably associate with the US2 molecule in a coordinated fashion to create a predislocation complex to promote the extraction of class I out of the ER. The results imply that the ER quality control machinery may recognize and eliminate misfolded proteins using a similar multistep regulated process.

17650499
Dislocation of an endoplasmic reticulum membrane glycoprotein involves the formation of partially dislocated ubiquitinated polypeptides.
Accumulation of improperly folded polypeptides in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) can trigger a stress response that leads to the export of aberrant proteins into the cytosol and their ultimate proteasomal degradation. Human cytomegalovirus encodes a type I glycoprotein, US11, that binds to nascent MHC class I heavy chain molecules and causes their dislocation from the ER to the cytosol where they are degraded by the proteasome. Examination of US11-mediated class I degradation has identified a host of cellular proteins involved in the dislocation reaction, including the cytosolic AAA ATPase p97, the membrane protein Derlin-1, and the E3 ubiquitin ligase Sel1L. However, the intermediate steps occurring between the initiation of dislocation and full extraction of the misfolded substrate into the cytosol are not known. We demonstrate that US11 itself undergoes ER export and proteasomal degradation and utilize this system to define multiple steps of US11 dislocation. Treatment of US11-expressing cells with proteasome inhibitor resulted in the accumulation of glycosylated and ubiquitinated species as well as a deglycosylated US11 intermediate. Subcellular fractionation of proteasome-inhibited US11 cells demonstrated that deglycosylated intermediates continued to be integrated within the ER membrane, suggesting that the proteasome functions in the latter steps of dislocation. The data supports a model in which US11 is modified with ubiquitin, whereas the transmembrane region is integrated in the ER membrane, and deglycosylation occurs before complete dislocation.

