20858855
Sequential treatment of CD34+ cells from patients with primary myelofibrosis with chromatin-modifying agents eliminate JAK2V617F-positive NOD/SCID marrow repopulating cells.
Because primary myelofibrosis (PMF) originates at the level of the pluripotent hematopoietic stem cell (HSC), we examined the effects of various therapeutic agents on the in vitro and in vivo behavior of PMF CD34(+) cells. Treatment of PMF CD34(+) cells with chromatin-modifying agents (CMAs) but not hydroxyurea, Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) inhibitors, or low doses of interferon-? led to the generation of greater numbers of CD34(+) chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor (CXCR)4(+) cells, which were capable of migrating in response to chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand (CXCL)12 and resulted in a reduction in the proportion of hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) that were JAK2V617F(+). Furthermore, sequential treatment of PMF CD34(+) cells but not normal CD34(+) cells with decitabine (5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine [5azaD]), followed by suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA; 5azaD/SAHA), or trichostatin A (5azaD/TSA) resulted in a higher degree of apoptosis. Two to 6 months after the transplantation of CMAs treated JAK2V617F(+) PMF CD34(+) cells into nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient (SCID)/IL-2R?(null) mice, the percentage of JAK2V617F/JAK2(total) in human CD45(+) marrow cells was dramatically reduced. These findings suggest that both PMF HPCs, short-term and long-term SCID repopulating cells (SRCs), are JAK2V617F(+) and that JAK2V617F(+) HPCs and SRCs can be eliminated by sequential treatment with CMAs. Sequential treatment with CMAs, therefore, represents a possible effective means of treating PMF at the level of the malignant SRC.

20647774
Abl promotes cadherin-dependent adhesion and signaling in myoblasts.
Cell-cell contact promotes myogenic differentiation but the mechanisms that regulate this phenomenon are not well understood. Cdo (also known as Cdon), an Ig superfamily member, functions as a component of cell surface complexes to promote myogenic differentiation through activation of p38alpha/beta MAP kinase. We recently showed that N-cadherin ligation activated p38alpha/beta in a Cdo-dependent manner, whereas N-cadherin ligation-dependent activation of ERK MAP kinase was not affected by loss of Cdo. The non-receptor tyrosine kinase Abl associates with Cdo during myoblast differentiation and is necessary for full activition of p38alpha/beta during this process. The Abl SH3 domain binds to a PxxP motif in the Cdo intracellular domain, and both these motifs are required for their promyogenic activity. Here we show that Abl is necessary for p38alpha/beta activation initiated by N-cadherin ligation, but in contrast to Cdo, Abl is also required for N-cadherin-dependent ERK activation. Moreover, Abl is required for efficient cadherin-mediated myoblast aggregation via modulation of RhoA-ROCK signaling. Therefore, Abl regulates N-cadherin-mediated p38alpha/beta activation by multiple mechanisms, more generally through regulation of cell-cell adhesion and specifically as a component of Cdo-containing complexes. The role of Cdo as a multifunctional coreceptor with roles in several pathways is also discussed.

20625010
Treatment with the Bcl-xL inhibitor ABT-737 in combination with interferon ? specifically targets JAK2V617F-positive polycythemia vera hematopoietic progenitor cells.
Polycythemia vera (PV) treatment with interferon ? (IFN?) is frequently limited by dose-related toxicity. PV CD34(+) cells are characterized by overexpression of Bcl-xL, which can be antagonized by ABT-737 leading to apoptosis. We explored the effects of ABT-737 and IFN? on PV hematopoiesis. Both IFN? and ABT-737 alone or in combination had a modest effect on normal hematopoiesis but each individually were able to markedly induce PV CD34(+) cell apoptosis and suppress hematopoietic colony formation. The inhibitory activities of these agents in combination were greater against PV hematopoiesis than either agent alone. The exposure of PV CD34(+) cells to low doses of IFN? and ABT-737 in combination resulted in the reduction of the proportion of JAK2V617F(+) colonies similar to that observed with higher doses of IFN?. These data provide the rationale for combination therapy with low doses of IFN? and a BH3 mimetic for patients with PV.

20388788
The effect of CXCL12 processing on CD34+ cell migration in myeloproliferative neoplasms.
Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) and polycythemia vera (PV) are chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms. PMF and, to a lesser degree, PV are characterized by constitutive mobilization of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and progenitor cells (HPC) into the peripheral blood (PB). The interaction between the chemokine CXCL12 and its receptor CXCR4 plays a pivotal role in determining the trafficking of CD34(+) cells between the bone marrow (BM) and the PB. PMF, but not PV, is associated with downregulation of CXCR4 by CD34(+) cells due to epigenetic events. Both PV and PMF patients have elevated levels of immunoreactive forms of CXCL12 in the BM and PB. Using electrospray mass spectrometry, the PB and BM plasma of PV and PMF patients was shown to contain reduced amounts of intact CXCL12 but significant amounts of several truncated forms of CXCL12, which are lacking in normal PB and BM plasma. These truncated forms of CXCL12 are the product of the action of several serine proteases, including dipeptidyl peptidase-IV, neutrophil elastase, matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), MMP-9, and cathepsin G. Unlike CXCL12, these truncates either lack the ability to act as a chemoattractant for CD34(+) cells and/or act as an antagonist to the action of CXCL12. These data suggest that proteolytic degradation of CXCL12 is characteristic of both PV and PMF and that the resulting truncated forms of CXCL12, in addition to the reduced expression of CXCR4 by CD34(+) cells, lead to a profound mobilization of HSC/HPC in PMF.

20303384
Interferon-alpha targets JAK2V617F-positive hematopoietic progenitor cells and acts through the p38 MAPK pathway.
Interferon-alpha (IFNalpha) therapy leads to hematological remissions and a reduction of the JAK2V617F allele burden in patients with polycythemia vera (PV). In this study, the cellular target by which IFNalpha affects hematopoiesis in PV patients was evaluated. CD34(+) cells were isolated from normal bone marrow and the peripheral blood of patients with PV and were treated in vitro with each of the three commercially available forms of IFNalpha: IFNalpha 2b, pegylated IFNalpha 2a (Peg-IFNalpha 2a), and pegylated IFNalpha 2b (Peg-IFNalpha 2b). Each form of IFNalpha was equally potent in suppressing hematopoietic colony formation by normal CD34(+) cells, but Peg-IFNalpha 2a and IFNalpha 2b were more effective than Peg-IFNalpha 2b in inhibiting burst-forming unit erythroid-derived colony formation by PV CD34(+) cells. In addition, exposure of PV CD34(+) cells to equal doses of Peg-IFNalpha 2a and IFNalpha 2b resulted in a 38% to 40% reduction in the proportion of JAK2V617F-positive hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPC), while equivalent doses of Peg-IFNalpha 2b did not reduce the number of malignant HPC. Further studies explored the mechanism by which IFNalpha induced PV HPC growth inhibition. Treatment of Peg-IFNalpha 2a increased the rate of apoptosis of PV CD34(+) cells and the phosphorylation/activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in PV CD34(+) cells, while the p38-specific inhibitor SB203580 reversed the growth inhibition and apoptosis induced by Peg-IFNalpha 2a. These data suggest that low doses of IFNalpha selectively and directly suppress PV JAK2V617F HPC and that these agents act through the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

20160094
N-cadherin ligation, but not Sonic hedgehog binding, initiates Cdo-dependent p38alpha/beta MAPK signaling in skeletal myoblasts.
The p38alpha/beta mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway promotes muscle-specific gene expression and myoblast differentiation but how pathway activity is initiated during these processes is poorly understood. During myoblast differentiation, the intracellular region of the promyogenic cell surface protein Cdo (also known as Cdon) binds to Bnip-2 and JLP, scaffold proteins for Cdc42 and p38alpha/beta MAPK, respectively. The Bnip-2/Cdc42 and JLP/p38alpha/beta complexes associate in a Cdo-dependent manner, resulting in Bnip-2/Cdc42-dependent p38alpha/beta activation and stimulation of cell differentiation. Although the Cdo ectodomain binds to several different proteins, it is unclear how Cdo-dependent p38alpha/beta activation is initiated. In myoblasts, Cdo interacts with the cell-cell adhesion molecule N-cadherin. Cdo also binds directly to the secreted morphogen Sonic hedgehog (Shh) to promote Shh pathway signaling. We report here that N-cadherin ligation activates p38alpha/beta in myoblasts in a Cdo-, Bnip-2-, and JLP-dependent manner. Furthermore, these proteins and activated Cdc42 cluster at sites of N-cadherin ligation. In contrast, neither JLP nor Bnip-2 is associated with Cdo bound to Shh, and Shh does not activate p38alpha/beta in myoblasts. Taken together, these results link cadherin-based cell-cell adhesion to a defined signaling pathway (Cdo --> p38alpha/beta) that directly regulates a cell-type-specific differentiation program. Furthermore, they are consistent with a model whereby Cdo serves as a multifunctional coreceptor with mechanistically distinct roles in multiple signaling pathways.

19404394
CD133+ anaplastic thyroid cancer cells initiate tumors in immunodeficient mice and are regulated by thyrotropin.
Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is one of the most lethal human malignancies. Its rapid onset and resistance to conventional therapeutics contribute to a mean survival of six months after diagnosis and make the identification of thyroid-cancer-initiating cells increasingly important. In prior studies of ATC cell lines, CD133(+) cells exhibited stem-cell-like features such as high proliferation, self-renewal and colony-forming ability in vitro. Here we show that transplantation of CD133(+) cells, but not CD133(-) cells, into immunodeficient NOD/SCID mice is sufficient to induce growth of tumors in vivo. We also describe how the proportion of ATC cells that are CD133(+) increases dramatically over three months of culture, from 7% to more than 80% of the total. This CD133(+) cell pool can be further separated by flow cytometry into two distinct populations: CD133(+/high) and CD133(+/low). Although both subsets are capable of long-term tumorigenesis, the rapidly proliferating CD133(+/high) cells are by far the most efficient. They also express high levels of the stem cell antigen Oct4 and the receptor for thyroid stimulating hormone, TSHR. Treating ATC cells with TSH causes a three-fold increase in the numbers of CD133(+) cells and elicits a dose-dependent up-regulation of the expression of TSHR and Oct4 in these cells. More importantly, immunohistochemical analysis of tissue specimens from ATC patients indicates that CD133 is highly expressed on tumor cells but not on neighboring normal thyroid cells. To our knowledge, this is the first report indicating that CD133(+) ATC cells are solely responsible for tumor growth in immunodeficient mice. Our data also give a unique insight into the regulation of CD133 by TSH. These highly tumorigenic CD133(+) cells and the activated TSH signaling pathway may be useful targets for future ATC therapies.

19347245
Sequences of polycythemia-type Friend spleen focus-forming virus in clone-745-derived mouse erythroleukemia cells.
Friend leukemia virus complex consists of a replication-competent virus plus one of two replication-incompetent viruses, spleen focus-forming virus anemia virus or spleen focus-forming virus polycythemia virus. The replication-incompetent viruses induce rapid malignant transformation of erythroid precursor cells. Transformed cell lines from mice infected with the complex can be induced to undergo erythrodifferentiation in vitro. However, lines containing the anemia-type virus require erythropoietin and another agent such as dimethyl sulfoxide for optimal erythrodifferentiation, whereas those containing the polycythemia-type virus do not require or respond to erythropoietin. Mice infected with the original Friend virus isolates were anemic, so sub-lines derived from these mice should be erythropoietin-dependent for induction of erythrodifferentiation. However, many of the widely studied sub-lines are erythropoietin-independent. In order to clarify this apparent anomaly, the genomes of viruses present in two commonly used erythropoietin-independent sub-lines were sequenced. Sequence analysis demonstrates that they contain the polycythemia-type virus and not the anemia-type virus.

19232325
Differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells to thyrocytes requires insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1.
The mechanisms controlling thyrocyte development during embryonic stem (ES) cell differentiation have only been partially elucidated, although previous studies have suggested the participation of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) in these processes. To further define the role of TSH in this context, we have studied a murine ES cell line in which green fluorescent protein (GFP) cDNA is targeted to the TSH receptor (TSHR) gene, linking the expression of GFP to the transcription of the endogenous TSHR gene. We demonstrate that, in the initial stages of embryoid body formation, activin A and TSH induce the differentiation of definitive endoderm and thyrocyte progenitors expressing Sox17, Foxa2, and TSHR. These thyrocyte progenitors are then converted into cellular aggregates that, in the presence of insulin and IGF-1, further differentiate into mature thyroglobulin-expressing thyrocytes. Our data suggest that, despite the fact that TSH is important for the induction and specification of thyrocytes from ES cells, insulin and IGF-1 are crucial for thyrocyte maturation. Our method provides a powerful in vitro differentiation model for studying the mechanisms of early thyrocyte lineage development.

18281494
Acetyl-keto-beta-boswellic acid induces apoptosis through a death receptor 5-mediated pathway in prostate cancer cells.
Acetyl-keto-beta-boswellic acid (AKBA), a triterpenoid isolated from Boswellia carterri Birdw and Boswellia serrata, has been found to inhibit tumor cell growth and to induce apoptosis. The apoptotic effects and the mechanisms of action of AKBA were studied in LNCaP and PC-3 human prostate cancer cells. AKBA induced apoptosis in both cell lines at concentrations above 10 microg/mL. AKBA-induced apoptosis was correlated with the activation of caspase-3 and caspase-8 as well as with poly(ADP)ribose polymerase (PARP) cleavage. The activation of caspase-8 was correlated with increased levels of death receptor (DR) 5 but not of Fas or DR4. AKBA-induced apoptosis, caspase-8 activation, and PARP cleavage were inhibited by knocking down DR5 using a small hairpin RNA. AKBA treatment increased the levels of CAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) and activated a DR5 promoter reporter but did not activate a DR5 promoter reporter with the mutant CHOP binding site. These results suggest that AKBA induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells through a DR5-mediated pathway, which probably involves the induced expression of CHOP.

18180327
TSH stimulates adipogenesis in mouse embryonic stem cells.
Although TSH is the main regulator of thyroid growth and function, TSH binding activity in fat has long been reported. Since the TSH receptor (TSHR) has been detected in both preadipocytes and adipocytes, we hypothesized that it may play a role in adipose differentiation. Here, we use an in vitro model of adipogenesis from mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells to define TSH function. Directed differentiation of ES cells into the adipose lineage can be achieved over a 3-week period. Although adipocyte differentiation is initiated early in the development of cultured ES cells, TSHR up-regulation is precisely correlated with terminal differentiation of those adipocytes. The adipocytes express TSHR on the cell surface and respond to TSH with increased intracellular cAMP production, suggesting the activation of the protein kinase A signaling pathway. To determine whether TSH impacts adipogenesis, we examined how adipocytes responded to TSH at various points during their differentiation from cultured ES cells. We found that TSH greatly increases adipogenesis when added in the presence of adipogenic factors. More importantly, our data suggest that TSH also stimulates adipogenesis in cultured ES cells even in the absence of adipogenic factors. This finding provides the first evidence of TSH being a pro-adipogenic factor that converts ES cells into adipocytes. It further highlights the potential of ES cells as a model system for use in the study of TSH's role in the regulation of physiologically relevant adipose tissue.

