21466544
Key aspects for an adequate immunoglobulin therapy of primary immunodeficiencies.


20956091
High levels of Crohn's disease-associated anti-microbial antibodies are present and independent of colitis in chronic granulomatous disease.
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) have overlapping gastrointestinal manifestations. Serum antibodies to intestinal microbial antigens in IBD are thought to reflect a loss of tolerance in the setting of genetically encoded innate immune defects. CGD subjects studied here, with or without colitis, had considerably higher levels of ASCA IgA, ASCA IgG, anti-OmpC, anti-I2, and anti-CBir1, but absent to low pANCA, compared to IBD-predictive cutoffs. Higher antibody levels were not associated with a history of colitis. Except for higher ASCA IgG in subjects <18 years, antibody levels were not age-dependent. In comparison, 7 HIES subjects expressed negative to low antibody levels to all of these antigens; none had colitis. Our results suggest that markedly elevated levels of antimicrobial antibodies in CGD do not correlate with a history of colitis but may reflect a specific defect in innate immunity in the face of chronic antigenic stimulation.

20676093
The transmembrane activator TACI triggers immunoglobulin class switching by activating B cells through the adaptor MyD88.
BAFF and APRIL are innate immune mediators that trigger immunoglobulin G (IgG) and IgA class-switch recombination (CSR) in B cells by engaging the receptor TACI. The mechanism that underlies CSR signaling by TACI remains unknown. Here we found that the cytoplasmic domain of TACI encompasses a conserved motif that bound MyD88, an adaptor that activates transcription factor NF-kappaB signaling pathways via a Toll-interleukin 1 (IL-1) receptor (TIR) domain. TACI lacks a TIR domain, yet triggered CSR via the DNA-editing enzyme AID by activating NF-kappaB through a Toll-like receptor (TLR)-like MyD88-IRAK1-IRAK4-TRAF6-TAK1 pathway. TACI-induced CSR was impaired in mice and humans lacking MyD88 or the kinase IRAK4, which indicates that MyD88 controls a B cell-intrinsic, TIR-independent, TACI-dependent pathway for immunoglobulin diversification.

20634142
TLR signaling and effector functions are intact in XLA neutrophils.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are essential components of the innate immune system, and their ligands are important activators of neutrophils. Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) has been reported to mediate signaling through toll-like receptors (TLRs) in many cell types, however, the role of Btk in TLR activation of neutrophils remains unclear. Impaired TLR-induced neutrophil function was found in mice with loss of Btk and in humans with TLR-signaling defects, but the integrity of TLR pathways in X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) neutrophils has not been assessed. In this study LPS (TLR4) or an imidazoquinoline compound (TLR7/8) activated XLA neutrophil shedding of surface CD62L, and phosphorylated MAP kinases p38, JNK and ERK. TLR activation also induced normal respiratory burst and retarded apoptosis for XLA neutrophils, comparable to normal controls. These data demonstrate that the loss of Btk in XLA neutrophils does not impair functional responses to TLR signals.

20629103
Characterization of immunologic defects in patients with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) with intestinal disease.
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is a heterogeneous disorder commonly presenting with recurrent sinopulmonary infections. In all, 6%-10% of CVID patients develop an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)-like disorder, making these patients a unique population to investigate immune-mediated gastrointestinal disease. This study examined whether defects in peripheral and/or intestinal lymphocytes are involved in disruption of the intestinal mucosa in CVID patients with inflammatory intestinal diseases. Peripheral blood (PB) T cells from healthy controls; CD or UC; CVID; and CVID with IBD were stimulated for 48 hours with anti-CD3+CD28 or phytohemagglutinin (PHA) + phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA); cytokine production was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Cytokine expression from unstimulated lamina propria lymphocytes (LPLs) was compared by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Immunohistochemistry of mucosal biopsies was performed. Cell populations were quantified by morphometry. CVID/IBD PB T cells stimulated by anti-CD3+CD28 had trends for reduced IL-2, IL-10, IFN-?, and TNF-? compared to controls. These differences were not apparent following stimulation by PHA/PMA. Constitutive production of inflammatory cytokines by LPLs was not detected. Histologically, CVID patients had reduced/absent plasma cells with reductions in intestinal IgM and IgA. CVID patients with and without gastrointestinal (GI) disease exhibited increased CD3+ T cells, specifically CD8+, in the colon compared to normal and IBD controls, suggesting immune dysregulation. Intestinal inflammation in CVID patients with IBD-like disease may be mediated by abnormal cytokine production through a T-cell receptor-mediated pathway. However, the variability observed suggests multiple, rather than singular, mechanisms are involved. Histologic features such as reduced intestinal plasma cells and lack of intestinal immunoglobulins may be useful markers in diagnosing CVID in a patient with GI disease refractory to conventional therapies.

20477641
Role of B cells in common variable immune deficiency.
Common variable immune deficiency is a heterogeneous immune deficiency characterized by reduced serum immunoglobulins and a lack of antibodies. As the name implies, B-cell defects are variably defective. In particular, peripheral blood isotype-switched CD27(+) memory B cells are reduced in number and have been the basis of several classification schemes. A lack of these B cells has been associated with selected clinical conditions, including immune cytopenias, splenomegaly, granulomatous disease and lymphadenopathy. Genetic defects in ICOS, CD19 and TACI have been described. In addition to defects in the production or survival of memory B cells, in most subjects, B cells have defects in Toll-like receptor signaling.

20332369
How I treat common variable immune deficiency.
Common variable immunodeficiency is a rare immune deficiency, characterized by low levels of serum immunoglobulin G, A, and/or M with loss of antibody production. The diagnosis is most commonly made in adults between the ages of 20 and 40 years, but both children and older adults can be found to have this immune defect. The range of clinical manifestations is broad, including acute and chronic infections, inflammatory and autoimmune disease, and an increased incidence of cancer and lymphoma. For all these reasons, the disease phenotype is both heterogeneous and complex. Contributing to the complexity is that patient cohorts are generally small, criteria used for diagnosis vary, and the doses of replacement immune globulin differ. In addition, routines for monitoring patients over the years and protocols for the use of other biologic agents for complications have not been clarified or standardized. In the past few years, data from large patient registries have revealed that both selected laboratory markers and clinical phenotyping may aid in dissecting groups of subjects into biologically relevant categories. This review presents my approach to the diagnosis and treatment of patients with common variable immunodeficiency, with suggestions for the use of laboratory biomarkers and means of monitoring patients.

20226738
Oligoclonality, impaired class switch and B-cell memory responses in WHIM syndrome.
Heterozygous truncating mutations in CXCR4 have been identified as a cause of WHIM syndrome (warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, immunodeficiency and myelokathexis). The receptor truncations have been proposed to lead to altered lymphocyte trafficking. The purpose of the described studies was to characterize the B-cell repertoire in WHIM subjects. We confirmed profound B-cell lymphopenia and demonstrated oligoclonality of the circulating B-cell pool by HCDR3 spectratyping. The response to immunization was studied in one subject utilizing a bacteriophage PhiX174 immunization protocol. Spectratyping showed oligoclonality at baseline with normalization of the HCDR3 length distribution by 5 months after immunization with PhiX174 with eventual return to the baseline state. Isotype switching from phage specific neutralizing antibody of the IgM class to IgG was markedly reduced. Overall, these data suggest that impaired CXCR4 signaling in WHIM syndrome results in defective B-cell function and abnormal isotype switching, possibly through effects on germinal center trafficking of lymphocytes.

19671377
Autoimmunity in common variable immunodeficiency.
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is the most common clinically significant primary immune defect. Although the hallmark of CVID is hypogammaglobulinemia, the intrinsic dysregulation of the immune system leads to defective T-cell activation and proliferation, as well as dendritic cell and cytokine defects. Although 70% to 80% of patients have had recurrent sinopulmonary infections, autoimmunity and inflammatory complications are also common. The most common autoimmune conditions are immune thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic anemia, but other autoimmune complications arise, including rheumatoid arthritis, pernicious anemia, primary biliary cirrhosis, thyroiditis, sicca syndrome, systemic lupus, and inflammatory bowel disease. Treatment of autoimmunity includes high-dose immunoglobulins, corticosteroids, selected immunosuppressants, and other immune modulators. This review focuses on autoimmune conditions associated with CVID, potential mechanisms of immune dysregulation, and therapeutic strategies.

19592080
Toll-like receptor 7 and 9 defects in common variable immunodeficiency.
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is characterized by hypogammaglobulinemia, reduced numbers of peripheral blood isotype-switched memory B cells, and loss of plasma cells. Because Toll-like receptor (TLR) activation of B cells can initiate and potentially sustain normal B cell functions, we examined functional outcomes of TLR7 and TLR9 signaling in CVID B cells. TLR7-mediated, TLR7/8-mediated, and TLR9-mediated cell proliferation, isotype switch, and immunoglobulin production by control and CVID B cells or isolated naive and memory B cell subsets were examined. We quantitated TNF-alpha, IL-6, and IL-12 production in response to TLR1-9 ligands and measured IFN-alpha production by TLR7-stimulated PBMCs and isolated plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). IFN-beta mRNA expression by TLR3-stimulated fibroblasts was assessed. Unlike CD27(+) B cells of controls, TLR7-activated, TLR7/8-activated, or TLR9-activated CVID B cells or isolated CD27(+) B cells did not proliferate, upregulate CD27, or shed surface IgD. TLR-stimulated CVID B cells failed to upregulate activation-induced cytosine deaminase mRNA or produce IgG and IgA. TLR7-stimulated PBMCs and pDCs produced little or no IFN-alpha. Reconstituting IFN-alpha in TLR7-stimulated CVID B-cell cultures facilitated proliferation, CD27 upregulation, and isotype switch. These TLR defects are restricted because CVID PBMCs stimulated with TLR ligands produced normal amounts of TNF-alpha, IL-6, and IL-12; TLR3-mediated expression of IFN-beta by CVID fibroblasts was normal. Defective TLR7 and TLR9 signaling in CVID B cells and pDCs, coupled with deficient IFN-alpha, impairs CVID B cell functions and prevents TLR-mediated augmentation of humoral immunity in vivo.

18714044
Memory B cells and pneumococcal antibody after splenectomy.
Splenectomized patients are susceptible to bloodstream infections with encapsulated bacteria, potentially due to loss of blood filtering but also defective production of anticarbohydrate Ab. Recent studies propose that a lack of Ab is related to reduced numbers of IgM(+) CD27(+) memory B cells found after splenectomy. To test this, we analyzed CD27(+) memory B cell subsets, IgG, and IgM pneumococcal Ab responses in 26 vaccinated splenectomized subjects in comparison to memory B cell subsets and Ab responses in healthy controls. As shown previously, the splenectomized autoimmune subjects had fewer total, isotype switched, and IgM(+) CD27(+) memory B cells as compared with controls, but there was no difference in memory B cells subsets between controls and splenectomized subjects with spherocytosis. There was no difference between the geometric mean IgG Ab response between normal controls and splenectomized subjects (p = 0.51; p = 0.81). Control subjects produced more IgM Ab than splenectomized autoimmune subjects (p = 0.01) but the same levels as subjects with spherocytosis (p = 0.15.) There was no correlation between memory B cell subsets and IgG or IgM Ab responses for controls or splenectomized subjects. These data suggest that splenectomy alone may not be the sole reason for loss of memory B cells and reduced IgM antipneumococcal Ab. Because subjects with autoimmunity had splenectomy at a significantly older age than participants with spherocytosis, these data suggest that an age-related loss of extra splenic sites necessary for the maintenance or function of memory B cells may lead to impaired immunity in these subjects.

18525364
Osteoarticular infectious complications in patients with primary immunodeficiencies.
To describe the incidence and management of various infectious arthritides in selected primary immunodeficiency states. Joint complications have been a well recognized finding in patients with primary immunodeficiencies for many years. Many are clearly infectious in etiology, but other apparently noninfectious joint abnormalities similar to rheumatoid arthritis have been shown to be due to an underlying infectious trigger. In humoral immunodeficiencies such as common variable immunodeficiency and X-linked agammaglobulinemia, bacterial organisms are the most common causes of infectious arthritis, but mycoplasmas and ureaplasmas are also of particular importance. In nonhumoral immunodeficiencies, noninfectious inflammatory arthritides are more prevalent, although microbiologic organisms have been reported in some cases of arthritis. Lack of appropriate culturing techniques and documentation of infectious agents may underestimate the prevalence of low-virulence infections in these patients. Infectious arthritis is a significant comorbidity associated with primary immunodeficiencies and can be the presenting feature for some patients. Prompt examination for common as well as atypical organisms is not only important for the treatment but also crucial to the understanding of the exact etiology of arthritides as a whole in these disorders.

17917013
Common variable immune deficiency: reviews, continued puzzles, and a new registry.
Background: Common variable immune deficiency (CVID) is a clinically and immunologically heterogenous primary immune deficiency first described more than 50 years ago. The main features are hypogammaglobulinemia, recurrent infections, and other complications. While CVID is considered as a genetic immune defect, and several genes have been reported as leading to the CVID phenotype, one of the most puzzling features of CVID is the sporadic inheritance pattern and the relatively late onset. In most cases, no other family members have any immune defect. The mean age at diagnosis is between 25 and 45 years of age. These features suggest the interplay between either several or numerous genes with or without potential environmental factors.

17910333
Assessment and clinical interpretation of reduced IgG values.


17718102
Subspecialty evaluation of chronically ill hospitalized patients with suspected immune defects.
The diagnosis of primary immunodeficiency is suggested by recurrent or unusual infections and inflammatory and autoimmune conditions. Because the diversity of immune defects and clinical presentations poses a diagnostic challenge in hospital populations, a computer algorithm was devised to help identify patients. To assess use of pertinent subspecialty clinics by patients with clinical features of immunodeficiency. Using a validated algorithm based on International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9), codes applied to The Mount Sinai Hospital billing records, we investigated hospitalized patients, 60 years or younger, who had been diagnosed as having conditions associated with immunodeficiency, excluding those with confounding medical conditions. Immunodeficiency-related disease codes were given a weighted score based on relative severity and expressed as a sum for admissions between January 1, 1999, and December 31, 2003. Demographic features, subspecialty care, and clinic attendance were determined. The 296 computer-identified patients with illnesses characteristic of immunodeficiency were 35.8% Hispanic, 27.0% African American, and 21.6% white; their median age was 13.3 years. Patients were hospitalized 1,261 times, or a median of 4.2 times each (range, 1-42 times), and had 5,700 diagnoses. Of the patients, 75.0% received primary care at The Mount Sinai Hospital. Although the most common diagnosis was pneumonia (n = 243), 45% of patients never received allergy/immunology or pulmonary subspecialty care. Despite receiving primary medical care at the same hospital, many frequently hospitalized subjects with features of immunodeficiency do not receive medical care in appropriate subspecialty clinics.

17674313
Mirtazapine in progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy associated with polycythemia vera.
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a usually fatal cerebral white matter disease found in patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection and other immunocompromised states. We present the case of a 63-year-old woman with polycythemia vera who developed a progressive focal neurological deficit with white matter abnormalities on magnetic resonance images of the brain that was proved on biopsy to be PML. She was treated with the serotonin reuptake inhibitor mirtazapine and remains neurologically stable, with resolution of cerebral lesions, >2 years after diagnosis. We propose that mirtazapine should be investigated further for use in PML.

17556024
High serum levels of BAFF, APRIL, and TACI in common variable immunodeficiency.
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is characterized by low levels of immune globulins and lack of antibody. Mutations in transmembrane activator and calcium-modulating cyclophilin ligand (TACI), are found in 8-10%, associated with autoimmunity and splenomegaly. Some patients with mutations had increased serum levels of TACI. Because of this, and the prevalence of autoimmunity, splenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy, we quantitated levels of TACI ligands, a proliferation inducing ligand (APRIL) and B cell activating factor (BAFF) and TACI in serum of 77 patients. CVID subjects had markedly increased serum levels of BAFF (p<0.0001), APRIL (p<0.0001), and TACI (p=0.001) but there was no relationship between levels and autoimmunity, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, B cell numbers, or mutations in TACI. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells of CVID subjects had increased levels of BAFF mRNA. We conclude that increased constitutive production and/or underlying immuno-regulatory or inflammatory conditions lead to enhanced release of ligands; however, the biological result remains unclear.

17430541
X-linked agammaglobulinemia in a 10-year-old child: a case study.
To discuss the advanced practice nurse's diagnosis and management of an unsuspected primary immunodeficiency (PI) disease, X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA), in a child. Review of historical and current scientific literature, practice guidelines, and a case study. While a diagnosis of XLA is most commonly made in the first 3 years of life, this case study presents a 10-year-old boy's circuitous route to this diagnosis. A diagnosis of an immune defect should be considered for patients with chronic, recurrent, or unusual infections. For patients who lack immune globulins and antibodies, intravenous immune globulin, given monthly and continued throughout life, is the standard of care. Diagnosis of children and adults with primary immune deficiency diseases may be delayed if practitioners fail to find the root cause of recurrent infections. Nurses as patient advocates should recognize the need for a referral in clinical cases where immunodeficiency may not be suspected. Evaluation of the immune system is performed by a panel of blood tests. There is a need to increase awareness of PI, their manifestations, and treatment among nurses both at the bedside and in advanced practice settings.

17304889
Thymoma and immunodeficiency (Good syndrome): a report of 2 unusual cases and review of the literature.
Good syndrome is a rare cause of combined B- and T-cell immunodeficiency that occurs in association with a thymoma. Patients affected with Good syndrome have increased susceptibility to bacterial, fungal, viral, and opportunistic infections. To describe 2 unusual cases of infections in patients with Good syndrome and review the literature. Case 1 describes a 51-year-old woman with Good syndrome who presented with a 10-day history of diarrhea, nausea, and fevers. During her hospitalization she became pancytopenic and underwent a bone marrow biopsy and evaluation of her peripheral blood smear. Case 2 describes an 89-year-old man with Good syndrome who presented with a nonhealing leg ulcer, which underwent biopsy. A literature search through MEDLINE was performed. Keywords included Good syndrome, thymoma, hypogammaglobulinemia, immunodeficiency, and infection. The peripheral blood smear in patient 1 showed ring-formed parasites in red blood cells suggestive of babesiosis. She began treatment with azithromycin, atovaquone, and doxycycline and recovered completely. Patient 2 underwent a biopsy of the foot. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for human herpesvirus 8 consistent with Kaposi sarcoma. The concomitant occurrence of immunodeficiency and thymoma is known as Good syndrome. In contrast to other humoral immune defects, patients with this syndrome can develop opportunistic infections, and the prognosis appears less favorable compared with X-linked agammaglobulinemia or common variable immunodeficiency. Immunological investigations, including T-cell subsets, B cells, and quantitative immunoglobulins, should be considered part of the routine diagnostic evaluation in patients with a thymoma and recurrent infections.

17192819
CTLA-4 gene exon-1 +49 A/G polymorphism: lack of association with autoimmune disease in patients with common variable immune deficiency.
The presence of the G allele of exon-1 +49 A/G polymorphisms of the cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) gene has been described as a risk factor associated with the development of autoimmune diseases. Since Common Variable Immune Deficiency (CVID) is associated with autoimmune manifestations in approximately 25% of patients, we sought to examine the association of the CTLA-4 single nucleotide polymorphism with autoimmunity and other inflammatory complications. Sixteen of 47 CVID (34%) patients had a history of autoimmunity, and 15 (32%) had known granulomatous disease with or without lymphoid hyperplasia. CTLA-4 genotype frequencies were AA 40% (19), AG 45% (21), and GG 15% (7). Allele frequencies were A 63% and G 37%, similar to control populations. There were no significant associations between CTLA-4 exon-1 +49 A/G polymorphism and autoimmune or lymphoid hyperplasia and granulomatous disease in this mostly Caucasian CVID patient population.

21466548
Key aspects for successful immunoglobulin therapy of primary immunodeficiencies.
Immunoglobulin (Ig) therapy is the mainstay for treatment in the majority of primary immune deficiencies. While B cell defects are the predominant conditions in man, other diseases in which T cell dysfunction is severe also require antibody replacement. In many medical practices the phenotypic overlap between immune deficiency and symptoms of asthma leads to both missed opportunities for diagnosing immune defects and inappropriate Ig treatment of asthmatic patients with normal B cell function. As steroid therapy can lower serum IgG levels, this finding alone is an insufficient indicator for Ig replacement. In the past 3 decades, there has a gradual increase in recommended and commonly used doses of parenteral immune globulin, often based on both IgG trough levels and clinical responses. Special attention to Ig doses is needed for growing children, in cases of weight loss or gain, pregnancy and for subjects in whom more rapid consumption of Ig is likely, including febrile patients or those with gastrointestinal or lung disease. While acute bacterial infections are much less common in Ig-treated subjects, a number of reports note continued evidence of inflammatory complications. Monitoring patients over time includes, at minimum, physical examination, blood counts and chemistry screening tests and IgG trough levels, at 6-12-month intervals. Other monitoring tools include spirometry and at wider intervals with those with lung disease, carbon monoxide diffusion capacity and chest computed tomography scans. With careful selection of patients and adequate therapy, an improved quality of life is possible.

21466546
Autoimmunity in primary immune deficiency: taking lessons from our patients.
The elucidation of the genes leading to selected immune defects has accelerated our understanding of the molecular basis of tolerance in autoimmunity disorders. Mutations in genes of the immune system are known to lead to a catalogue of functional deficits, including loss of activation-induced Fas-mediated apoptosis, an inability to remove self-reactive T and/or B cells and insufficient numbers or functions of regulatory T cells. In most cases, microbial antigen stimulation occurs simultaneously, leading to further inflammatory responses. In each case, probing the molecular pathways involved in these primary immune defects has led to a better understanding of autoimmune diseases in general. While subjects with X-linked agammaglobulinaemia are almost devoid of autoimmune diseases, B cells which are present, but dysfunctional in other defects, lead to a significant incidence of autoimmune disease. Autoimmunity is also particularly common in the antibody deficiency states. Although organ-based autoimmunity also occurs, for unclear reasons the main conditions are immune thrombocytopenia purpura and autoimmune haemolytic anaemia. The common variable immune deficiency subjects most afflicted by these cytopenias are those with specific peripheral blood memory B cell phenotypes. B cells of these subjects have a retained autoimmune potential, lack of somatic hypermutation, profound loss of proliferative potential, accelerated apoptosis and loss of normal Toll-like receptor signalling. Treatment with high-dose immunoglobulin and/or steroids can be helpful, while rituximab provides benefits in the treatment of refractory cytopenias with apparently little risk, even with repeated use, due to ongoing immune globulin therapy.

19630864
Lung disease, antibodies and other unresolved issues in immune globulin therapy for antibody deficiency.
Defects of antibody production are the most common of the primary immune defects of man. While these defects have been described in clinical terms for more than five decades, in most cases, the pathogenesis is still poorly understood. The most common clinically important of these is common variable immune deficiency. However there is no strict definition of this defect and the criteria for initiating immune globulin therapy are not standardized, leading to wide variation in treatment practices. In addition there has been no clear means to adequate assess progression of lung disease or elucidate the causes of progressive pulmonary inflammation found in some subjects. Moreover, there are still questions such as what are the best predictors of chronic lung disease and how can we prevent this disorder. Other complications such as autoimmunity, granulomatous disease, gastrointestinal inflation, are similarly poorly understood although treatment with various biological agents has been used with some success. A few bio-markers for assessing clinical and immunologic status have been proposed, and some have proved to be useful, but additional methods to gauge the benefits of therapy, predict outcomes, and harmonize treatment practices are needed. Aside from Ig replacement, additional means of prevention of lung disease may need consideration to reduce lung damage apart from prophylactic antibiotics. These might include using macrolides as anti-inflammatory agents, inhaled corticosteroids, bronchodilators, mucolytics or mechanical or rehabilitative respiratory methods.

18322785
Autoimmune manifestations in common variable immunodeficiency.
INTRODUCTION: About 20% of subjects with common variable immune deficiency (CVID) develop an autoimmune complication, most often immune thrombocytopenia or hemolytic anemia. While the pathogenesis of autoreactivity is unknown for CVID subjects in general, and to a greater extent in those with autoimmunity, there is a loss of switched memory B cells. DISCUSSION: About 7-8% of CVID subjects have mutations in the transmembrane activator and calcium-modulating cyclophilin ligand interactor (TACI), a significant association with this immune defect, although the same mutations may be found in normal relatives and rarely in healthy blood donors. In addition to generalized B cell dysfunction, defective elimination of autoimmune B cells has been demonstrated.

