20061943
Use of echocardiography and modalities of patient monitoring of trauma patients.
Trauma patients require evaluation of the anatomic structure as well as the hemodynamic profile of the heart to improve effectiveness of resuscitation. They are prone to hemodynamic instability and must be monitored with various modalities to detect deterioration early. Newer, less invasive ultrasound technologies are replacing familiar 'gold standard' modalities of the past. This article reviews the indications, roles, imaging approaches, and limitations of modern echocardiography. A brief review of other ICU monitoring modalities is also presented. Echocardiography has emerged as a first-line diagnostic tool for assessment of trauma patients, especially those with hemodynamic compromise. It yields crucial information about structural damage as well as the hemodynamic profile and can be performed through either the transesophageal or transthoracic route. Quick and systematic use of echocardiography for diagnosis and management of critically injured patients may lead to improved outcomes. Echocardiography plays an important role in the trauma bay for diagnosis of thoracic injury and at the bedside in the ICU for evaluation of the hemodynamic profile.

19955551
Adult parenteral nutrition utilization at a tertiary care hospital.
Guidelines from the American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition promote appropriate use of parenteral nutrition (PN). In addition, involvement of multidisciplinary nutrition support teams (NSTs) has led to a reduction of inappropriate PN administration. This study evaluated the effect of introducing hospital-wide PN guidelines and a PN review committee on PN prescription behavior of NSTs in the authors' hospital. A PN guidelines form with established indications was developed and made available to the NSTs. A PN review committee was formed to assess the appropriateness of PN prescriptions and educate the NSTs if an inappropriate PN prescription was noted. The initial-phase PN prescriptions were compared with those in a later (established) phase. Of a total of 614 PN prescriptions, 8.1% did not meet the established indications. The initial phase recorded 312 PN prescriptions, and the established phase had 302 prescriptions. The number of inappropriate PN prescriptions decreased significantly from 11.9% in the initial phase to 4.3% in the established phase (P = .001). The incidence of inappropriate PN prescription was low when NSTs were closely involved in patient care. Availability of written guidelines and continuous oversight of NSTs promoted appropriate PN usage.

18405250
Sinus bradycardia associated with daclizumab in liver transplant recipients: report of 3 cases.
Daclizumab is a commonly used immunosuppressive agent for prophylaxis of solid organ rejection. Although rare, the cardiovascular adverse effects of daclizumab include sinus tachycardia, hypotension, and hypertension. Here, we report 3 patients who developed significant and prolonged sinus bradycardia after receiving daclizumab following orthotopic liver transplant. Daclizumab should be considered a possible cause of bradycardia following its administration in orthotopic liver transplant.

17414727
Effect of lower limb compression devices on thermodilution cardiac output measurement.
The aim of this study was to determine whether lower limb (calf) sequential compression devices (SCDs) have a significant effect on thermodilution cardiac output measurements using a pulmonary artery catheter. Prospective clinical investigation. Surgical and neurosurgical intensive care units in a university hospital. A total of 43 patients with pulmonary artery catheters and bilateral lower limb SCDs. Cardiac output was measured (average of three) when the SCDs were off (T1), during the first 2-4 secs of the inflation cycle (T2), during seconds 4-8 of the inflation cycle (T3), and when the SCDs were off again (T4). Cardiac output measurements were consistently lower when measured during the SCD inflation cycle. The decrease in cardiac output ranged from 7.58% to 49.5%, with a mean reduction of 24.51% in the first 2-4 seconds and 20.61% during seconds 4-8 (p < .001). Two patients displayed an increase in cardiac output during the inflation cycle; one patient had an increase of 2.78% and the other an increase of 13.5%. In 11 patients, measurements were also made using a pulse contour-analysis cardiac output device, but no changes in pulse contour-analysis cardiac output were observed during the same time period. Thermodilution cardiac output measurements via a pulmonary artery catheter should not be done during the inflation cycle of lower limb SCDs because they produce a falsely low cardiac output.

