21498463
Analysis of 94 Candidate Genes and 12 Endophenotypes for Schizophrenia From the Consortium on the Genetics of Schizophrenia.
Objective: The authors used a custom array of 1,536 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to interrogate 94 functionally relevant candidate genes for schizophrenia and identify associations with 12 heritable neurophysiological and neurocognitive endophenotypes in data collected by the Consortium on the Genetics of Schizophrenia. Method: Variance-component association analyses of 534 genotyped subjects from 130 families were conducted by using Merlin software. A novel bootstrap total significance test was also developed to overcome the limitations of existing genomic multiple testing methods and robustly demonstrate significant associations in the context of complex family data and possible population stratification effects. Results: Associations with endophenotypes were observed for 46 genes of potential functional significance, with three SNPs at p<10(-4), 27 SNPs at p<10(-3), and 147 SNPs at p<0.01. The bootstrap analyses confirmed that the 47 SNP-endophenotype combinations with the strongest evidence of association significantly exceeded that expected by chance alone, with 93% of these findings expected to be true. Many of the genes interact on a molecular level, and eight genes (e.g., NRG1 and ERBB4) displayed evidence for pleiotropy, revealing associations with four or more endophenotypes. The results collectively support a strong role for genes related to glutamate signaling in mediating schizophrenia susceptibility. Conclusions: This study supports use of relevant endophenotypes and the bootstrap total significance test for identifying genetic variation underlying the etiology of schizophrenia. In addition, the observation of extensive pleiotropy for some genes and singular associations for others suggests alternative, independent pathways mediating pathogenesis in the "group of schizophrenias."

21451436
Mutation screening of PDZD2, GOLPH3, and MTMR12 genes in patients with schizophrenia.


20875727
Non-synonymous variants in the AMACR gene are associated with schizophrenia.
The AMACR gene is located in the schizophrenia susceptibility locus on chromosome 5p13, previously identified in a large Puerto Rican pedigree of Spanish origin. The AMACR-encoded protein is an enzyme involved in the metabolism of branched-chain fatty and bile acids. The enzyme deficiency causes structural and functional brain changes, and disturbances in fatty acid and oxidative phosphorylation pathways observed in individuals with schizophrenia. Therefore, AMACR is both a positional and functional candidate gene for susceptibility to schizophrenia. The study had a two-step design: we performed mutation analysis of the coding and flanking regions of AMACR in affected members of the pedigree, and tested the detected sequence variants for association with schizophrenia in a Puerto Rican case-control sample (n=383) of Spanish descent. We identified three missense variants segregating with the disorder in the family, rs2278008, rs2287939 and rs10941112. Two of them, rs2278008 and rs2287939, demonstrated significant differences in genotype (P = 4 × 10-4, P = 4 × 10-4) and allele (P = 1 × 10-4, P = 9.5 × 10-5) frequencies in unrelated male patients compare to controls, with the odds ratios (OR) 2.24 (95% CI: 1.48-3.40) and 2.25 (95% CI: 1.49-3.38), respectively. The G-C-G haplotype of rs2278008-rs2287939-rs10941112 revealed the most significant association with schizophrenia (P = 4.25 × 10-6, OR = 2.96; 95% CI: 1.85-4.76) in male subjects. There were no statistically significant differences in genotype, allele, and haplotype frequencies between female schizophrenia subjects and controls. Our results suggest that AMACR may play a significant role in susceptibility to schizophrenia in male patients.

20826004
Eye tracking performance and the boundaries of the schizophrenia spectrum.
In order to investigate the nature of the eye tracking impairment in schizophrenia spectrum we measured pursuit gain with a constant velocity target using a quantitative (RMS error in pursuit gain) and, on an exploratory basis, a qualitative (quality of tracking) measure. We utilized a sample consisting of three clinically characterized groups: patients with schizophrenia (SZ), their first degree non-psychotic relatives, subjects with schizotypal personality disorder (SPD), and healthy volunteers (HV). Thirty three SZ patients, 19 SPD subjects, 66 non-psychotic relatives (all clinically assessed for schizophrenia spectrum psychopathology--DSM-IIIR) and 18 HV were evaluated using an infrared eye tracking system. Targets were constant velocity trapezoids at 5°/s (slow) and 16°/s (fast). The quality of the eye tracking was independently evaluated by at least two raters (ICC: 0.92). The RMS measures at the two velocities (quantitative measure) and the quality of the tracking obtained for each velocity were entered separately into a two factor repeated measures ANOVA, with velocity and diagnosis as the independent measures. For the quantitative ratings (RMS error), a significant effect for velocity was found, with all subjects performing worse at the higher velocity, but there was no significant velocity by diagnosis interaction. In addition, an overall significant effect for diagnosis was found in the four-group ANOVA. In post hoc multiple comparison tests, SZ subjects performed significantly worse from the HV and the relatives. SPD subjects were not different from patients with schizophrenia (or from any group--and their performance was intermediate between the HV and the SZ). Relatives of the patients with schizophrenia were different from SZ subjects, but not different from SPD or HV subjects. Similar results were obtained in the exploratory qualitative ratings. Clinical symptoms did not correlate significantly with quantitative or qualitative performance in any group. We have found that the performance of SPD subjects is intermediate between that of patients with schizophrenia and the healthy volunteers in both qualitative and quantitative (exploratory) measures. Indeed, SPD subjects comprise the only group not statistically different from schizophrenic patients in quantitative or qualitative ratings.

20044143
Relationship between whole blood serotonin and repetitive behaviors in autism.
This study was conducted to examine the relationship between whole blood serotonin level and behavioral symptoms in 78 subjects with autism. No significant associations were found between serotonin level and the primary behavioral outcome measures. However, a significant inverse relationship between serotonin level and self-injury was demonstrated.

19820033
Protection against loss of innate defenses in adulthood by low advanced glycation end products (AGE) intake: role of the antiinflammatory AGE receptor-1.
Increased oxidant stress and inflammation (OS/infl) are linked to both aging-related diseases and advanced glycation end products (AGEs). Whereas AGE receptor-1 (AGER1) reduces OS/infl in animals, this has not been assessed in normal humans. The objectives of the study were to determine whether AGER1 correlates with AGEs and OS/infl and a reduction of dietary AGEs (dAGEs) lowers OS/infl in healthy adults and chronic kidney disease (CKD-3) patients. This study was cross-sectional with 2-yr follow-up studies of healthy adults and CKD-3 patients, a subset of which received a reduced AGE or regular diet. The study was conducted at general community and renal clinics. Participants included 325 healthy adults (18-45 and >60 yr old) and 66 CKD-3 patients. An isocaloric low-AGE (30-50% reduction) or regular diet was given to 40 healthy subjects for 4 months and to nine CKD-3 patients for 4 wk. Relationships between age, dAGEs, serum AGEs, peripheral mononuclear cell AGE-receptors, and OS/Infl before and after reduction of dAGE intake were measured. AGEs, oxidant stress, receptor for AGE, and TNFalpha were reduced in normal and CKD-3 patients after the low-AGE diet, independently of age. AGER1 levels in CKD-3 patients on the low-AGE diet resembled 18- to 45-yr-old normal subjects. Dietary, serum, and urine AGEs correlated positively with peripheral mononuclear cell AGER1 levels in healthy participants. AGER1 was suppressed in CKD-3 subjects, whereas receptor for AGE and TNFalpha were increased. Reduction of AGEs in normal diets may lower oxidant stress/inflammation and restore levels of AGER1, an antioxidant, in healthy and aging subjects and CKD-3 patients. AGE intake has implications for health outcomes and costs and warrants further testing.

19585955
The effects of cardiovascular risk factors on cognitive compromise.
As life expectancy in the United States continues to increase, the projected numbers of elderly people who will develop dementia will grow rapidly. This paper reviews four well-established cardiovascular risk factors (type 2 diabetes, hypertension, cholesterol, and inflammation), for which there is longitudinal epidemiological evidence of increased risk of dementia, Alzheimer's disease, mild cognitive impairment, and cognitive decline. These risk factors are of special interest because of their potential modifiability, which may affect the course of cognitive compromise. Diabetes is the cardiovascular risk factor (CvRF) most consistently associated with cognition. Hypertension in midlife is consistently associated with cognition, but its associations with late-life hypertension are less clear. Total cholesterol is not consistently associated with cognition. Interleukin-6 and C-reactive protein are inflammatory markers relatively consistently associated with cognition. Composites of the CvRFs increase the risk for dementia in a dose-dependent fashion, suggesting a cumulative effect of these factors on neuronal stress. In the relatively few studies that have reported interactions of risk factors, they potentiate each other. The effect of each of these risk factors varies according to apolipoprotein E genotype. It may be that the effect of these risk factors varies according to the presence of the others, and these complex relationships underlie the biological mechanisms of cognitive compromise. This may be crucial for understanding the effects on cognition of drugs and other approaches, such as lifestyle change, for treating these risk factors.

19584451
Impact of APOE epsilon4 on the cognitive performance of a sample of non-demented Puerto Rican nonagenarians.
APOE epsilon4 is a major risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. It has also been associated with cognitive impairment and cognitive decline in young-olds, but the impact of the epsilon4 allele on cognitive function in very late life is still unclear. The object of this study was to evaluate the association of the epsilon4 allele of APOE with the cognitive performance of a sample of non-demented oldest-olds. Eighty-seven Spanish-speaking Puerto Rican non-demented nonagenarians were administered a complete neuropsychological assessment and provided a blood sample used for APOE genotyping. A factor analysis generated two factors: 1) verbal memory; and 2) visuo-spatial, naming and attention tasks, accounting for 43.6% of the overall variance in the 13 original neuropsychological variables. The multivariate analysis reflected, after controlling for gender, education, and age, the APOE epsilon4 carriers performed better in overall cognition (both factors analyzed together) than non-carriers (T<formula>;{2}</formula> = 0.082, F(2,80) = 3.289, p = 0.042). Neither gender nor the gender by APOE epsilon4 status interaction was associated with differences in cognition. In conclusion, the results of this study suggest that, among these Puerto Rican non-demented nonagenarians, being an APOE epsilon4 allele carrier is associated with better cognition.

19342124
Memory activation in healthy nonagenarians.
Little is known about brain function in the oldest old, although this is the fastest growing segment of the population in developed countries and is of paramount importance in public health considerations. In this study, we investigated the cerebral response to a memory task in healthy subjects over age 90 compared with healthy younger elderly. We studied 29 healthy elderly subjects, 12 over age 90 and 17 between age 70 and 80. All subjects were cognitively intact, as verified by a neuropsychological battery, and performed a nonverbal memory task while undergoing a functional MRI (fMRI). Activation results were analyzed by a random-effects ANCOVA using SPM5. The task resulted in activation of similar areas of the posterior temporal, parietal, and posterior frontal cortexes, but the activation was more robust in the younger subjects, especially in the right hippocampus, and parietal and temporal cortices. This finding remained after controlling for education, cognition, task performance or cerebral atrophy. The phenomenon of relatively maintained performance, despite significant brain atrophy and lower activation is consistent with the cognitive reserve theory and may be specific to subjects with extremely successful aging. Further investigation of brain activation patterns in the oldest old is warranted.

19293568
The neuropsychological performance of nondemented Puerto Rican nonagenarians.
While the oldest old are the fastest growing segment of the US population, normative neuropsychological data for nondemented oldest old Spanish speakers are nonexistent. This study sought to evaluate the neuropsychological performance of nondemented nonagenarians residing in Puerto Rico and to compare their results with those of a similar English-speaking sample from New York. We studied 81 subjects who had a complete CERAD neuropsychological assessment in Spanish. We used multiple regression analysis to predict performance on the CERAD battery and ANCOVA to compare the Puerto Rico and New York samples. In 10 out of the 13 neuropsychological tests administered, education was a significant predictor of performance. There were significant differences between the Puerto Rico and New York groups only in the Trail Making Tests. In this Puerto Rican sample, education was the strongest predictor of neuropsychological performance, which is consistent with previous studies. When education level is properly accounted for, the performance of Puerto Rican nonagenarians in the CERAD battery does not differ from the performance of US English-speaking nonagenarians.

19147740
C-reactive protein and memory function suggest antagonistic pleiotropy in very old nondemented subjects.


18925931
Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification for genetic screening in autism spectrum disorders: efficient identification of known microduplications and identification of a novel microduplication in ASMT.
It has previously been shown that specific microdeletions and microduplications, many of which also associated with cognitive impairment (CI), can present with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) represents an efficient method to screen for such recurrent microdeletions and microduplications. In the current study, a total of 279 unrelated subjects ascertained for ASDs were screened for genomic disorders associated with CI using MLPA. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) and/or direct DNA sequencing were used to validate potential microdeletions and microduplications. Methylation-sensitive MLPA was used to characterize individuals with duplications in the Prader-Willi/Angelman (PWA) region. MLPA showed two subjects with typical ASD-associated interstitial duplications of the 15q11-q13 PWA region of maternal origin. Two additional subjects showed smaller, de novo duplications of the PWA region that had not been previously characterized. Genes in these two novel duplications include GABRB3 and ATP10A in one case, and MKRN3, MAGEL2 and NDN in the other. In addition, two subjects showed duplications of the 22q11/DiGeorge syndrome region. One individual was found to carry a 12 kb deletion in one copy of the ASPA gene on 17p13, which when mutated in both alleles leads to Canavan disease. Two subjects showed partial duplication of the TM4SF2 gene on Xp11.4, previously implicated in X-linked non-specific mental retardation, but in our subsequent analyses such variants were also found in controls. A partial duplication in the ASMT gene, located in the pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) of the sex chromosomes and previously suggested to be involved in ASD susceptibility, was observed in 6-7% of the cases but in only 2% of controls (P = 0.003). MLPA proves to be an efficient method to screen for chromosomal abnormalities. We identified duplications in 15q11-q13 and in 22q11, including new de novo small duplications, as likely contributing to ASD in the current sample by increasing liability and/or exacerbating symptoms. Our data indicate that duplications in TM4SF2 are not associated with the phenotype given their presence in controls. The results in PAR1/PAR2 are the first large-scale studies of gene dosage in these regions, and the findings at the ASMT locus indicate that further studies of the duplication of the ASMT gene are needed in order to gain insight into its potential involvement in ASD. Our studies also identify some limitations of MLPA, where single base changes in probe binding sequences alter results. In summary, our studies indicate that MLPA, with a focus on accepted medical genetic conditions, may be an inexpensive method for detection of microdeletions and microduplications in ASD patients for purposes of genetic counselling if MLPA-identified deletions are validated by additional methods.

18757771
Better memory functioning associated with higher total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels in very elderly subjects without the apolipoprotein e4 allele.
To examine the association of cholesterol with cognitive functioning in oldest old community dwelling individuals with and without the apolipoprotein e4 (APOE4) allele. One hundred eighty-five nondemented, community dwelling individuals (>or=85) were assessed with a broad neuropsychological battery. Bloods were drawn to assess total, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, as well as for APOE genotyping. In contrast to our expectations, high total cholesterol and high LDL cholesterol were associated with higher memory scores for noncarriers of the APOE4 allele. No significant associations between cognitive performance and lipid profile were found for carriers of the APOE4 allele. In oldest old nondemented noncarriers of the APOE4 allele, high cholesterol is associated with better memory function. Further examination of the role of APOE genotype on the association between cholesterol and cognitive performance, especially in the oldest old is warranted.

18538995
Religious education and midlife observance are associated with dementia three decades later in Israeli men.
The aim of the study was to examine the association of religious education and observance with dementia among participants in the Israeli Ischemic Heart Disease study. We assessed dementia in 1,890 participants among 2,604 survivors of 10,059 participants in the Israeli Ischemic Heart Disease study, a longitudinal investigation of the incidence and risk factors for cardiovascular disease among Jewish male civil servants in Israel. Face-to-face interviews were conducted with 651 subjects identified as possibly demented by the Modified Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status. Of 1,628 subjects included in this analysis (mean age 82 at assessment), 308 (18.9%) had dementia. The prevalence rates of dementia (and odds ratios (ORs) relative to those with exclusively religious education, adjusted for age, area of birth, and socioeconomic status) were 27.1% for those with exclusively religious education, 12.6% (OR=0.49) for those with mixed education, and 16.1% (OR=0.76) for those with secular education. For religious self-definition and practice, the prevalence rates were 9.7%, 17.7%, 14.1%, 19.3%, and 28.8% for categories from least to most religious (ORs relative to the most religious: 0.43, 0.67, 0.48, 0.55). Examining lifestyles associated with religiosity might shed light onto environmental risks for dementia. Mechanisms underlying these associations remain elusive.

18367838
Clinical dementia rating performed several years prior to death predicts regional Alzheimer's neuropathology.
To assess the relationships between early and late antemortem measures of dementia severity and Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology severity. 40 residents of a nursing home, average age at death 82.0, participated in this longitudinal cohort study with postmortem assessment. Severity of dementia was measured by Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) at two time points, averaging 4.5 and 1.0 years before death. Densities of postmortem neuritic plaques (NPs) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) were measured in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and entorhinal cortex. For most brain areas, both early and late CDRs were significantly associated with NPs and NFTs. CDRs assessed proximal to death predicted NFTs beyond the contribution of early CDRs. NPs were predicted by both early and late CDRs. NPs were predictive of both early and late CDRs after controlling for NFTs. NFTs were only associated significantly with late CDR in the cerebral cortex after controlling for NPs. Even if assessed several years before death, dementia severity is associated with AD neuropathology. NPs are more strongly associated with dementia severity than NFTs. NFTs consistently associate better with late than early CDR, suggesting that these neuropathological changes may occur relatively later in the course of the disease.

18348195
An analysis of candidate autism loci on chromosome 2q24-q33: evidence for association to the STK39 gene.
A susceptibility locus for autism was identified to the chromosome 2q24-q33 region in independent cohorts of families, especially in subsets clinically defined with phrase speech delay (PSD). In the present work, we screened 84 linkage-informative SNPs covering this locus in a cohort of 334 families with autism and in subsets identified with PSD. We observed linkage to autism with the highest non-parametric linkage score (NPL) of 2.79 (P = 0.002) in the PSD subset with at least two affected subjects. In addition, using a set of 109 additional gene-oriented SNPs in this interval we observed that several SNPs encompassing the SLC25A12 gene provided the maximum evidence for linkage (NPL = 3.32, P = 0.0003). Using the transmission disequilibrium test to test for associations, we observed significant over-transmissions of rs2056202 (P = 0.006) within the SLC25A12 gene, rs1807984 (P = 0.007) within the STK39 gene, and rs2305586 (P = 0.009) within the ITGA4 gene. We also found evidence for association between autism and two other SNPs (rs1517342, P = 0.012 and rs971257, P = 0.030) or haplotypes (P = 0.003) of the STK39 gene. STK39 encodes a serine/threonine kinase (SPAK/PASK/STE20-SPS1 homolog) abundantly expressed in the brain with roles in cell differentiation, cell transformation and proliferation, and in regulation of ion transporters. In summary, we have observed further evidence for linkage and association between autism and loci within the 2q24-q33 region, including at STK39, a novel candidate gene for autism.

18161858
Increased longevity in offspring of mothers with Alzheimer's disease.
Life expectancy is a familial trait. However, the effectiveness of using the age at death of a deceased parent to estimate life expectancy in their offspring can vary depending on whether death in the parent was due to extrinsic versus intrinsic causes, as well as demographic characteristics such as sex. While Alzheimer's disease (AD) risk increases with increased age, mortality for individuals with AD is increased in contrast to comparably aged individuals without AD. Yet in most cases it is not the defining neuropathology of AD that directly terminates life but instead conditions and illnesses extrinsic to AD pathology that nevertheless have increased likelihood in its presence. For this reason, we hypothesized that offspring of AD mothers would have greater longevity than offspring of mothers without AD (insufficient numbers prevented a comparable analysis using fathers with AD). The longevity of 345 offspring of 100 deceased 60+ year old AD mothers was compared with 5,465 offspring in 1,312 deceased 60+ year old non-AD mothers. We used a proportional hazards model that accounted for clustered (nonindependent) observations due to the inclusion of several offspring from the same family. In both an unadjusted model and one that adjusted for the age at death in the mother, and the sex and birth year in the offspring we found evidence for increased longevity in the offspring of AD mothers. The results suggest that, in addition to genes that might directly affect pathways leading to AD, there may be familial/genetic factors not connected to specific pathophysiological processes in AD but instead associated with increased longevity that contribute to the familial aggregation observed in AD.

18079025
Number of children is associated with neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease in women.
To examine the association between number of born children and neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The brains of 86 subjects with data on the number of biological children born, were studied postmortem. Primary analyses included 73 subjects (average age at death=80; 42 women) devoid of cerebrovascular disease associated lesions (i.e., infarcts) or of non-AD related neuropathology. Women were significantly older at death than men (85.6 vs. 73.4; p<.0005) but did not differ significantly from men in number of children or dementia severity. Secondary analyses included 13 additional subjects who had concomitant cerebrovascular disease. Density of neuritic plaques (NPs) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, amygdala and multiple regions of the cerebral cortex, as well as composites of these indices reflecting overall neuropathology, were analyzed. For men and women separately, partial correlations, controlling for age at death and dementia severity, were used to assess the associations of number of children with these neuropathological variables. Among women, all the partial correlations were positive, with statistical significance for overall neuropathology (r=.37; p=.02), overall NPs (r=.36; p=.02), and for NPs in the amygdala (r=.47; p=.002). Among men, none of the partial correlations were statistically significant. Results of the secondary analyses were similar. Since the associations between number of children and neuropathology of AD were found for women only, they might reflect sex-specific mechanisms (such as variations in estrogen or luteinizing hormone levels) rather than social, economic, biological or other mechanisms common to both men and women.

18023042
A phenotype for genetic studies of successful cognitive aging.
Survival from Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other dementias into late old age may be a useful phenotype for genetic studies of successful cognitive aging. To support molecular genetics studies for successful cognitive aging, we conducted a two-stage study to determine an optimal age phenotype for successful cognitive aging. First, risk of AD was evaluated, through informant interviews, in 4,794 parents and siblings of 976 elderly nondemented probands who were divided into three different proband age groups: those aged 60-74, 75-89, and 90+. Relatives of probands aged 90+ had a significantly lower risk than the relatives of the other two proband groups. Second, this sample was combined with an earlier sample (combined nondemented elderly probands: n = 2,025; relatives: n = 10,506), and a series of proband age groups (i.e., 75-79, 80-84, 85-89, 90+) were used to determine which optimally identifies a group of relatives with low AD risk. Using the relatives of the nondemented proband aged 60-74 as the reference group, there were reductions in cumulative risk among relatives of probands aged 85-89 and 90+, but only the latter group also showed significant reductions to the relatives of probands aged 75-79, 80-84, and 85-89. This pattern of results varied little by sex. Finally, cumulative AD risk curves were similar between relatives of probands aged 90-94 and 95+. These results suggest that age 90 is an optimal age threshold to use for both men and women in genetic studies seeking to identify genes associated with successful cognitive aging.

18001468
Mutation analysis of the NSD1 gene in patients with autism spectrum disorders and macrocephaly.
Sotos syndrome is an overgrowth syndrome characterized by macrocephaly, advanced bone age, characteristic facial features, and learning disabilities, caused by mutations or deletions of the NSD1 gene, located at 5q35. Sotos syndrome has been described in a number of patients with autism spectrum disorders, suggesting that NSD1 could be involved in other cases of autism and macrocephaly. We screened the NSD1 gene for mutations and deletions in 88 patients with autism spectrum disorders and macrocephaly (head circumference 2 standard deviations or more above the mean). Mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing of all exons and flanking regions. Dosage analysis of NSD1 was carried out using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. We identified three missense variants (R604L, S822C and E1499G) in one patient each, but none is within a functional domain. In addition, segregation analysis showed that all variants were inherited from healthy parents and in two cases were also present in unaffected siblings, indicating that they are probably nonpathogenic. No partial or whole gene deletions/duplications were observed. Our findings suggest that Sotos syndrome is a rare cause of autism spectrum disorders and that screening for NSD1 mutations and deletions in patients with autism and macrocephaly is not warranted in the absence of other features of Sotos syndrome.

17894412
Autism-related routines and rituals associated with a mitochondrial aspartate/glutamate carrier SLC25A12 polymorphism.
Evidence for a genetic association between autism and two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs2056202 and rs2292813, in the mitochondrial aspartate/glutamate carrier (SLC25A12) gene led us to ask whether any of the four previously identified familial traits in autism spectrum disorders (ASD) varied by these SNPs. In 355 ASD cases from 170 sibships we examined levels of the four traits in these SNPs using ANCOVA models. The primary models selected unrelated affected cases and used age and sex as covariates. An ancillary set of models used all affected siblings and included "sibship" as a random effects independent variable. We found significantly lower levels of routines and rituals associated with the presence of the less frequent A allele in rs2056206. No other significant differences were observed. The rs2056202 polymorphism may be associated with levels of routines and rituals in autism and related disorders.

17483665
Cardiovascular risk factors for Alzheimer's disease.
There is now sizable literature on the association between traditional cardiovascular risk factors and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Based on epidemiologic studies, both cross-sectional and longitudinal, there are statistically significant correlations between the prevalence of AD and diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, hyperhomocysteinemia, dietary saturated fats, cholesterol, antioxidants, alcohol consumption, smoking, physical activity, the presence of atrial fibrillation, atherosclerotic disease, and the plasma concentration of some hemostatic factors. Most of the cardiovascular risk factors found to be associated with AD are age-dependent, and the prevalence of AD increases with age. Therefore, the association could simply be attributed to aging. On the other hand, the common pathogenetic mechanisms for the generation of both atherosclerotic disease and AD, such as inflammation and the generation of free radicals, suggest a causal link. If this is the case, the identification of modifiable risk factors for dementia becomes a research priority and early intervention aimed at reducing those cardiovascular risk factors a therapeutic imperative.

17427195
Mutation screening of the PTEN gene in patients with autism spectrum disorders and macrocephaly.
Mutations in the PTEN gene are associated with a broad spectrum of disorders, including Cowden syndrome (CS), Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, Proteus syndrome, and Lhermitte-Duclos disease. In addition, PTEN mutations have been described in a few patients with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) and macrocephaly. In this study, we screened the PTEN gene for mutations and deletions in 88 patients with ASDs and macrocephaly (defined as >or=2 SD above the mean). Mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing of all exons and flanking regions, as well as the promoter region. Dosage analysis of PTEN was carried out using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). No partial or whole gene deletions were observed. We identified a de novo missense mutation (D326N) in a highly conserved amino acid in a 5-year-old boy with autism, mental retardation, language delay, extreme macrocephaly (+9.6 SD) and polydactyly of both feet. Polydactyly has previously been described in two patients with Lhermitte-Duclos disease and CS and is thus likely to be a rare sign of PTEN mutations. Our findings suggest that PTEN mutations are a relatively infrequent cause of ASDs with macrocephaly. Screening of PTEN mutations is warranted in patients with autism and pronounced macrocephaly, even in the absence of other features of PTEN-related tumor syndromes.

17289158
Birth order effects on autism symptom domains.
Autism is predominantly genetically determined. Evidence supports familiality of the main sets of behavioral characteristics that define the syndrome of autism; however, possible non-genetic effects have also been suggested. The present study compared levels of autism symptom domains, as measured by the Autism Diagnostic Interview, and useful phrase speech scores between 106 pairs of first- and second-born siblings from multiply affected families. In addition, the intercorrelations between the measures were compared between siblings. The overall mean repetitive behavior total score was significantly higher (worse) in first-born than in second-born siblings. In contrast, first-born siblings had significantly lower (better) useful phrase speech than their younger siblings. Autism social and non-verbal communication scores were significantly correlated in first- and in second-born siblings. However, there was a significant difference in the coefficients between first- and second-born siblings. Performance on the non-verbal communication domain was also significantly and positively correlated with useful phrase speech score in both first- and second-born siblings. It is unclear at this time whether these results are of biologic origin. Nevertheless, the findings suggest that genetic studies in autism using specific levels of familial autism traits as phenotypes should take into account their intercorrelations and birth order effects embedded in the instrument.

