21485003
Improved compensation in flow cytometry by multivariable optimization.
Conventional compensation of flow cytometry (FMC) data of an N-stained sample requires additional data sets, of N single-stained control samples, to estimate the spillover coefficients. Single-stained controls however are the least rigorous controls because any of the multi-stained controls are closer to the N-stained sample. In this article, a new, optimization based, compensation method has been developed that is able to use not only single- but also multi-stained controls to improve estimates of the spillover coefficients. The method is demonstrated on a data set from five-stained dentritic cells (DCs) with five single-stained and eight multi-stained controls. This approach is practical and leads to significant improvements in FCM compensation. © 2011 International Society for Advancement of Cytometry.

21436256
Characterization of a MAPK scaffolding protein logic gate in gonadotropes.
In the pituitary gonadotropes, both protein kinase C (PKC) and MAPK/ERK signaling cascades are activated by GnRH. Phosphoprotein-enriched in astrocytes 15 (PEA-15) is a cytosolic ERK scaffolding protein, which is expressed in L?T2 gonadotrope cells. Pharmacological inhibition of PKC and small interfering RNA-mediated silencing of G?q/11 revealed that GnRH induces accumulation of phosphorylated PEA-15 in a PKC-dependent manner. To investigate the potential role of PEA-15 in GnRH signaling, we examined the regulation of ERK subcellular localization and the activation of ribosomal S6 kinase, a substrate of ERK. Results obtained by cellular fractionation/Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry revealed that GnRH-induced accumulation of phosphorylated ERK in the nucleus was attenuated when PEA-15 expression was reduced. Conversely, in the absence of GnRH stimulation, PEA-15 anchors ERK in the cytosol. Our data suggest that GnRH-induced nuclear translocation of ERK requires its release from PEA-15, which occurs upon PEA-15 phosphorylation by PKC. Additional gene-silencing experiments in GnRH-stimulated cells demonstrated that ribosomal S6 kinase activation was dependent on both PEA-15 and PKC. Furthermore, small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of PEA-15 caused a reduction in GnRH-stimulated expression of early response genes Egr2 and c-Jun, as well as gonadotropin FSH?-subunit gene expression. PEA-15 knockdown increased LH? and common ?-glycoprotein subunit mRNAs, suggesting a possible role in differential regulation of gonadotropin subunit gene expression. We propose that PEA-15 represents a novel point of convergence of the PKC and MAPK/ERK pathways under GnRH stimulation. PKC, ERK, and PEA-15 form an AND logic gate that shapes the response of the gonadotrope cell to GnRH.

21375368
Differential gene expression in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Abstract Our objective was to analyze gene expression pattern in muscles from patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) compared to controls. Biopsied skeletal muscles from three ALS, three MMN and three control subjects had total RNA extracted and subjected to genome-wide gene expression analysis using Affymetrix GeneChip Exon 1.0 ST array. The most significant expression pattern differences were confirmed with RT-PCR in four additional ALS patients. Results showed that over 3000 genes were identified across the groups using q < 10%. Among 50 genes that were overexpressed only in the ALS group were: leucine-rich repeat kinase-2, follistatin, collagen type XIX alpha-1, ceramide kinase-like, sestrin-3 and CXorf64. No genes were significantly overexpressed in MMN alone. Underexpressed genes only in ALS included actinin ?3, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase-2 and homeobox C10; whereas only in MMN: hemoglobin A1 and CXorf64. Ankyrin repeat domain-1 was overexpressed in both groups. Underexpressed genes in both groups included myosin light chain kinase-2, enolase-3 and 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase-1. Validation analysis using RT-PCR confirmed the data for leucine-rich repeat kinase-2, follistatin, collagen type XIX alpha-1, ceramide kinase-like, sestrin-3 and CXorf64. In conclusion, there is differential tissue-specific gene expression in patients with ALS relative to MMN and controls. Further studies are necessary to evaluate the identified genes in larger patient groups and different tissues.

21347441
Role of cell-to-cell variability in activating a positive feedback antiviral response in human dendritic cells.
In the first few hours following Newcastle disease viral infection of human monocyte-derived dendritic cells, the induction of IFNB1 is extremely low and the secreted type I interferon response is below the limits of ELISA assay. However, many interferon-induced genes are activated at this time, for example DDX58 (RIGI), which in response to viral RNA induces IFNB1. We investigated whether the early induction of IFNBI in only a small percentage of infected cells leads to low level IFN secretion that then induces IFN-responsive genes in all cells. We developed an agent-based mathematical model to explore the IFNBI and DDX58 temporal dynamics. Simulations showed that a small number of early responder cells provide a mechanism for efficient and controlled activation of the DDX58-IFNBI positive feedback loop. The model predicted distributions of single cell responses that were confirmed by single cell mRNA measurements. The results suggest that large cell-to-cell variation plays an important role in the early innate immune response, and that the variability is essential for the efficient activation of the IFNB1 based feedback loop.

21276828
Metabotropic glutamate mGlu2 receptor is necessary for the pharmacological and behavioral effects induced by hallucinogenic 5-HT2A receptor agonists.
Hallucinogenic drugs, including mescaline, psilocybin and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), act at serotonin 5-HT2A receptors (5-HT2ARs). Metabotropic glutamate receptor 2/3 (mGluR2/3) ligands show efficacy in modulating the responses induced by activation of 5-HT2ARs. The formation of a 5-HT2AR-mGluR2 complex suggests a functional interaction that affects the hallucinogen-regulated cellular signaling pathways. Here, we tested the cellular and behavioral effects of hallucinogenic 5-HT2AR agonists in mGluR2 knockout (mGluR2-KO) mice. Mice were intraperitoneally injected with the hallucinogens DOI (2 mg/kg) and LSD (0.24 mg/kg), or vehicle. Head-twitch behavioral response, expression of c-fos, which is induced by all 5-HT2AR agonists, and expression of egr-2, which is hallucinogen-specific, were determined in wild type and mGluR2-KO mice. [(3)H]Ketanserin binding displacement curves by DOI were performed in mouse frontal cortex membrane preparations. Head twitch behavior was abolished in mGluR2-KO mice. The high-affinity binding site of DOI was undetected in mGluR2-KO mice. The hallucinogen DOI induced c-fos in both wild type and mGluR2-KO mice. However, the induction of egr-2 by DOI was eliminated in mGlu2-KO mice. These findings suggest that the 5-HT2AR-mGluR2 complex is necessary for the neuropsychological responses induced by hallucinogens.

20967621
RNA and DNA microarrays.
The development of microarray technology has revolutionized RNA and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) research. In contrast with traditional biological assays, microarrays allow the simultaneous measurement of tens of thousands of messenger RNA (mRNA) transcripts for gene expression or of genomic DNA fragments for copy number variation analysis. Over the past decade, genome-wide RNA or DNA microarray analysis has become an essential component of biology and biomedical research. The successful use of microarrays requires attention to unique issues of experimental design and execution. This chapter provides an overview of the methodology and applications of RNA and DNA microarrays in various areas of biological research.

20932336
Misty Mountain clustering: application to fast unsupervised flow cytometry gating.
There are many important clustering questions in computational biology for which no satisfactory method exists. Automated clustering algorithms, when applied to large, multidimensional datasets, such as flow cytometry data, prove unsatisfactory in terms of speed, problems with local minima or cluster shape bias. Model-based approaches are restricted by the assumptions of the fitting functions. Furthermore, model based clustering requires serial clustering for all cluster numbers within a user defined interval. The final cluster number is then selected by various criteria. These supervised serial clustering methods are time consuming and frequently different criteria result in different optimal cluster numbers. Various unsupervised heuristic approaches that have been developed such as affinity propagation are too expensive to be applied to datasets on the order of 106 points that are often generated by high throughput experiments. To circumvent these limitations, we developed a new, unsupervised density contour clustering algorithm, called Misty Mountain, that is based on percolation theory and that efficiently analyzes large data sets. The approach can be envisioned as a progressive top-down removal of clouds covering a data histogram relief map to identify clusters by the appearance of statistically distinct peaks and ridges. This is a parallel clustering method that finds every cluster after analyzing only once the cross sections of the histogram. The overall run time for the composite steps of the algorithm increases linearly by the number of data points. The clustering of 106 data points in 2D data space takes place within about 15 seconds on a standard laptop PC. Comparison of the performance of this algorithm with other state of the art automated flow cytometry gating methods indicate that Misty Mountain provides substantial improvements in both run time and in the accuracy of cluster assignment. Misty Mountain is fast, unbiased for cluster shape, identifies stable clusters and is robust to noise. It provides a useful, general solution for multidimensional clustering problems. We demonstrate its suitability for automated gating of flow cytometry data.

20929569
Signaling network of dendritic cells in response to pathogens: a community-input supported knowledgebase.
Dendritic cells are antigen-presenting cells that play an essential role in linking the innate and adaptive immune systems. Much research has focused on the signaling pathways triggered upon infection of dendritic cells by various pathogens. The high level of activity in the field makes it desirable to have a pathway-based resource to access the information in the literature. Current pathway diagrams lack either comprehensiveness, or an open-access editorial interface. Hence, there is a need for a dependable, expertly curated knowledgebase that integrates this information into a map of signaling networks. We have built a detailed diagram of the dendritic cell signaling network, with the goal of providing researchers with a valuable resource and a facile method for community input. Network construction has relied on comprehensive review of the literature and regular updates. The diagram includes detailed depictions of pathways activated downstream of different pathogen recognition receptors such as Toll-like receptors, retinoic acid-inducible gene-I-like receptors, C-type lectin receptors and nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptors. Initially assembled using CellDesigner software, it provides an annotated graphical representation of interactions stored in Systems Biology Mark-up Language. The network, which comprises 249 nodes and 213 edges, has been web-published through the Biological Pathway Publisher software suite. Nodes are annotated with PubMed references and gene-related information, and linked to a public wiki, providing a discussion forum for updates and corrections. To gain more insight into regulatory patterns of dendritic cell signaling, we analyzed the network using graph-theory methods: bifan, feedforward and multi-input convergence motifs were enriched. This emphasis on activating control mechanisms is consonant with a network that subserves persistent and coordinated responses to pathogen detection. This map represents a navigable aid for presenting a consensus view of the current knowledge on dendritic cell signaling that can be continuously improved through contributions of research community experts. Because the map is available in a machine readable format, it can be edited and may assist researchers in data analysis. Furthermore, the availability of a comprehensive knowledgebase might help further research in this area such as vaccine development. The dendritic cell signaling knowledgebase is accessible at http://tsb.mssm.edu/pathwayPublisher/DC_pathway/DC_pathway_index.html.

20875421
Validation of efficient high-throughput plasmid and siRNA transfection of human monocyte-derived dendritic cells without cell maturation.
Transfection of primary immune cells is difficult to achieve at high efficiency and without cell activation and maturation. Dendritic cells (DCs) represent a key link between the innate and adaptive immune systems. Delineating the signaling pathways involved in the activation of human primary DCs and reverse engineering cellular inflammatory pathways have been challenging tasks. We optimized and validated an effective high-throughput transfection protocol, allowing us to transiently express DNA in naïve primary DCs, as well as investigate the effect of gene silencing by RNA interference. Using a high-throughput nucleofection system, monocyte-derived DCs were nucleoporated with a plasmid expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP), and transfection efficiency was determined by flow cytometry, based on GFP expression. To evaluate the effect of nucleoporation on DC maturation, the expression of cell surface markers CD86 and MHCII in GFP-positive cells was analyzed by flow cytometry. We established optimal assay conditions with a cell viability reaching 70%, a transfection efficiency of over 50%, and unchanged CD86 and MHCII expression. We examined the impact of small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of RIG-I, a key viral recognition receptor, on the induction of the interferon (IFN) response in DCs infected with Newcastle disease virus. RIG-I protein was undetectable by Western blot in siRNA-treated cells. RIG-I knockdown caused a 75% reduction in the induction of IFN? mRNA compared with the negative control siRNA. This protocol should be a valuable tool for probing the immune response pathways activated in human DCs.

20739535
Novel Nipah virus immune-antagonism strategy revealed by experimental and computational study.
Nipah virus is an emerging pathogen that causes severe disease in humans. It expresses several antagonist proteins that subvert the immune response and that may contribute to its pathogenicity. Studies of its biology are difficult due to its high pathogenicity and requirement for biosafety level 4 containment. We integrated experimental and computational methods to elucidate the effects of Nipah virus immune antagonists. Individual Nipah virus immune antagonists (phosphoprotein and V and W proteins) were expressed from recombinant Newcastle disease viruses, and the responses of infected human monocyte-derived dendritic cells were determined. We developed an ordinary differential equation model of the infectious process that that produced results with a high degree of correlation with these experimental results. In order to simulate the effects of wild-type virus, the model was extended to incorporate published experimental data on the time trajectories of immune-antagonist production. These data showed that the RNA-editing mechanism utilized by the wild-type Nipah virus to produce immune antagonists leads to a delay in the production of the most effective immune antagonists, V and W. Model simulations indicated that this delay caused a disconnection between attenuation of the antiviral response and suppression of inflammation. While the antiviral cytokines were efficiently suppressed at early time points, some early inflammatory cytokine production occurred, which would be expected to increase vascular permeability and promote virus spread and pathogenesis. These results suggest that Nipah virus has evolved a unique immune-antagonist strategy that benefits from controlled expression of multiple antagonist proteins with various potencies.

20632964
Heteromerization of G protein-coupled receptors: relevance to neurological disorders and neurotherapeutics.
Because G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are numerous, widely expressed and involved in major physiological responses, they represent a relevant therapeutic target for drug discovery, particularly regarding pharmacological treatments of neurological disorders. Among the biological phenomena regulating receptor function, GPCR heteromerization is an important emerging area of interest and investigation. There is increasing evidence showing that heteromerization contributes to the pharmacological heterogeneity of GPCRs by modulating receptor ontogeny, activation and recycling. Although in many cases the physiological relevance of receptor heteromerization has not been fully established, the unique pharmacological and functional properties of heteromers are likely to lead to new strategies in clinical medicine. This review describes the main GPCR heteromers and their implications for major neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease, schizophrenia and addiction. A better understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying drug interactions related to the targeting of receptor heteromers could provide more specific and efficient therapeutic agents for the treatment of brain diseases.

20592162
Research resource: Gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor-mediated signaling network in LbetaT2 cells: a pathway-based web-accessible knowledgebase.
The GnRH receptor (GnRHR), expressed at the cell surface of the anterior pituitary gonadotrope, is critical for normal secretion of gonadotropins LH and FSH, pubertal development, and reproduction. The signaling network downstream of the GnRHR and the molecular bases of the regulation of gonadotropin expression have been the subject of intense research. The murine LbetaT2 cell line represents a mature gonadotrope and therefore is an important model for the study of GnRHR-signaling pathways and modulation of the gonadotrope cell by physiological regulators. In order to facilitate access to the information contained in this complex and evolving literature, we have developed a pathway-based knowledgebase that is web hosted. At present, using 106 relevant primary publications, we curated a comprehensive knowledgebase of the GnRHR signaling in the LbetaT2 cell in the form of a process diagram. Positive and negative controls of gonadotropin gene expression, which included GnRH itself, hypothalamic factors, gonadal steroids and peptides, as well as other hormones, were illustrated. The knowledgebase contains 187 entities and 206 reactions. It was assembled using CellDesigner software, which provides an annotated graphic representation of interactions, stored in Systems Biology Mark-up Language. We then utilized Biological Pathway Publisher, a software suite previously developed in our laboratory, to host the knowledgebase in a web-accessible format as a public resource. In addition, the network entities were linked to a public wiki, providing a forum for discussion, updating, and error correction. The GnRHR-signaling network is openly accessible at http://tsb.mssm.edu/pathwayPublisher/GnRHR_Pathway/GnRHR_Pathway_ index.html.

20585619
Plato's cave algorithm: inferring functional signaling networks from early gene expression shadows.
Improving the ability to reverse engineer biochemical networks is a major goal of systems biology. Lesions in signaling networks lead to alterations in gene expression, which in principle should allow network reconstruction. However, the information about the activity levels of signaling proteins conveyed in overall gene expression is limited by the complexity of gene expression dynamics and of regulatory network topology. Two observations provide the basis for overcoming this limitation: a. genes induced without de-novo protein synthesis (early genes) show a linear accumulation of product in the first hour after the change in the cell's state; b. The signaling components in the network largely function in the linear range of their stimulus-response curves. Therefore, unlike most genes or most time points, expression profiles of early genes at an early time point provide direct biochemical assays that represent the activity levels of upstream signaling components. Such expression data provide the basis for an efficient algorithm (Plato's Cave algorithm; PLACA) to reverse engineer functional signaling networks. Unlike conventional reverse engineering algorithms that use steady state values, PLACA uses stimulated early gene expression measurements associated with systematic perturbations of signaling components, without measuring the signaling components themselves. Besides the reverse engineered network, PLACA also identifies the genes detecting the functional interaction, thereby facilitating validation of the predicted functional network. Using simulated datasets, the algorithm is shown to be robust to experimental noise. Using experimental data obtained from gonadotropes, PLACA reverse engineered the interaction network of six perturbed signaling components. The network recapitulated many known interactions and identified novel functional interactions that were validated by further experiment. PLACA uses the results of experiments that are feasible for any signaling network to predict the functional topology of the network and to identify novel relationships.

20298589
Coregulation mapping based on individual phenotypic variation in response to virus infection.
Gene coregulation across a population is an important aspect of the considerable variability of the human immune response to virus infection. Methodology to investigate it must rely on a number of ingredients ranging from gene clustering to transcription factor enrichment analysis. We have developed a methodology to investigate the gene to gene correlations for the expression of 34 genes linked to the immune response of Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV) infected conventional dendritic cells (DCs) from 145 human donors. The levels of gene expression showed a large variation across individuals. We generated a map of gene co-expression using pairwise correlation and multidimensional scaling (MDS). The analysis of these data showed that among the 13 genes left after filtering for statistically significant variations, two clusters are formed. We investigated to what extent the observed correlation patterns can be explained by the sharing of transcription factors (TFs) controlling these genes. Our analysis showed that there was a significant positive correlation between MDS distances and TF sharing across all pairs of genes. We applied enrichment analysis to the TFs having binding sites in the promoter regions of those genes. This analysis, after Gene Ontology filtering, indicated the existence of two clusters of genes (CCL5, IFNA1, IFNA2, IFNB1) and (IKBKE, IL6, IRF7, MX1) that were transcriptionally co-regulated. In order to facilitate the use of our methodology by other researchers, we have also developed an interactive coregulation explorer web-based tool called CorEx. It permits the study of MDS and hierarchical clustering of data combined with TF enrichment analysis. We also offer web services that provide programmatic access to MDS, hierarchical clustering and TF enrichment analysis. MDS mapping based on correlation in conjunction with TF enrichment analysis represents a useful computational method to generate predictions underlying gene coregulation across a population.

20164420
Antiviral response dictated by choreographed cascade of transcription factors.
The dendritic cell (DC) is a master regulator of immune responses. Pathogenic viruses subvert normal immune function in DCs through the expression of immune antagonists. Understanding how these antagonists interact with the host immune system requires knowledge of the underlying genetic regulatory network that operates during an uninhibited antiviral response. To isolate and identify this network, we studied DCs infected with Newcastle disease virus, which is able to stimulate innate immunity and DC maturation through activation of RIG-I signaling, but lacks the ability to evade the human IFN response. To analyze this experimental model, we developed a new approach integrating genome-wide expression kinetics and time-dependent promoter analysis. We found that the genetic program underlying the antiviral cell-state transition during the first 18 h postinfection could be explained by a single convergent regulatory network. Gene expression changes were driven by a stepwise multifactor cascading control mechanism, where the specific transcription factors controlling expression changed over time. Within this network, most individual genes were regulated by multiple factors, indicating robustness against virus-encoded immune evasion genes. In addition to effectively recapitulating current biological knowledge, we predicted, and validated experimentally, antiviral roles for several novel transcription factors. More generally, our results show how a genetic program can be temporally controlled through a single regulatory network to achieve the large-scale genetic reprogramming characteristic of cell-state transitions.

20159146
Immune response modeling of interferon beta-pretreated influenza virus-infected human dendritic cells.
The pretreatment of human dendritic cells with interferon-beta enhances their immune response to influenza virus infection. We measured the expression levels of several key players in that response over a period of 13 h both during pretreatment and after viral infection. Their activation profiles reflect the presence of both negative and positive feedback loops in interferon induction and interferon signaling pathway. Based on these measurements, we have developed a comprehensive computational model of cellular immune response that elucidates its mechanism and its dynamics in interferon-pretreated dendritic cells, and provides insights into the effects of duration and strength of pretreatment.

20048384
Multiple testing and its applications to microarrays.
The large-scale multiple testing problems resulting from the measurement of thousands of genes in microarray experiments have received increasing interest during the past several years. This article describes some commonly used criteria for controlling false positive errors, including familywise error rates, false discovery rates and false discovery proportion rates. Various statistical methods controlling these error rates are described. The advantages and disadvantages of these methods are discussed. These methods are applied to gene expression data from two microarray studies and the properties of these multiple testing procedures are compared.

19707855
Group II metabotropic glutamate receptors and schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia is one of the most common mental illnesses, with hereditary and environmental factors important for its etiology. All antipsychotics have in common a high affinity for monoaminergic receptors. Whereas hallucinations and delusions usually respond to typical (haloperidol-like) and atypical (clozapine-like) monoaminergic antipsychotics, their efficacy in improving negative symptoms and cognitive deficits remains inadequate. In addition, devastating side effects are a common characteristic of monoaminergic antipsychotics. Recent biochemical, preclinical and clinical findings support group II metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR2 and mGluR3) as a new approach to treat schizophrenia. This paper reviews the status of general knowledge of mGluR2 and mGluR3 in the psychopharmacology, genetics and neuropathology of schizophrenia.

19601596
Model of autocrine/paracrine signaling in epithelial layer: geometrical regulation of intercellular communication.
An autocrine/paracrine signaling model in epithelial layers is described. The axially symmetric model of the epithelial layer explicitly considers the microvilli of the epithelial cells and the gaps between nearest neighbor microvilli. Ligand trapping site distribution functions and probability of autocrine signaling are calculated for different epithelial geometries and ligand sources by numerically solving the inhomogeneous stationary diffusion equation, the Poisson equation. In general, the global characteristics of the trapping site distribution curves are similar to the ones obtained for a planar epithelial model, and the superimposed small periodical changes of the curves reflect the details of the epithelial geometry. However, when ligands are emitted into a narrow gap between nearest neighbor microvilli the probability of local trapping is particularly high, causing a locally large deviation from the overall behavior of the trapping site distribution curves. If the microvilli of the cell are closely packed, then the probability of paracrine signaling is about 0.2. However, this probability jumps to about 0.5 if the cell is able to slightly loosen the tight packing, for example, by decreasing the diameter of the microvilli by only 2%. On the basis of our calculations, alteration of microvillus geometry represents a mechanism by which epithelial cells can efficiently regulate intercellular signaling.

19356622
Microtranscriptome regulation by gonadotropin-releasing hormone.
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) regulates biosynthesis in the pituitary gonadotrope via a complex signaling and gene network. Small non-coding microRNAs (miRNA) can play important roles in gene expression. We investigated the microtranscriptome in the mouse L?T2 gonadotrope cell line using microarray, single molecule coincidence detection assays, hairpin real time PCR and LNA (locked nucleic acid) primer-extension PCR. Expression of nearly 200 miRNAs were detected by array and a panel of 101 hairpin real time PCR assays. Within this broad family of expressed miRNAs, GnRH induced upregulation of two miRNA products of the same primary transcript, miR-132 and miR-212, a result confirmed by single molecule, hairpin and LNA assays. Induction peaked 6h after GnRH exposure and showed no significant frequency sensitivity. Bioinformatics analysis was used to predict potential targets of each of these GnRH-regulated miRNAs. These findings suggest the importance of the microtranscriptome in gene control in the gonadotrope and implicate miR-132 and miR-212 in the regulation of GnRH-stimulated biosynthetic response.

19275609
Agonist-trafficking and hallucinogens.
Seven transmembrane domain receptors, also termed G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), represent the most common molecular target for therapeutic drugs. The generally accepted pharmacological model for GPCR activation is the ternary complex model, in which GPCRs exist in a dynamic equilibrium between the active and inactive conformational states. However, the demonstration that different agonists sometimes elicit a different relative activation of two signaling pathways downstream of the same receptor has led to a revision of the ternary complex model. According to this agonist- trafficking model, agonists stabilize distinct activated receptor conformations that preferentially activate specific signaling pathways. Hallucinogenic drugs and non-hallucinogenic drugs represent an attractive experimental system with which to study agonist-trafficking of receptor signaling. Thus many of the behavioral responses induced by hallucinogenic drugs, such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), psilocybin or mescaline, depend on activation of serotonin 5-HT(2A) receptors (5-HT2ARs). In contrast, this neuropsychological state in humans is not induced by closely related chemicals, such as lisuride or ergotamine, despite their similar in vitro activity at the 5-HT2AR. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge, as well as unresolved questions, regarding agonist-trafficking and the mechanism of action of hallucinogenic drugs.

19269047
Psychedelics and schizophrenia.
Research on psychedelics such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and dissociative drugs such as phencyclidine (PCP) and the symptoms, neurochemical abnormalities and treatment of schizophrenia have converged. The effects of hallucinogenic drugs resemble some of the core symptoms of schizophrenia. Some atypical antipsychotic drugs were identified by their high affinity for serotonin 5-HT(2A) receptors, which is also the target of LSD-like drugs. Several effects of PCP-like drugs are strongly affected by both 5-HT(2A) and metabotropic glutamate 2/3 receptor modulation. A serotonin-glutamate receptor complex in cortical pyramidal neurons has been identified that might be the target both of psychedelics and the atypical and glutamate classes of antipsychotic drugs. Recent results on the receptor, signalling and circuit mechanisms underlying the response to psychedelic and antipsychotic drugs might lead to unification of the serotonin and glutamate neurochemical hypotheses of schizophrenia.

19018297
SOME STEP-DOWN PROCEDURES CONTROLLING THE FALSE DISCOVERY RATE UNDER DEPENDENCE.
Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) proposed the false discovery rate (FDR) as an alternative to the familywise error rate (FWER) in multiple testing problems. Since then, researchers have been increasingly interested in developing methodologies for controlling the FDR under different model assumptions. In a later paper, Benjamini and Yekutieli (2001) developed a conservative step-up procedure controlling the FDR without relying on the assumption that the test statistics are independent.In this paper, we develop a new step-down procedure aiming to control the FDR. It incorporates dependence information as in the FWER controlling step-down procedure given by Westfall and Young (1993). This new procedure has three versions: lFDR, eFDR and hFDR. Using simulations of independent and dependent data, we observe that the lFDR is too optimistic for controlling the FDR; the hFDR is very conservative; and the eFDR a) seems to control the FDR for the hypotheses of interest, and b) suggests the number of false null hypotheses. The most conservative procedure, hFDR, is proved to control the FDR for finite samples under the subset pivotality condition and under the assumption that joint distribution of statistics from true nulls is independent of the joint distribution of statistics from false nulls.

18981106
Antiviral-activated dendritic cells: a paracrine-induced response state.
Infection of immature dendritic cells (DCs) by virus stimulates their maturation into APC. Infected DCs can also expose uninfected DCs to a panoply of cytokines/chemokines via paracrine signaling. Mathematical modeling suggests that a high rate of paracrine signaling is likely to occur among DCs located in three-dimensional space. Relatively little is known about how secreted factors modify the early response to virus infection. We used a transwell experimental system that allows passage of secreted factors, but not direct contact, between virus-infected DCs and uninfected DCs to investigate paracrine signaling responses. Paracrine signaling from infected DCs induced an antiviral-primed DC state distinct from that of mature virus-infected DCs that we refer to as antiviral-activated DCs (AVDCs). AVDCs had increased surface MHC class II and CD86 levels, but in contrast to virus-infected DCs, their MHC class I levels were unchanged. Imaging flow cytometry showed that AVDCs had an increased rate of phagocytosis compared with naive DCs. Experiments with IFN-beta cytokine indicated that it may be responsible for CD86, but not MHC class II regulation in AVDCs. Both IFN-inducible and IFN-independent genes are up-regulated in AVDCs. Notably, AVDCs are relatively resistant to virus infection in comparison to naive DCs and achieve accelerated and augmented levels of costimulatory molecule expression with virus infection. AVDCs show a distinct antiviral-primed state of DC maturation mediated by DC paracrine signaling. Although further in vivo study is needed, the characteristics of the AVDC suggest that it is well suited to play a role in the early innate-adaptive transition of the immune system.

18974865
Interferon-beta pretreatment of conventional and plasmacytoid human dendritic cells enhances their activation by influenza virus.
Influenza virus produces a protein, NS1, that inhibits infected cells from releasing type I interferon (IFN) and blocks maturation of conventional dendritic cells (DCs). As a result, influenza virus is a poor activator of both mouse and human DCs in vitro. However, in vivo a strong immune response to virus infection is generated in both species, suggesting that other factors may contribute to the maturation of DCs in vivo. It is likely that the environment in which a DC encounters a virus would contain multiple pro-inflammatory molecules, including type I IFN. Type I IFN is a critical component of the viral immune response that initiates an antiviral state in cells, primarily by triggering a broad transcriptional program that interferes with the ability of virus to establish infection in the cell. In this study, we have examined the activation profiles of both conventional and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (cDCs and pDCs) in response to an influenza virus infection in the context of a type I IFN-containing environment. We found that both cDCs and pDCs demonstrate a greater activation response to influenza virus when pre-exposed to IFN-beta (IFN priming); although, the priming kinetics are different in these two cell types. This strongly suggests that type I IFN functions not only to reduce viral replication in these immune cells, but also to promote greater DC activation during influenza virus infections.

18729740
A comprehensive evaluation of human plasmacytoid dendritic cells using small volumes of human blood.
Elucidation of the role played by cells of the innate immune system, particularly the dendritic cell (DC) populations, has led to a precipitous growth in our understanding of immunity to pathogens and foreign antigens. Much of this information has been derived from studies using mouse model systems. However, mice and human DCs differ drastically in the relative distribution of the toll-like receptors (TLRs) critical for immune activation. This is particularly true for the plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), which are activated almost exclusively through TLR signaling. Variation in this DC subpopulation has been implicated in a number of pathological syndromes; therefore, a thorough understanding of their steady state and activation profiles in human patients is essential. A number of factors, including the relatively low numbers of these cells in blood, have precluded careful analysis in clinical trials. To overcome these limitations, we have developed a technique for studying the steady state and activation profile of pDCs collected from small amounts of human blood. This technique can be performed with 10,000 cells to obtain the immune transcriptome of the pDCs analyzed by quantitative PCR using amplified RNA. In addition, we have used multiplex enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays to measure secreted proteins. We demonstrate the validity of this technique and document its potential for use with blood from human study populations.

18463709
Getting started in biological pathway construction and analysis.


18297054
Identification of a serotonin/glutamate receptor complex implicated in psychosis.
The psychosis associated with schizophrenia is characterized by alterations in sensory processing and perception. Some antipsychotic drugs were identified by their high affinity for serotonin 5-HT2A receptors (2AR). Drugs that interact with metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR) also have potential for the treatment of schizophrenia. The effects of hallucinogenic drugs, such as psilocybin and lysergic acid diethylamide, require the 2AR and resemble some of the core symptoms of schizophrenia. Here we show that the mGluR2 interacts through specific transmembrane helix domains with the 2AR, a member of an unrelated G-protein-coupled receptor family, to form functional complexes in brain cortex. The 2AR-mGluR2 complex triggers unique cellular responses when targeted by hallucinogenic drugs, and activation of mGluR2 abolishes hallucinogen-specific signalling and behavioural responses. In post-mortem human brain from untreated schizophrenic subjects, the 2AR is upregulated and the mGluR2 is downregulated, a pattern that could predispose to psychosis. These regulatory changes indicate that the 2AR-mGluR2 complex may be involved in the altered cortical processes of schizophrenia, and this complex is therefore a promising new target for the treatment of psychosis.

17720728
Noise propagation and scaling in regulation of gonadotrope biosynthesis.
Reproductive physiology depends on the control of biosynthesis in the pituitary gonadotrope by hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). The responses to GnRH include activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and induction of Egr1. Using population and single cell signaling assays, we investigated the signal and noise transmission through this signaling and gene circuit, analyzing data obtained from 43,775 individual cells in 40 experiments. After exposure to GnRH, phosphorylated ERK (pERK) is elevated in 50% of the cells at 1.7 (SD = 0.3) min. Studies of the cell-to-cell response showed that for both pERK and for Egr1 protein production the mean response (mu) and standard deviation (sigma) within individual cells were linearly related (sigma = kmu) and had similar values of k. To understand the basis for the scaling observed for noise propagation through this system, we determined the relationship between pERK and egr1 mRNA levels induced at varying concentration of GnRH. While both pERK and egr1 mRNA show a saturating sigmoidal relationship to the concentration of GnRH exposure, egr1 mRNA is linearly related to the levels of pERK. These results explain the basis for variation in cellular responses in an important mammalian signaling pathway leading to gene induction.

17675303
Chromosome-specific and noisy IFNB1 transcription in individual virus-infected human primary dendritic cells.
The induction of interferon beta (IFNB1) is a key event in the antiviral immune response. We studied the role of transcriptional noise in the regulation of the IFNB1 locus in primary cultures of human dendritic cells (DCs), which are important 'first responders' to viral infection. In single cell assays, IFNB1 mRNA expression in virus-infected DCs showed much greater cell-to-cell variation than that of a housekeeping gene, another induced transcript and viral RNA. We determined the contribution of intrinsic noise by measuring the allelic origin of transcripts in each cell and found that intrinsic noise is a very significant part of total noise. We developed a stochastic model to investigate the underlying mechanisms. We propose that the surprisingly high levels of IFNB1 transcript noise originate from the complexity of IFNB1 enhanceosome formation, which leads to a range up to many minutes in the differences within each cell in the time of activation of each allele.

17519033
BioPP: a tool for web-publication of biological networks.
Cellular processes depend on the function of intracellular molecular networks. The curation of the literature relevant to specific biological pathways is important for many theoretical and experimental research teams and communities. No current tool supports web publication or hosting of user-developed large scale annotated pathway diagrams. Sharing via web publication is needed to allow real-time access to the current literature pathway knowledge-base, both privately within a research team or publicly among the outside research community. Web publication also facilitates team and/or community input into the curation process while allowing centralized control of the curation and validation process. We have developed new tool to address these needs. Biological Pathway Publisher (BioPP) is a software suite for converting CellDesigner Systems Biology Markup Language (CD-SBML) formatted pathways into a web viewable format. The BioPP suite is available for private use and for depositing knowledge-bases into a newly created public repository. BioPP suite is a web-based application that allows pathway knowledge-bases stored in CD-SBML to be web published with an easily navigated user interface. The BioPP suite consists of four interrelated elements: a pathway publisher, an upload web-interface, a pathway repository for user-deposited knowledge-bases and a pathway navigator. Users have the option to convert their CD-SBML files to HTML for restricted use or to allow their knowledge-base to be web-accessible to the scientific community. All entities in all knowledge-bases in the repository are linked to public database entries as well as to a newly created public wiki which provides a discussion forum. BioPP tools and the public repository facilitate sharing of pathway knowledge-bases and interactive curation for research teams and scientific communities. BioPP suite is accessible at http://tsb.mssm.edu/pathwayPublisher/broadcast/

17270739
Hallucinogens recruit specific cortical 5-HT(2A) receptor-mediated signaling pathways to affect behavior.
Hallucinogens, including mescaline, psilocybin, and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), profoundly affect perception, cognition, and mood. All known drugs of this class are 5-HT(2A) receptor (2AR) agonists, yet closely related 2AR agonists such as lisuride lack comparable psychoactive properties. Why only certain 2AR agonists are hallucinogens and which neural circuits mediate their effects are poorly understood. By genetically expressing 2AR only in cortex, we show that 2AR-regulated pathways on cortical neurons are sufficient to mediate the signaling pattern and behavioral response to hallucinogens. Hallucinogenic and nonhallucinogenic 2AR agonists both regulate signaling in the same 2AR-expressing cortical neurons. However, the signaling and behavioral responses to the hallucinogens are distinct. While lisuride and LSD both act at 2AR expressed by cortex neurons to regulate phospholipase C, LSD responses also involve pertussis toxin-sensitive heterotrimeric G(i/o) proteins and Src. These studies identify the long-elusive neural and signaling mechanisms responsible for the unique effects of hallucinogens.

19804729
Power-laws in interferon-B mRNA distribution in virus-infected dendritic cells.
Interferon-beta (IFNB1) mRNA shows very large cell-to-cell variability in primary human dendritic cells infected by Newcastle disease virus, with copy numbers varying from a few to several thousands. Analysis of data from the direct measurement of the expression of this gene in its natural chromatin environment in primary human cells shows that the distribution of mRNA across cells follows a power law with an exponent close to -1, and thus encompasses a range of variation much more extensive than a Gaussian. We also investigate the single cell levels of IFNB1 mRNA induced by infection with Texas influenza A mutant viruses, which vary in their capacity to inhibit the signaling pathways responsible for activation of this gene. Here as well we observe power-law behavior for the distribution of IFNB1 mRNA, albeit over a truncated range of values, with exponents similar to the one for cells infected by Newcastle disease virus. We propose a model of stochastic enhanceosome and preinitiation complex formation that incorporates transcriptional pulsing. Analytical and numerical results show good agreement with the observed power laws, and thus support the existence of transcriptional pulsing of an unmodified, intact gene regulated by a natural stimulus.

18997274
Shared kinase fluctuations between two enzymatic reactions.
Kinases serve crucial roles in many cellular signaling pathways that process and transfer information. When signaling kinases phosphorylate two targets, these can serve as branch points that distribute information among two pathways. Responses to stimuli transmitted by activated kinases show high levels of cell-to-cell variation that influence cellular function. We ask how fluctuations around a steady state, due to kinase fluctuations and intrinsic noise, are distributed between two reactions with substrates phosphorylated by a shared kinase. We develop the formalism to answer this question and, for a realistic set of biological constants, we illustrate various features of fluctuations and relaxation times to a steady state. We find that the steady-state response determines the size and range in enzyme concentration of phosphorylated substrate fluctuations, and that the choice of an operating point can have a large impact on how shared kinase noise is distributed among two available pathways.

17280588
Effective use of microarrays in neuroendocrine research.
The development of microarray technology makes it possible to simultaneously assay the expression level of hundreds to tens of thousands of mRNA transcripts in one experiment. Genome-wide transcriptional analysis has increasing importance for many areas of neuroendocrinology research. The expense and technical complexity of microarray experiments can make it difficult to navigate the terrain of rival platforms and technologies. In this review, we provide a practical view and comparison of various microarray technologies. Affymetrix arrays, high-density cDNA arrays, membrane arrays and experimental design and data analysis are all discussed by researchers currently using these techniques to study gene regulation in neuroendocrine tissues.

