19713865
Is there physician bias against eliciting affective qualities of pain?
The purpose of this study is to determine the weight given to each of 3 pain dimensions by physicians who assess patients' pain experiences. Pain is a subjective experience that has profound impact on the quality of life. The 101-Multidimensional Affect and Pain Survey (101-MAPS) is currently the only available instrument that takes into account all 3 validated dimensions of pain by classifying 101 items into "superclusters" of sensory pain, suffering, and well-being. Fourteen gastroenterologists, 11 internists, and 11 medicine residents from 2 teaching hospitals rated the items on the 101-MAPS based on their perception of the items' relevance to pain in gastrointestinal diseases, on a scale of 0 (least relevant) to 5 (most relevant). Of the 101 items in the MAPS rated by gastroenterologists, 25 items received a median rating of 4 or above. Of these, 23 were selected from the 57 items in the sensory pain supercluster (40%) and only 1 item each from the 26 in the suffering (3.8%), and the 18 in the well-being (5.5%) dimensions. These proportions were significantly lower for the suffering (P<0.01) and well-being (P<0.05) superclusters than for the sensory pain dimension. These findings suggest a bias among physicians toward sensory and against affective qualities when eliciting patients' pain experiences. The results also suggest that this bias is found as early as residency training and persists among specialists.

19236970
Asymptomatic colonic sarcoid polyps.


18679534
Complications of and controversies associated with percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy: report of a case and literature review.
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) is one of the most commonly performed gastrointestinal procedures, despite absence of benefit in many patients and risks associated with the procedure. Increased education of primary care physicians about the shortcomings of PEG may allow for better selection of patients to be referred for PEG placement. We performed a comprehensive literature review by searching PUBMED using the search headings percutaneous enteral gastrostomy, PEG, complications, dementia, stroke, dysphagia, malnutrition, and complications. We identified English language articles from 1980 onward. The highest quality data were considered to be randomized controlled trials although given the paucity of trials in this area, we used all of the various types of literature. We based the major conclusions of this review, where possible, on the most robust literature, namely, controlled trials. However, the majority of the available literature in this field is based on case series. We attempted to maximize the use of larger case series with longer term follow-up. Case reports were used only to report on rare complications where no other literature was available. Despite more than 30 years of experience with PEG, numerous questions remain regarding the utility of nutrition support in many of the clinical scenarios in which PEG placement is contemplated. There is a multitude of evidence that artificial nutrition does not improve outcome or quality of life in patients with dementia who have decreased oral intake. It is likely that ethical, moral, religious, and legal considerations of family members and caregivers play a role in the decision to place a PEG in a patient with dementia despite the medical evidence demonstrating lack of benefit.

