20880370
Adding emotional stressors to training in simulated cardiopulmonary arrest enhances participant performance.
Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) skills tend to degrade over time. There is mounting evidence that high-fidelity simulation (HFS) is advantageous to teaching ACLS. The aspects of HFS that enhance learning are not entirely clear, but the anxiety generated by a scenario may enhance retention through well-established learning pathways. We sought to determine whether an HFS with added emotional stress could provoke anxiety and, if so, whether or not participants learning ACLS would demonstrate better written and applied knowledge retention 6 months after their initial course. Twenty-five student volunteers from Year 1 and 2 at Mount Sinai School of Medicine were randomly assigned to a control group or an emotional content (EC) group for a sudden cardiac death management course. All subjects were monitored for heart rate and were assessed using the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Control group participants experienced an HFS in which actors were not scripted to add stress, whereas EC group participants were exposed to an emotionally charged environment using the same actors. Participants across the two groups were well matched by resting heart rates, baseline anxiety and prior ACLS knowledge. The EC group participants experienced greater anxiety than controls (mean state anxiety score: 35.0 versus 28.2 [p<0.05]; average heart rate [HR]: 94.6 bpm versus 72.9 bpm [p<0.05]; maximum HR: 120.8 bpm versus 95.3 bpm [p<0.05]). Six months later, written test scores were similar, but the EC group participants achieved higher practical competency examination ('mega code') scores than controls (32.5 versus 25.0; p<0.05). Independent t-tests and Spearman rank coefficients were employed where applicable. Simulation with added emotional stressors led to greater anxiety during ACLS instruction but correlated with enhanced performance of ACLS skills after this course. The quantitative and qualitative values of added stressors need further exploration, but these values represent important variables in simulation-based education.

20099953
Mediators of a brief hypnosis intervention to control side effects in breast surgery patients: response expectancies and emotional distress.
The present study was designed to test the hypotheses that response expectancies and emotional distress mediate the effects of an empirically validated presurgical hypnosis intervention on postsurgical side effects (i.e., pain, nausea, and fatigue). Women (n = 200) undergoing breast-conserving surgery (mean age = 48.50 years; 63% White, 15% Hispanic, 13% African American, and 9% other) were randomized to a hypnosis or to an attention control group. Prior to surgery, patients completed assessments of hypothesized mediators (response expectancies and emotional distress), and following surgery, patients completed assessments of outcome variables (pain, nausea, and fatigue). Structural equation modeling revealed the following: (a) Hypnotic effects on postsurgical pain were partially mediated by pain expectancy (p < .0001) but not by distress (p = .12); (b) hypnotic effects on postsurgical nausea were partially mediated by presurgical distress (p = .02) but not by nausea expectancy (p = .10); and (c) hypnotic effects on postsurgical fatigue were partially mediated by both fatigue expectancy (p = .0001) and presurgical distress (p = .02). The results demonstrate the mediational roles of response expectancies and emotional distress in clinical benefits associated with a hypnotic intervention for breast cancer surgical patients. More broadly, the results improve understanding of the underlying mechanisms responsible for hypnotic phenomena and suggest that future hypnotic interventions target patient expectancies and distress to improve postsurgical recovery.

19825487
Postoperative urinary retention.
Postoperative urinary retention (PUR) is a common complication of surgery and anesthesia. The risk of retention is especially high after anorectal surgery, hernia repair, and orthopedic surgery and increases with advancing age. Certain anesthetic and analgesic modalities, particularly spinal anesthesia with long-acting local anesthetics and epidural analgesia, promote the development of urinary retention. Portable ultrasound provides rapid and accurate assessment of bladder volume and aids in the diagnosis and management of PUR. Catheterization is recommended when bladder volume exceeds 600 mL to prevent the negative sequelae of prolonged bladder overdistention.

19011695
Predictors of expectancies for post-surgical pain and fatigue in breast cancer surgical patients.
Expectancies for post-surgical pain and fatigue have previously been found to predict pain and fatigue among breast cancer surgery patients. However, the study of predictors of these expectancies has been neglected. The present study was designed to investigate predictors of expectancies for post-surgical pain and fatigue among breast cancer surgery patients.Four hundred and eighteen women (M = 48.3 years, SD = 13.66 years) scheduled to undergo excisional breast biopsy or lumpectomy completed questionnaires assessing demographics/medical history, pre-surgical distress, stable personality characteristics, pre-surgical pain and fatigue, and expectancies for post-surgical pain and fatigue.Path analysis revealed: expectancies for post-surgical pain were significantly predicted by trait anxiety, acute pre-surgical distress, and age; and expectancies for post-surgical fatigue were significantly predicted by acute pre-surgical distress, acute pre-surgical fatigue, previous experience with the same surgical procedure, and education (all ps < .05). Examination of an alternative model revealed that the effects of the aforementioned predictors on expectancies were not mediated by acute pre-surgical distress, clarifying the directionality of the distress-expectancy relationship.Expectancies for post-surgical pain and fatigue are influenced by distress, treatment history, stable personality characteristics, extant symptoms, and demographic factors. These variables should be considered in designing clinical interventions to manipulate expectancies for patient benefit.

18723313
Disrupted sleep the night before breast surgery is associated with increased postoperative pain.
Despite the best available clinical care, pain after surgery is a virtually universal patient experience that can have pervasive negative consequences. Given the large variability among patients in postoperative pain levels, research on novel modifiable risk factors is needed. One such factor suggested by recent experimental studies indicates that disruption of even a single night's sleep can increase subsequent pain in healthy volunteers. In this preliminary clinical study, we tested the hypothesis that poor sleep the night before surgery would predict heightened postoperative pain. Patients (n=24) scheduled for routine breast-conserving surgical procedures for the diagnosis or treatment of cancer were recruited and wore an actigraphy device providing objective, validated measures of sleep duration and disruption (low sleep efficiency). Pain severity and interference with daily activities for the week after surgery was assessed with the Brief Pain Inventory. As hypothesized, multiple regression analyses revealed that lower sleep efficiency was a significant predictor of greater pain severity and interference, controlling for age, race, and perioperative analgesics as appropriate. Sleep efficiency was not significantly related to measures of depressed mood, emotional upset, or relaxation assessed on the morning of surgery. Patients with sleep efficiency in the lowest tertile had clinically higher levels of pain (>2 points) compared with patients in the highest sleep efficiency tertile. Sleep duration had no significant effects. This preliminary clinical study supports the possibility that sleep disruption on the night before surgery may increase patients' experience of pain after surgery. Research to investigate the mechanisms underlying these effects and to explore the possible clinical benefits of interventions to improve patients' sleep before surgery is now warranted.

18444017
Anticipatory psychological distress in women scheduled for diagnostic and curative breast cancer surgery.
Psychological distress is a central experience for women facing diagnostic and curative breast cancer surgery. The present study was designed to predict anticipatory distress in 187 women scheduled to undergo excisional breast biopsy or lumpectomy. Participants completed questionnaires assessing emotional distress and predictors of this distress (surgery type, worry about the surgical procedure, and worry about what the surgeon will find). The study found that lumpectomy patients experienced greater anticipatory distress than excisional breast biopsy patients on three of the four distress measures (all ps < 0.05) and that worry about what the surgeon might find partially mediated these effects. The results suggest that although women awaiting lumpectomy are more distressed than women awaiting biopsy, both groups report substantial distress, and, consequently, psychosocial interventions are recommended for both groups.

18306252
Roles and actions of IRBs as it relates to the process of drug and device development.


18227298
Hypnosis decreases presurgical distress in excisional breast biopsy patients.
Excisional breast biopsy is associated with presurgical psychological distress. Such distress is emotionally taxing, and may have negative implications for postsurgical side effects and satisfaction with anesthesia. We investigated the ability of a brief hypnosis session to reduce presurgical psychological distress in excisional breast biopsy patients. Ninety patients presenting for excisional breast biopsy were randomly assigned to receive either a 15-minute presurgery hypnosis session (n = 49, mean age: 46.4 (95% CI: 42.3-50.4)) or a 15-minute presurgery attention control session (n = 41, mean age: 45.0 (95% CI: 40.8-49.2)). The hypnosis session involved suggestions for increased relaxation and decreased distress. The attention control session involved nondirective empathic listening. Presurgery distress was measured using visual analog scales (VAS) and the short version of the Profile of Mood States (SV-POMS). Data were analyzed using analysis of variance and chi2 procedures. Groups did not differ in terms of the following: demographics (age, education, ethnicity, marital status, all P's > 0.28); medical variables (presurgery diagnosis, previous excisional biopsy, previous breast cancer, all P's > 0.11); or preintervention distress (SV-POMS P > 0.74) assessed on the day of surgery. Postintervention, and before surgery, patients in the hypnosis group had significantly lower mean values for presurgery VAS emotional upset (16.5 vs 38.2, P < 0.0001, d = .85), VAS depressed mood (6.6 vs 19.9, P < 0.02, d = .67), and SV-POMS anxiety (10.0 vs 5.0, P < 0.0001, d = 0.85); and significantly higher levels for VAS relaxation (75.7 vs 54.2, P < 0.001, d = -0.76) than attention controls. The study results indicate that a brief presurgery hypnosis intervention can be an effective means of controlling presurgical distress in women awaiting diagnostic breast cancer surgery.

17728216
A randomized clinical trial of a brief hypnosis intervention to control side effects in breast surgery patients.
Breast cancer surgery is associated with side effects, including postsurgical pain, nausea, and fatigue. We carried out a randomized clinical trial to test the hypotheses that a brief presurgery hypnosis intervention would decrease intraoperative anesthesia and analgesic use and side effects associated with breast cancer surgery and that it would be cost effective. We randomly assigned 200 patients who were scheduled to undergo excisional breast biopsy or lumpectomy (mean age 48.5 years) to a 15-minute presurgery hypnosis session conducted by a psychologist or nondirective empathic listening (attention control). Patients were not blinded to group assignment. Intraoperative anesthesia use (i.e., of the analgesics lidocaine and fentanyl and the sedatives propofol and midazolam) was assessed. Patient-reported pain and other side effects as measured on a visual analog scale (0-100) were assessed at discharge, as was use of analgesics in the recovery room. Institutional costs and time in the operating room were assessed via chart review. Patients in the hypnosis group required less propofol (means = 64.01 versus 96.64 microg; difference = 32.63; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 3.95 to 61.30) and lidocaine (means = 24.23 versus 31.09 mL; difference = 6.86; 95% CI = 3.05 to 10.68) than patients in the control group. Patients in the hypnosis group also reported less pain intensity (means = 22.43 versus 47.83; difference = 25.40; 95% CI = 17.56 to 33.25), pain unpleasantness (means = 21.19 versus 39.05; difference = 17.86; 95% CI = 9.92 to 25.80), nausea (means = 6.57 versus 25.49; difference = 18.92; 95% CI = 12.98 to 24.87), fatigue (means = 29.47 versus 54.20; difference = 24.73; 95% CI = 16.64 to 32.83), discomfort (means = 23.01 versus 43.20; difference = 20.19; 95% CI = 12.36 to 28.02), and emotional upset (means = 8.67 versus 33.46; difference = 24.79; 95% CI = 18.56 to 31.03). No statistically significant differences were seen in the use of fentanyl, midazolam, or recovery room analgesics. Institutional costs for surgical breast cancer procedures were $8561 per patient at Mount Sinai School of Medicine. Patients in the hypnosis group cost the institution $772.71 less per patient than those in the control group (95% CI = 75.10 to 1469.89), mainly due to reduced surgical time. Hypnosis was superior to attention control regarding propofol and lidocaine use; pain, nausea, fatigue, discomfort, and emotional upset at discharge; and institutional cost. Overall, the present data support the use of hypnosis with breast cancer surgery patients.

17325520
Central nervous system dysfunction after noncardiac surgery and anesthesia in the elderly.


17325500
Postoperative cognitive dysfunction in patients with preoperative cognitive impairment: which domains are most vulnerable?
The authors explored the database of the first International Study of Postoperative Cognitive Dysfunction study to specify the domains of cognitive function that were most vulnerable and to determine the pattern of deterioration in patients with preoperative cognitive impairment. One thousand two hundred eighteen patients were included in the first International Study of Postoperative Cognitive Dysfunction, where neuropsychological testing was performed at entry to the study, at 1 week, and at 3 months after surgery. The authors' analyses determined the extent to which seven neuropsychological measures changed after surgery with focus on the relation with preoperative cognitive impairment, defined as a preoperative score 1.5 SD below healthy controls in the memory test. Preoperative cognitive impairment was found in 74 patients at baseline. At 1 week, cognitive deterioration was seen in all tests, but in particular in the Letter Digit Coding and the time of the Stroop interference test, with 14% and 16% of the total sample (n = 1,016) exceeding 2 SD, respectively. At 3 months, deterioration was more uniform. Significantly fewer in the preoperative cognitive impairment group had deterioration in the memory test, both at 1 week and at 3 months, with no patient displaying a deterioration exceeding 2 SD. Postoperative cognitive deterioration was seen in all tests, although most commonly in attention and cognitive speed at 1 week. Deterioration in memory was difficult to detect after surgery in patients with preoperative cognitive impairment.

21368727
Anesthesia for geriatric patients.
The number of elderly surgical patients will be increasing in Italy. Slowly, anesthesiologists are developing the expertise to care for these patients. The information available to apply to these cases is now the topic of a number of anesthesia textbooks dedicated to the elderly. In this article, we review some of the more recent findings and provide some tips to help guide the care of elderly patients. It is hoped that practitioners will use this information to improve the care of these patients and conduct additional research to further improve care in the future.

20007989
Postoperative delirium and cognitive dysfunction.
Postoperative delirium and cognitive dysfunction (POCD) are topics of special importance in the geriatric surgical population. They are separate entities, whose relationship has yet to be fully elucidated. Although not limited to geriatric patients, the incidence and impact of both are more profound in geriatric patients. Delirium has been shown to be associated with longer and more costly hospital course and higher likelihood of death within 6 months or postoperative institutionalization. POCD has been associated with increased mortality, risk of leaving the labour market prematurely, and dependency on social transfer payments. Here, we review their definitions and aetiology, and discuss treatment and prevention in elderly patients undergoing major non-cardiac surgery. Good basic care demands identification of at-risk patients, awareness of common perioperative aggravating factors, simple prevention interventions, recognition of the disease states, and basic treatments for patients with severe hyperactive manifestations.

