21613275
Recovery of cardiac calcium release is controlled by sarcoplasmic reticulum refilling and ryanodine receptor sensitivity.
Aims: In heart cells, the mechanisms underlying refractoriness of the elementary units of sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) release, Ca(2+) sparks, remain unclear. We investigated local recovery of SR Ca(2+) release using experimental measurements and mathematical modeling. Methods and Results: Repeated Ca(2+) sparks were induced from individual clusters of ryanodine receptors (RyRs) in quiescent rat ventricular myocytes, and we examined how changes in RyR gating influenced the time-dependent recovery of Ca(2+) spark amplitude and triggering probability. Repeated Ca(2+) sparks from individual sites were analyzed in the presence of 50 nM ryanodine with: 1) no additional agents (control); 2) 50 µM caffeine to sensitize RyRs; 3) 50 µM tetracaine to inhibit RyRs; or 4) 100 nM isoproterenol to activate ?-adrenergic receptors. Sensitization and inhibition of RyR clusters shortened and lengthened, respectively, the median interval between consecutive Ca(2+) sparks (caffeine 239 ms; control 280 ms; tetracaine 453 ms). Recovery of Ca(2+) spark amplitude, however, was exponential with a time constant of ~100 ms in all cases. Isoproterenol both accelerated the recovery of Ca(2+) spark amplitude (?= 58 ms) and shortened the median interval between Ca(2+) sparks (192 ms). The results were recapitulated by a mathematical model in which SR [Ca(2+)] depletion terminates Ca(2+) sparks, but not by an alternative model based on limited depletion and Ca(2+)-dependent inactivation of RyRs. Conclusions: Together, the results strongly suggest that: 1) local SR refilling controls Ca(2+) spark amplitude recovery; 2) Ca(2+) spark triggering depends on both refilling and RyR sensitivity; and 3) ?-adrenergic stimulation influences both processes.

21568349
Mutations in a Helix-1 Motif of the ATP Synthase c-Subunit of Bacillus pseudofirmus OF4 Cause Functional Deficits and Changes in the c-Ring Stability and Mobility on Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis.
The ATP synthase of the alkaliphile Bacillus pseudofirmus OF4 has a tridecameric c-subunit rotor ring. Each c-subunit has an AxAxAxA motif near the center of the inner helix, where neutralophilic bacteria generally have a GxGxGxG motif. Here, we studied the impact of four single and six multiple Ala-to-Gly chromosomal mutations in the A16xAxAxA22 motif on the capacity for nonfermentative growth and, for most of the mutants, on ATP synthesis by ADP- and P(i)-loaded membrane vesicles at pH 7.5 and 10.5. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) analyses of the holo-ATP synthases were used to probe stability of the mutant c-rotors and mobility properties of the c-rotors as well as the monomeric c-subunits that are released from them by trichloroacetic acid treatment. Mutants containing an Ala16-to-Gly mutation exhibited the most severe functional defects. Via SDS-PAGE, most of the mutant c-monomers exhibited increased mobility relative to the wild-type (WT) c-subunit, but among the intact c-rings, only Ala16-to-Gly mutants exhibited significantly increased mobility relative to that of the WT c-ring. The hypothesis that these c-rings have a decreased c-subunit stoichiometry is still untested, but the functional impact of an Ala16-to-Gly mutation clearly depended upon additional Ala-to-Gly mutation(s) and their positions. The A16/20G double mutant exhibited a larger functional deficit than both the A16G and A16/18G mutants. Most of the mutant c-rings showed in vitro instability relative to that of the WT c-ring. However, the functional deficits of mutants did not correlate well with the extent of c-ring stability loss, so this property is unlikely to be a major factor in vivo.

21440552
Cyclosporine attenuates cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by RAF1 mutants in Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes.
RAS activation is implicated in physiologic and pathologic cardiac hypertrophy. Cross-talk between the Ras and calcineurin pathways, the latter also having been implicated in cardiac hypertrophy, has been suspected for pathologic hypertrophy. Our recent discovery that germ-line mutations in RAF1, which encodes a downstream RAS effector, cause Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes with a high prevalence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy provided an opportunity to elaborate the role of RAF1 in cardiomyocyte biology. Here, we characterize the role of RAF1 signaling in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy with an aim of identifying potential therapeutic targets. We modeled hypertrophic cardiomyopathy by infecting neonatal and adult rat cardiomyocytes (NRCMs and ARCMs, respectively) with adenoviruses encoding wild-type RAF1 and three Noonan/LEOPARD syndrome-associated RAF1 mutants (S257L, D486N or L613V). These RAF1 proteins, except D486N, engendered cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Surprisingly, these effects were independent and dependent of mitogen activated protein kinases in NRCMs and ARCMs, respectively. Inhibiting Mek1/2 in RAF1 overexpressing cells blocked hypertrophy in ARCMs but not in NRCMs. Further, we found that endogenous and heterologously expressed RAF1 complexed with calcineurin, and RAF1 mutants causing hypertrophy signaled via nuclear factor of activated T cells (Nfat) in both cell types. The involvement of calcineurin was also reflected by down regulation of Serca2a and dysregulation of calcium signaling in NRCMs. Furthermore, treatment with the calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine blocked hypertrophy in NRCMs and ARCMs overexpressing RAF1. Thus, we have identified calcineurin as a novel interaction partner for RAF1 and established a mechanistic link and possible therapeutic target for pathological cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by mutant RAF1. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 'Possible Editorial'.

21232541
Complex and rate-dependent beat-to-beat variations in Ca2+ transients of canine Purkinje cells.
Purkinje fibers play an essential role in transmitting electrical impulses through the heart, but they may also serve as triggers for arrhythmias linked to defective intracellular calcium (Ca(2+)) regulation. Although prior studies have extensively characterized spontaneous Ca(2+) release in nondriven Purkinje cells, little attention has been paid to rate-dependent changes in Ca(2+) transients. Therefore we explored the behaviors of Ca(2+) transients at pacing rates ranging from 0.125 to 3 Hz in single canine Purkinje cells loaded with fluo3 and imaged with a confocal microscope. The experiments uncovered the following novel aspects of Ca(2+) regulation in Purkinje cells: 1) the cells exhibit a negative Ca(2+)-frequency relationship (at 2.5 Hz, Ca(2+) transient amplitude was 66 ± 6% smaller than that at 0.125 Hz); 2) sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) release occurs as a propagating wave at very low rates but is localized near the cell membrane at higher rates; 3) SR Ca(2+) load declines modestly (10 ± 5%) with an increase in pacing rate from 0.125 Hz to 2.5 Hz; 4) Ca(2+) transients show considerable beat-to-beat variability, with greater variability occurring at higher pacing rates. Analysis of beat-to-beat variability suggests that it can be accounted for by stochastic triggering of local Ca(2+) release events. Consistent with this hypothesis, an increase in triggering probability caused a decrease in the relative variability. These results offer new insight into how Ca(2+) release is normally regulated in Purkinje cells and provide clues regarding how disruptions in this regulation may lead to deleterious consequences such as arrhythmias.

20824123
Regression analysis for constraining free parameters in electrophysiological models of cardiac cells.
A major challenge in computational biology is constraining free parameters in mathematical models. Adjusting a parameter to make a given model output more realistic sometimes has unexpected and undesirable effects on other model behaviors. Here, we extend a regression-based method for parameter sensitivity analysis and show that a straightforward procedure can uniquely define most ionic conductances in a well-known model of the human ventricular myocyte. The model's parameter sensitivity was analyzed by randomizing ionic conductances, running repeated simulations to measure physiological outputs, then collecting the randomized parameters and simulation results as "input" and "output" matrices, respectively. Multivariable regression derived a matrix whose elements indicate how changes in conductances influence model outputs. We show here that if the number of linearly-independent outputs equals the number of inputs, the regression matrix can be inverted. This is significant, because it implies that the inverted matrix can specify the ionic conductances that are required to generate a particular combination of model outputs. Applying this idea to the myocyte model tested, we found that most ionic conductances could be specified with precision (R(2) > 0.77 for 12 out of 16 parameters). We also applied this method to a test case of changes in electrophysiology caused by heart failure and found that changes in most parameters could be well predicted. We complemented our findings using a Bayesian approach to demonstrate that model parameters cannot be specified using limited outputs, but they can be successfully constrained if multiple outputs are considered. Our results place on a solid mathematical footing the intuition-based procedure simultaneously matching a model's output to several data sets. More generally, this method shows promise as a tool to define model parameters, in electrophysiology and in other biological fields.

20513395
Predicting local SR Ca(2+) dynamics during Ca(2+) wave propagation in ventricular myocytes.
Of the many ongoing controversies regarding the workings of the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) in cardiac myocytes, two unresolved and interconnected topics are 1), mechanisms of calcium (Ca(2+)) wave propagation, and 2), speed of Ca(2+) diffusion within the SR. Ca(2+) waves are initiated when a spontaneous local SR Ca(2+) release event triggers additional release from neighboring clusters of SR release channels (ryanodine receptors (RyRs)). A lack of consensus regarding the effective Ca(2+) diffusion constant in the SR (D(Ca,SR)) severely complicates our understanding of whether dynamic local changes in SR [Ca(2+)] can influence wave propagation. To address this problem, we have implemented a computational model of cytosolic and SR [Ca(2+)] during Ca(2+) waves. Simulations have investigated how dynamic local changes in SR [Ca(2+)] are influenced by 1), D(Ca,SR); 2), the distance between RyR clusters; 3), partial inhibition or stimulation of SR Ca(2+) pumps; 4), SR Ca(2+) pump dependence on cytosolic [Ca(2+)]; and 5), the rate of transfer between network and junctional SR. Of these factors, D(Ca,SR) is the primary determinant of how release from one RyR cluster alters SR [Ca(2+)] in nearby regions. Specifically, our results show that local increases in SR [Ca(2+)] ahead of the wave can potentially facilitate Ca(2+) wave propagation, but only if SR diffusion is relatively slow. These simulations help to delineate what changes in [Ca(2+)] are possible during SR Ca(2+)release, and they broaden our understanding of the regulatory role played by dynamic changes in [Ca(2+)](SR).

19217846
Parameter sensitivity analysis in electrophysiological models using multivariable regression.
Computational models of electrical activity and calcium signaling in cardiac myocytes are important tools for understanding physiology. The sensitivity of these models to changes in parameters is often not well-understood, however, because parameter evaluation can be a time-consuming, tedious process. I demonstrate here what I believe is a novel method for rapidly determining how changes in parameters affect outputs. In three models of the ventricular action potential, parameters were randomized, repeated simulations were run, important outputs were calculated, and multivariable regression was performed on the collected results. Random parameters included both maximal rates of ion transport and gating variable characteristics. The procedure generated simplified, empirical models that predicted outputs resulting from new sets of input parameters. The linear regression models were quite accurate, despite nonlinearities in the mechanistic models. Moreover, the regression coefficients, which represent parameter sensitivities, were robust, even when parameters were varied over a wide range. Most importantly, a side-by-side comparison of two similar models identified fundamental differences in model behavior, and revealed model predictions that were both consistent with, and inconsistent with, experimental data. This new method therefore shows promise as a tool for the characterization and assessment of computational models. The general strategy may also suggest methods for integrating traditional quantitative models with large-scale data sets obtained using high-throughput technologies.

19153162
Excitation-contraction coupling gain in ventricular myocytes: insights from a parsimonious model.
We present a minimal mathematical model of Ca(2+) spark triggering under voltage-clamp conditions in ventricular myocytes. The model predicts changes in excitation-contraction coupling 'gain' that result from diverse experimental interventions. We compare model results to several sets of data, and, in so doing, place apparent constraints on physiologically relevant model parameters. Specifically, the analysis suggests that many L-type Ca(2+) channel openings can potentially trigger each Ca(2+) spark, but the probability that an individual opening will trigger a spark is low. This procedure helps to reconcile contradictory results obtained in recent studies; moreover, this new model should be a useful tool for understanding changes in gain that occur physiologically and in disease.

18458091
beta-Adrenergic receptor activation induces internalization of cardiac Cav1.2 channel complexes through a beta-Arrestin 1-mediated pathway.
Voltage-dependent calcium channels (VDCCs) play a pivotal role in normal excitation-contraction coupling in cardiac myocytes. These channels can be modulated through activation of beta-adrenergic receptors (beta-ARs), which leads to an increase in calcium current (I(Ca-L)) density through cardiac Ca(v)1 channels as a result of phosphorylation by cAMP-dependent protein kinase A. Changes in I(Ca-L) density and kinetics in heart failure often occur in the absence of changes in Ca(v)1 channel expression, arguing for the importance of post-translational modification of these channels in heart disease. The precise molecular mechanisms that govern the regulation of VDCCs and their cell surface localization remain unknown. Our data show that sustained beta-AR activation induces internalization of a cardiac macromolecular complex involving VDCC and beta-arrestin 1 (beta-Arr1) into clathrin-coated vesicles. Pretreatment of myocytes with pertussis toxin prevents the internalization of VDCCs, suggesting that G(i/o) mediates this response. A peptide that selectively disrupts the interaction between Ca(V)1.2 and beta-Arr1 and tyrosine kinase inhibitors readily prevent agonist-induced VDCC internalization. These observations suggest that VDCC trafficking is mediated by G protein switching to G(i) of the beta-AR, which plays a prominent role in various cardiac pathologies associated with a hyperadrenergic state, such as hypertrophy and heart failure.

18408122
Mathematical model of the neonatal mouse ventricular action potential.
Therapies for heart disease are based largely on our understanding of the adult myocardium. The dramatic differences in action potential (AP) shape between neonatal and adult cardiac myocytes, however, indicate that a different set of molecular interactions in neonatal myocytes necessitates different treatment for newborns. Computational modeling is useful for synthesizing data to determine how interactions between components lead to systems-level behavior, but this technique has not been used extensively to study neonatal heart cell function. We created a mathematical model of the neonatal (day 1) mouse myocyte by modifying, on the basis of experimental data, the densities and/or formulations of ion transport mechanisms in an adult cell model. The new model reproduces the characteristic AP shape of neonatal cells, with a brief plateau phase and longer duration than the adult (action potential duration at 80% repolarization = 60.1 vs. 12.6 ms). The simulation results are consistent with experimental data, including 1) decreased density and altered inactivation of transient outward K+ currents, 2) increased delayed rectifier K+ currents, 3) Ca2+ entry through T-type as well as L-type Ca2+ channels, 4) increased Ca2+ influx through Na+/Ca2+ exchange, and 5) Ca2+ transients resulting from transmembrane Ca2+ entry rather than release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). Simulations performed with the model generated novel predictions, including increased SR Ca2+ leak and elevated intracellular Na+ concentration in neonatal compared with adult myocytes. This new model can therefore be used for testing hypotheses and obtaining a better quantitative understanding of differences between neonatal and adult physiology.

18323015
Teaching resources. Using web-based discussion forums as a model of the peer-review process and a tool for assessment.
This Teaching Resource describes how to use an online asynchronous discussion as a mechanism to introduce students to the peer-review process, as well as to assess student performance and understanding. This method was applied to a graduate course on signal transduction and the Teaching Resource includes a syllabus, detailed plan for incorporating the online discussion, sample journal club questions, and sample student responses to the discussion forum, faculty responses, and student revisions.

18309063
Inquiry learning. Integrating content detail and critical reasoning by peer review.


17323075
Novel approach to real-time flash photolysis and confocal [Ca2+] imaging.
Flash photolysis of "caged" compounds using ultraviolet light is a powerful experimental technique for producing rapid changes in concentrations of bioactive signaling molecules. Studies that employ this technique have used diverse strategies for controlling the spatial and temporal application of light to the specimen. In this paper, we describe a new system for flash photolysis that delivers light from a pulsed, adjustable intensity laser through an optical fiber coupled into the epifluorescence port of a commercial confocal microscope. Photolysis is achieved with extremely brief (5 ns) pulses of ultraviolet light (355 nm) that can be synchronized with respect to confocal laser scanning. The system described also localizes the UV intensity spatially so that uncaging only occurs in defined subcellular regions; moreover, because the microscope optics are used in localization, the photolysis volume can be easily adjusted. Experiments performed on rat ventricular myocytes loaded with the Ca(2+) indicator fluo-3 and the Ca(2+) cage o-nitrophenyl ethylene glycol bis(2-aminoethyl ether)-N,N,N'N'-tetraacetic acid (NP-EGTA) demonstrate the system's capabilities. Localized intracellular increases in [Ca(2+)] can trigger sarcoplasmic reticular Ca(2+) release events such as Ca(2+) sparks and, under certain conditions, regenerative Ca(2+) waves. This relatively simple and inexpensive system is, therefore, a useful tool for examining local signaling in the heart and other tissues.

20562890
Training in systems pharmacology: predoctoral program in pharmacology and systems biology at Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Our recently developed predoctoral training program in pharmacology and systems biology prepares students to become experts in systems-level models of disease that identify therapeutic targets and predict adverse effects or new uses of existing therapeutics. Multiple computational modeling modes are introduced throughout a curriculum that integrates basic cell and molecular sciences with the physiology and pathophysiology of disease states. Problem-based learning exercises enable students from different experimental and computational backgrounds to design experiments and interpret data quantitatively.

