21513889
A Small Molecule Binding to the Coactivator CREB-Binding Protein Blocks Apoptosis in Cardiomyocytes.
As a master transcription factor in cellular responses to external stress, tumor suppressor p53 is tightly regulated. Excessive p53 activity during myocardial ischemia causes irreversible cellular injury and cardiomyocyte death. p53 activation is dependent on lysine acetylation by the lysine acetyltransferase and transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) and on acetylation-directed CBP recruitment for p53 target gene expression. Here, we report a small molecule ischemin, developed with a structure-guided approach to inhibit the acetyl-lysine binding activity of the bromodomain of CBP. We show that ischemin alters post-translational modifications on p53 and histones, inhibits p53 interaction with CBP and transcriptional activity in cells, and prevents apoptosis in ischemic cardiomyocytes. Our study suggests small molecule modulation of acetylation-mediated interactions in gene transcription as a new approach to therapeutic interventions of human disorders such as myocardial ischemia.

21271695
Rational design of cyclic peptide modulators of the transcriptional coactivator CBP: a new class of p53 inhibitors.
The CREB binding protein (CBP) is a human transcriptional coactivator consisting of several conserved functional modules, which interacts with distinct transcription factors including nuclear receptors, CREB, and STAT proteins. Despite the importance of CBP in transcriptional regulation, many questions regarding the role of its particular domains in CBP functions remain unanswered. Therefore, developing small molecules capable of selectively modulating a single domain of CBP is of invaluable aid at unraveling its prominent activities. Here we report the design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of conformationally restricted peptides as novel modulators for the acetyl-lysine binding bromodomain (BRD) of CBP. Utilizing a target structure-guided and computer-aided rational design approach, we developed a series of cyclic peptides with affinity for CBP BRD significantly greater than those of its biological ligands, including lysine-acetylated histones and tumor suppressor p53. The best cyclopeptide of the series exhibited a K(d) of 8.0 ?M, representing a 24-fold improvement in affinity over that of the linear lysine 382-acetylated p53 peptide. This lead peptide is highly selective for CBP BRD over BRDs from other transcriptional proteins. Cell-based functional assays carried out in colorectal carcinoma HCT116 cells further demonstrated the efficacy of this compound to modulate p53 stability and function in response to DNA damage. Our results strongly argue that these CBP modulators can effectively inhibit p53 transcriptional activity by blocking p53K382ac binding to CBP BRD and promoting p53 instability by changes of its post-translational modification states, a different mechanism than that of the p53 inhibitors reported to date.

18400184
Structural basis of site-specific histone recognition by the bromodomains of human coactivators PCAF and CBP/p300.
Histone lysine acetylation is central to epigenetic control of gene transcription. Bromodomains of chromosomal proteins function as acetyl-lysine (Kac) binding domains. However, how bromodomains recognize site-specific histones remains unanswered. Here, we report three three-dimensional solution structures of the bromodomains of the human transcriptional coactivators CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF) bound to peptides derived from histone acetylation sites at lysines 36 and 9 in H3, and lysine 20 in H4. From structural and biochemical binding analyses, we determine consensus histone recognition by the bromodomains of PCAF and CBP, which represent two different subgroups of the bromodomain family. Through bromodomain residues in the ZA and BC loops, PCAF prefers acetylation sites with a hydrophobic residue at (Kac+2) position and a positively charged or aromatic residue at (Kac+3), whereas CBP favors bulky hydrophobic residues at (Kac+1) and (Kac+2), a positively charged residue at (Kac-1), and an aromatic residue at (Kac-2).

