19959322
The Statin Choice decision aid in primary care: a randomized trial.
To assess the impact of a decision aid on perceived risk of heart attacks and medication adherence among urban primary care patients with diabetes. We randomly allocated 150 patients with diabetes to participate in a usual primary care visit either with or without the Statin Choice tool. Participants completed a questionnaire at baseline and telephone follow-up at 3 and 6 months. Intervention patients were more likely to accurately perceive their underlying risk for a heart attack without taking a statin (OR: 1.9, CI: 1.0-3.8) and with taking a statin (OR: 1.4, CI: 0.7-2.8); a decline in risk overestimation among patients receiving the decision aid accounts for this finding. There was no difference in statin adherence at 3 or 6 months. A decision aid about using statins to reduce coronary risk among patients with diabetes improved risk communication, beliefs, and decisional conflict, but did not improve adherence to statins. Decision aid enhanced communication about the risks and benefits of statins improved patient risk perceptions but did not alter adherence among patients with diabetes.

19663125
Impact of positive and negative beliefs about inhaled corticosteroids on adherence in inner-city asthmatic patients.
Daily inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) use is the cornerstone of asthma management, although it is often suboptimal, especially in inner-city populations. To assess the impact of potentially modifiable medication beliefs on adherence with ICS therapy across time. Asthma history, medication beliefs, and ICS therapy adherence were determined in a prospective, observational cohort. Medication beliefs were based on self-regulation and self-efficacy theory. Self-reported adherence with ICS therapy was assessed using the Medication Adherence Reporting Scale, a validated 10-item instrument, at baseline and at 1 and 3 months. Repeated-measures multivariable regression identified beliefs independently associated with adherence across time after adjusting for age, sex, race, and asthma severity. The 261 patients were low-income minorities with high rates of asthma hospitalization, emergency department visits, intubation, and oral corticosteroid use. Adherence with ICS therapy was stable across time, with 70% of patients saying that they used ICS all or most of the time when asymptomatic. Most patients (82%) thought it was important to use ICS when asymptomatic, although 49% worried about side effects and 37% worried about becoming addicted. Although 82% felt confident in using ICS, 7% felt that their regimen was hard to follow. In multivariable analyses, the odds of adherence increased for those who felt that using ICS when asymptomatic was important (odds ratio [OR], 4.15) and for those who were confident in using ICS (OR, 2.23) and decreased by worries about side effects (OR, 0.52) or feeling the regimen was hard to follow (OR, 0.48). Several positive and negative beliefs about ICS were associated with adherence. Eliciting and addressing these potentially modifiable beliefs may help improve adherence and outcomes.

19184390
Predictors of adherence to diabetes medications: the role of disease and medication beliefs.
Despite the effectiveness of drug therapy in diabetes management high rates of poor adherence persist. The purpose of this study was to identify potentially modifiable patient disease and medication beliefs associated with poor medication adherence among people with diabetes. A cohort of patients with diabetes was recruited from an urban primary-care clinic in New York City. Patients were interviewed in English or Spanish about: disease beliefs, medication beliefs, regimen complexity, diabetes knowledge, depression, self-efficacy, and medication adherence (Morisky scale). Logistic regression was used to identify multivariate predictors of poor medication adherence (Morisky > 1). Patients (n = 151) had diabetes for an average of 13 years with a mean HgA1C of 7.6 (SD 1.7). One-in-four (28%) were poor adherers to their diabetes medicines. In multivariate analyses, predictors of poor medication adherence were: believing you have diabetes only when your sugar is high (OR = 7.4;2-27.2), saying there was no need to take medicine when the glucose was normal (OR = 3.5;0.9-13.7), worrying about side-effects of diabetes medicines (OR = 3.3;1.3-8.7), lack of self-confidence in controlling diabetes (OR = 2.8;1.1-7.1), and feeling medicines are hard to take (OR = 14.0;4.4-44.6). Disease and medication beliefs inconsistent with a chronic disease model of diabetes were significant predictors of poor medication adherence. These suboptimal beliefs are potentially modifiable and are logical targets for educational interventions to improve diabetes self-management.

19131457
Misconceptions about diabetes and its management among low-income minorities with diabetes.
To determine diabetic patients' knowledge and beliefs about the disease and medications that could hinder optimal disease management. A cross-sectional survey of 151 type 2 diabetic patients characterizing diabetes knowledge and beliefs about the disease and medications was conducted. Mean diabetes duration was 13 years. Over half of the patients (56%) believed that normal glucose is <or=200 mg/dl, 54% reported being able to feel when blood glucose levels are high, 36% thought that they will not always have diabetes, 29% thought that their doctor will cure them of diabetes, one in four (23%) said there is no need to take diabetes medications when glucose levels are normal, and 12% believed they have diabetes only when glucose levels are high. Diabetes knowledge and beliefs inconsistent with a chronic disease model of diabetes were prevalent in this sample. Suboptimal knowledge and beliefs are potentially modifiable and are logical targets for educational interventions to improve diabetes self-management.

17594491
The utility of B-type natriuretic peptide in the diagnosis of heart failure in the emergency department: a systematic review.
Dyspnea is a common chief complaint in the emergency department (ED); differentiating heart failure (HF) from other causes can be challenging. Brain Natriuretic Peptide (BNP) is a new diagnostic test for HF for use in dyspneic patients in the ED. The purpose of this study is to systematically review the accuracy of BNP in the emergency diagnosis of HF. We searched MEDLINE (1975-2005) supplemented by reference tracking. We included studies that reported the sensitivity and specificity of BNP for diagnosing HF in ED patients with acute dyspnea. Two reviewers independently assessed study quality. We pooled sensitivities and specificities within five ranges of BNP cutoffs. Ten studies including 3,344 participants met inclusion criteria. Quality was variable; possible verification or selection bias was common. No studies eliminated patients with obvious medical causes of dyspnea. Most studies used the Triage BNP assay; all utilized a clinical reference standard. Pooled sensitivity and specificity at a BNP cutoff of 100-105 pg/ml were 90% and 74% with negative likelihood ratio (LR) of 0.14; pooled sensitivity was 81% with specificity of 90% at cutoffs between 300 and 400 pg/ml with positive LR of 7.6. Our analysis suggests that BNP has moderate accuracy in detecting HF in the ED. Our results suggest utilizing a BNP of less than 100 pg/ml to rule out HF and a BNP of greater than 400 pg/ml to diagnose HF. Many studies were of marginal quality, and all included patients with varying degrees of diagnostic uncertainty. Further studies focusing on patients with diagnostic uncertainty will clarify the real-world utility of BNP in the emergency management of dyspnea.

17537881
Self management plus usual care was more effective than usual care alone for lower urinary tract symptoms in men.


