21508511
The role of genes in defining a molecular biology of PTSD.
Because environmental exposure to trauma is the sine qua non for the development of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), the recent focus on genetic studies has been noteworthy. The main catalyst for such studies is the observation from epidemiological studies that not all trauma survivors develop this disorder. Furthermore, neuroendocrine findings suggest pre-existing hormonal alterations that confer risk for PTSD. This paper presents the rationale for examining genetic factors in PTSD and trauma exposure, but suggests that studies of genotype may only present a limited picture of the molecular biology of this disorder. We describe the type of information that can be obtained from candidate gene and genomic studies that incorporate environmental factors in the design (i.e., gene - environment interaction and gene-environment correlation studies) and studies that capitalize on the idea that environment modifies gene expression, via epigenetic or other molecular mechanisms. The examination of epigenetic mechanisms in tandem with gene expression will help refine models that explain how PTSD risk, pathophysiology, and recovery is mediated by the environment. Since inherited genetic variation may also influence the extent of epigenetic or gene expression changes resulting from the environment, such studies should optimally be followed up by studies of genotype.

18075475
Irritable assault and variation in the COMT gene.
Aggression is associated with the 'low' activity allele (Met) of the functional Val158Met polymorphism among people with schizophrenia spectrum disorders relative to the 'high' activity (Val) allele. We examined this polymorphism in a sample of 112 people with axis II personality disorders. Participants completed the Buss Durkee Hostility Inventory. Two single nucleotide polymorphisms in the COMT gene were genotyped in these participants classified as 'white' according to US Census Bureau definitions. We failed to observe an association between the Val158Met allele and aggression but observed an association between self-reported aggression and the G allele of a biallelic polymorphism located in the 3'' UTR (rs16559). This allele is less prevalent among schizophrenics and is associated with lower COMT expression in the brain. These findings provide limited support for a role of COMT in modulating aggressive behavior, and are extended to people with personality disorders.

17721957
Differentiating biological correlates of risk, PTSD, and resilience following trauma exposure.
Risk and resilience factors presumably explain the individual differences in the response to adversity. However, little is known about how such factors are related. Risk and protective factors may reflect a quantitative difference along a single dimension (e.g., low IQ might be associated with risk and high IQ with resilience); however, they may also refer to orthogonal constructs that interact and/or moderate stress effects to increase or diminish the probability of developing trauma-related psychopathology (e.g., good coping could offset low IQ). The authors illustrate experimental strategies for distinguishing between these possibilities for any putative measure relating to symptom development, using a database that includes published and unpublished psychological and biological variables from a relatively homogenous cohort of exposed and nonexposed veterans.

