21538530
Genetic LRRK2 models of Parkinson's disease: Dissecting the pathogenic pathway and exploring clinical applications.
Dominantly inherited mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 are the most common cause of familial Parkinson's disease. Understanding leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 biology and pathophysiology is central to the elucidation of Parkinson's disease etiology and development of disease intervention. Recently, a number of genetic mouse models of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 have been reported utilizing different genetic approaches. Some similarities in Parkinson's disease-related pathology emerge in these genetic models despite lack of substantial neuropathology and clinical syndromes of Parkinson's disease. The systematic characterization of these models has begun to shed light on leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 biology and pathophysiology and is expected to offer the identification and validation of drug targets. In this review, we summarize the progress of genetic leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 mouse models and discuss their utility in understanding much needed knowledge regarding early-stage (presymptomatic) disease progression, identifying drug targets, and exploring the potential to aid compound screening focused on inhibitors of kinase activity of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2. © 2011 Movement Disorder Society.

21490089
Gammaherpesvirus 68 infection of endothelial cells requires both host autophagy genes and viral oncogenes for optimal survival and persistence.
Gammaherpesvirus-associated neoplasms include tumors of lymphocytes, epithelial cells and endothelial cells (ECs). We previously showed that, unlike most cell types, ECs survive productive gammaherpesvirus 68 (?HV68) infection and achieve anchorage-independent growth, providing a cellular reservoir for viral persistence. Here, we demonstrated autophagy in infected ECs by analysis of LC3 localization and protein modification and that infected ECs progress through the autophagosome pathway by LC3 dual fluorescence and p62 analysis. We demonstrate that pharmacologic autophagy induction results in increased survival of infected ECs, and conversely, that autophagy inhibition results in death of infected EC survivors. Furthermore, we identified two viral oncogenes, the vcyclin and the vBcl2, that are critical to EC survival and that modify EC proliferation and survival during infection-induced autophagy. We found that these viral oncogenes can also facilitate survival of substrate detachment in the absence of viral infection. Autophagy affords cells the opportunity to recover from stressful conditions, and consistent with this, the altered phenotype of surviving infected ECs was reversible. Finally, we demonstrated that knock-down of critical autophagy genes completely abrogated EC survival. This study reveals a viral mechanism, which usurps the autophagic machinery to promote viral persistence within non-adherent ECs, with the potential for recovery of infected ECs at a distant site upon disruption of virus replication.

21390248
Phosphorylation-dependent 14-3-3 binding to LRRK2 is impaired by common mutations of familial Parkinson's disease.
Recent studies show that mutations in Leucine Rich Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the cause of the most common inherited and some sporadic forms of Parkinson's disease (PD). The molecular mechanism underlying the pathogenic role of LRRK2 mutations in PD remains unknown. Using affinity purification and mass spectrometric analysis, we investigated phosphorylation sites and binding proteins of LRRK2 purified from mouse brain. We identified multiple phosphorylation sites at N-terminus of LRRK2 including S910, S912, S935 and S973. Focusing on the high stoichiometry S935 phosphorylation site, we developed an anti-pS935 specific antibody and showed that LRRK2 is constitutively phosphorylated at S935 in various tissues (including brain) and at different ages in mice. We find that 14-3-3 proteins (especially isoforms ? and ?) bind LRRK2 and this binding depends on phosphorylation of S935. The binding of 14-3-3, with little effect on dimer formation of LRRK2, confers protection of the phosphorylation status of S935. Furthermore, we show that protein kinase A (PKA), but not LRRK2 kinase itself, can cause the phosphorylation of LRRK2 at S935 in vitro and in cell culture, suggesting that PKA is a potential upstream kinase that regulates LRRK2 function. Finally, our study indicates that the common PD-related mutations of LRRK2, R1441G, Y1699C and G2019S, decrease homeostatic phosphorylation levels of S935 and impair 14-3-3 binding of LRRK2. LRRK2 is extensively phosphorylated in vivo, and the phosphorylation of specific sites (e.g. S935) determines 14-3-3 binding of LRRK2. We propose that 14-3-3 is an important regulator of LRRK2-mediated cellular functions. Our study suggests that PKA, a cAMP-dependent kinase involved in regulating dopamine physiology, is a potential upstream kinase that phosphorylates LRRK2 at S935. Furthermore, the reduction of phosphorylation/14-3-3 binding of LRRK2 due to the common familial PD-related mutations provides novel insight into the pathogenic mechanism of LRRK2-linked PD.

21292820
Bortezomib enhances the efficacy of fulvestrant by amplifying the aggregation of the estrogen receptor, which leads to a proapoptotic unfolded protein response.
Fulvestrant is known to promote the degradation of the estrogen receptor (ER) in the nucleus. However, fulvestrant also promotes the aggregation of the newly synthesized ER in the cytoplasm. Accumulation of protein aggregates leads to cell death but this effect is limited as a result of their elimination by the proteasome. We tested whether combining fulvestrant with the proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib, could enhance the accumulation of ER aggregates and cause apoptotic cell death. The rate of aggregation of the ER was monitored in ER(+) breast cancer cells lines, T47D, ZR-75.1, BT474, MDA-MB-361, MCF-7, fulvestrant resistance MCF-7, and tamoxifen-resistant T47D-cyclin D1 cells. Activation of the unfolded protein response, apoptosis, and metabolic rate were also monitored in these cell lines following treatment with fulvestrant, bortezomib, or bortezomib in combination with fulvestrant. We found that bortezomib enhances the fulvestrant-mediated aggregation of the ER in the cytoplasm without blocking the degradation of the ER in the nucleus. Further, these aggregates activate a sustained unfolded protein response leading to apoptotic cell death. Further, we show that the combination induced tumor regression in a breast cancer mouse model of tamoxifen resistance. Adding bortezomib to fulvestrant enhances its efficacy by taking advantage of the unique ability of fulvestrant to promote cytoplasmic aggregates of the ER. As this effect of fulvestrant is independent of the transcriptional activity of the ER, these results suggest that this novel combination may be effective in breast cancers that are ER(+) but estrogen independent. Clin Cancer Res; 17(8); 2292-300. ©2011 AACR.

20846953
From a global view to focused examination: understanding cellular function of lipid kinase VPS34-Beclin 1 complex in autophagy.
Phosphoinositide 3 kinase Class III (PIK3C3) or VPS34-Beclin 1 complex plays a key role in the autophagy-lysosome pathway. Previous identification of numerous binding partners for VPS34-Beclin 1 suggested a complex scheme of the autophagy control mechanism. Recent large-scale screening of autophagy network and signaling pathways in mammalian cells not only confirms the previous binding partners, but also reveals additional interactors and intricate connections of VPS34-Beclin 1 complex to other functional groups of autophagy, yielding a wealth of information that will direct future detailed study of the central control mechanism of autophagy mediated by VPS34-Beclin 1 and other regulators.

20404573
Autophagy in lurcher mice: Indicted but yet to be acquitted for the death of Purkinje cells.
A recent study published in the Journal of Neuroscience by Nishiyama et al., has revisited an autophagy-neurodegeneration model of lurcher (Lc) mice and promoted further discussion regarding the "autophagic cell death" hypothesis.(1) While the study confirmed the previous report by Yue et al., that GluRD2(Lc) induces autophagy both in vitro and in vivo,(2) it also suggests that GluRD2(Lc)-mediated autophagy and cell death occur via pathways outside the nPIST-Beclin 1 pathway.(1) For example, the study makes an interesting observation that GluRD2(Lc)-induced degeneration is associated with energy crisis and an aberrant AMPK activity. The result provides insight into the downstream events induced by GluRD2(Lc); however, it is not surprising considering that constitutive ion influx caused by the Lc mutation is expected to cause activation of multiple cellular pathways or responses. In conclusion, the authors state that "constitutive ion flux causes cell death with, but not by, autophagy." The conclusion appears consistent with the primary function of autophagy, from an evolutionary point of view, as a survival mechanism. However, careful examination of some results may call into question the conclusion.

20356743
The Beclin 1-VPS34 complex--at the crossroads of autophagy and beyond.
An increasing body of research on autophagy provides overwhelming evidence for its connection to diverse biological functions and human diseases. Beclin 1, the first mammalian autophagy protein to be described, appears to act as a nexus point between autophagy, endosomal, and perhaps also cell death pathways. Beclin 1 performs these roles as part of a core complex that contains vacuolar sorting protein 34 (VPS34), a class III phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase. The precise mechanism of Beclin 1-mediated regulation of these cellular functions is unclear, but substantial progress has recently been made in identifying new players and their functions in Beclin 1-VSP34 complexes. Here we review emerging studies that are beginning to unveil the physiological functions of Beclin 1-VPS34 in the central control of autophagic activity and other trafficking events through the formation of distinct Beclin 1-VPS34 protein complexes.

20130188
Enhanced striatal dopamine transmission and motor performance with LRRK2 overexpression in mice is eliminated by familial Parkinson's disease mutation G2019S.
PARK8/LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2) was recently identified as a causative gene for autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD), with LRRK2 mutation G2019S linked to the most frequent familial form of PD. Emerging in vitro evidence indicates that aberrant enzymatic activity of LRRK2 protein carrying this mutation can cause neurotoxicity. However, the physiological and pathophysiological functions of LRRK2 in vivo remain elusive. Here we characterize two bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) transgenic mouse strains overexpressing LRRK2 wild-type (Wt) or mutant G2019S. Transgenic LRRK2-Wt mice had elevated striatal dopamine (DA) release with unaltered DA uptake or tissue content. Consistent with this result, LRRK2-Wt mice were hyperactive and showed enhanced performance in motor function tests. These results suggest a role for LRRK2 in striatal DA transmission and the consequent motor function. In contrast, LRRK2-G2019S mice showed an age-dependent decrease in striatal DA content, as well as decreased striatal DA release and uptake. Despite increased brain kinase activity, LRRK2-G2019S overexpression was not associated with loss of DAergic neurons in substantia nigra or degeneration of nigrostriatal terminals at 12 months. Our results thus reveal a pivotal role for LRRK2 in regulating striatal DA transmission and consequent control of motor function. The PD-associated mutation G2019S may exert pathogenic effects by impairing these functions of LRRK2. Our LRRK2 BAC transgenic mice, therefore, could provide a useful model for understanding early PD pathological events.

20101724
Cell "self-eating" (autophagy) mechanism in Alzheimer's disease.
The autophagy pathway is the major degradation pathway of the cell for long-lived proteins and organelles. Dysfunction of autophagy has been linked to several neurodegenerative disorders that are associated with an accumulation of misfolded protein aggregates. Alzheimer's disease, the most common neurodegenerative disorder, is characterized by 2 aggregate forms, tau tangles and amyloid-beta plaques. Autophagy has been linked to Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis through its merger with the endosomal-lysosomal system, which has been shown to play a role in the formation of the latter amyloid-beta plaques. However, the precise role of autophagy in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis is still under contention. One hypothesis is that aberrant autophagy induction results in an accumulation of autophagic vacuoles containing amyloid-beta and the components necessary for its generation, whereas other evidence points to impaired autophagic clearance or even an overall reduction in autophagic activity playing a role in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis. In this review, we discuss the current evidence linking autophagy to Alzheimer's disease as well as the uncertainty over the exact role and level of autophagic regulation in the pathogenic mechanism of Alzheimer's disease.

19804414
LRRK2 in Parkinson's disease: in vivo models and approaches for understanding pathogenic roles.
The recent discovery of the genetic causes for Parkinson's disease (PD) is fruitful; however, the continuing revelation of PD-related genes is rapidly outpacing the functional characterization of the gene products. Although the discovery of multiple PD-related genes places PD as one of the most complex multigenetic diseases of the brain, it will undoubtedly facilitate the unfolding of a central pathogenic pathway and an understanding of the etiology of PD. Recent findings of pathogenic mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) (PARK8) that are linked to the most common familial forms and some sporadic forms of PD provide a unique opportunity to gain insight into the pathogenesis of PD. Despite rapid growth in biochemical, structural and in vitro cell culture studies of LRRK2, the in vivo characterizations of LRRK2 function generally fall short and are largely limited to invertebrates. The investigation of LRRK2 or homologs of LRRK2 in nonmammalian models provides important clues with respect to the cellular functions of LRRK2, but an elucidation of the physiology and pathophysiology of LRRK2 relevant to PD would still depend on mammalian models established by multiple genetic approaches, followed by rigorous examination of the models for pathological process. This minireview summarizes previous studies of genes for ROCO and LRRK2 homologs in slime mold, nematode worms and fruit flies. It also discusses the results obtained from available mouse models of LRRK2 that begin to provide information for understanding LRRK2-mediated pathogenesis in PD.

19339210
The cellular pathways of neuronal autophagy and their implication in neurodegenerative diseases.
Autophagy is a tightly regulated cell self-eating process. It has been shown to be associated with various neuropathological conditions and therefore, traditionally known as a stress-induced process. Recent studies, however, reveal that autophagy is constitutively active in healthy neurons. Neurons are highly specialized, post-mitotic cells that are typically composed of a soma (cell body), a dendritic tree, and an axon. Despite the vast growth of our current knowledge of autophagy, the detailed process in such a highly differentiated cell type remains elusive. Current evidence strongly suggests that autophagy is uniquely regulated in neurons and is also highly adapted to local physiology in the axons. In addition, the molecular mechanism for basal autophagy in neurons may be significantly divergent from "classical" induced autophagy. A considerable number of studies have increasingly shown an important role for autophagy in neurodegenerative diseases and have explored autophagy as a potential drug target. Thus, understanding the neuronal autophagy process will ultimately aid in drug target identification and rational design of drug screening to combat neurodegenerative diseases.

19216906
Using genetic mouse models to study the biology and pathology of autophagy in the central nervous system.
Autophagy is a cellular self-eating process that plays an important role in neuroprotection as well as neuronal injury and death. The detailed pathway of autophagy in these two opposing functions remains to be elucidated. Neurons are highly specialized, postmitotic cells that are typically composed of a soma (cell body), a dendritic tree, and an axon. Here, we describe methods for studying autophagy in the central nervous system (CNS). The first involves the use of recently developed transgenic mice expressing the fluorescent autophagosome marker, GFP-LC3. Although CNS neurons show little evidence for the presence of GFP-LC3-containing puncta under normal conditions, under pathological conditions such neurons exhibit many GFP-LC3 puncta. The onset and density of GFP-LC3 puncta have been found to vary significantly in the subcompartments of the affected neurons. These studies suggest that autophagy is distinctly regulated in CNS neurons and that neuronal autophagy can be highly compartmentalized. While transgenic mice expressing GFP-LC3 are a valuable tool for assessing autophagic activity in the CNS, caution needs to be taken when interpreting results solely based on the presence of GFP-LC3 puncta. Therefore, traditional ultrastructural analysis using electron microscopy remains an important tool for studying autophagosomes in vivo. Additional reporters of autophagy are constantly being sought. For example, recently a selective substrate of autophagy p62/SQSTM1 has been shown to be specifically regulated by autophagic activity. Therefore, p62/SQSTM1 protein levels can be used as an additional reporter for autophagic activity.

19149738
Recent patents and patent applications relating to mTOR pathway.
The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) plays an important role in cell growth. Dysfunction of mTOR has been linked to many human diseases, such as cancers, obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and neurological disorders. Currently, the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin and its analogs have been vigorously evaluated and developed as anticancer drugs. Here, we will review the most recent patents and patent applications relating to mTOR pathway. Moreover, we will discuss the patents and patent applications on the treatment of mTOR-associated metabolic diseases and cancers.

18000396
Neuronal autophagy: going the distance to the axon.
Autophagy, a regulated cellular degradation process responsible for the turnover of long-lived proteins and organelles, has been increasingly implicated in neurological disorders. Although autophagy is mostly viewed as a stress-induced process, recent studies have indicated that it is constitutively active in central nervous system (CNS) neurons and is protective against neurodegeneration. Neurons are highly specialized, post-mitotic cells that are typically composed of a soma (cell body), a dendritic tree and an axon. The detailed process of autophagy in such a highly differentiated cell type remains to be characterized. To elucidate the physiological role of neuronal autophagy, we generated mutant mice containing a neural cell type-specific deletion of Atg7, an essential gene for autophagy. Establishment of these mutant mice allowed us to examine cell-autonomous events in cerebellar Purkinje cells deficient in autophagy. Our data reveal the indispensability of autophagy in the maintenance of axonal homeostasis and the prevention of axonal dystrophy and degeneration. Furthermore, our study implicates dysfunction of axonal autophagy as a potential mechanism underlying axonopathy, which is linked to neurodegeneration associated with numerous human neurological disorders. Finally, our study has raised a possibility that "constitutive autophagy" in neurons involves processes that are not typical of autophagy in other cell types, but rather is highly adapted to local physiological function in the axon, which is projected in a distance from one neuron to another for transducing neural signals.

17726112
Essential role for autophagy protein Atg7 in the maintenance of axonal homeostasis and the prevention of axonal degeneration.
Autophagy is a regulated lysosomal degradation process that involves autophagosome formation and transport. Although recent evidence indicates that basal levels of autophagy protect against neurodegeneration, the exact mechanism whereby this occurs is not known. By using conditional knockout mutant mice, we report that neuronal autophagy is particularly important for the maintenance of local homeostasis of axon terminals and protection against axonal degeneration. We show that specific ablation of an essential autophagy gene, Atg7, in Purkinje cells initially causes cell-autonomous, progressive dystrophy (manifested by axonal swellings) and degeneration of the axon terminals. Consistent with suppression of autophagy, no autophagosomes are observed in these dystrophic swellings, which is in contrast to accumulation of autophagosomes in the axonal dystrophic swellings under pathological conditions. Axonal dystrophy of mutant Purkinje cells proceeds with little sign of dendritic or spine atrophy, indicating that axon terminals are much more vulnerable to autophagy impairment than dendrites. This early pathological event in the axons is followed by cell-autonomous Purkinje cell death and mouse behavioral deficits. Furthermore, ultrastructural analyses of mutant Purkinje cells reveal an accumulation of aberrant membrane structures in the axonal dystrophic swellings. Finally, we observe double-membrane vacuole-like structures in wild-type Purkinje cell axons, whereas these structures are abolished in mutant Purkinje cell axons. Thus, we conclude that the autophagy protein Atg7 is required for membrane trafficking and turnover in the axons. Our study implicates impairment of axonal autophagy as a possible mechanism for axonopathy associated with neurodegeneration.

17623048
Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2)/PARK8 possesses GTPase activity that is altered in familial Parkinson's disease R1441C/G mutants.
Mutations in Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are linked to the most common familial forms and some sporadic forms of Parkinson's disease (PD). The LRRK2 protein contains two well-known functional domains, MAPKKK-like kinase and Rab-like GTPase domains. Emerging evidence shows that LRRK2 contains kinase activity which is enhanced in several PD-associated mutants of LRRK2. However, the GTPase activity of LRRK2 has yet to be formally demonstrated. Here, we produced and purified the epitope-tagged LRRK2 protein from transgenic mouse brain, and showed that purified brain LRRK2 possesses both kinase and GTPase activity as assayed by GTP binding and hydrolysis. The brain LRRK2 is associated with elevated kinase activity in comparison to that from transgenic lung or transfected cultured cells. In transfected cell cultures, we detected GTP hydrolysis activity in full-length as well as in GTPase domain of LRRK2. This result indicates that LRRK2 GTPase can be active independent of LRRK2 kinase activity (while LRRK2 kinase activity requires the presence of LRRK2 GTPase as previously shown). We further found that PD mutation R1441C/G in the GTPase domain causes reduced GTP hydrolysis activity, consistent with the altered enzymatic activity in the mutant LRRK2 carrying PD familial mutations. Therefore, our study shows the biochemical characteristics of brain-specific LRRK2 which is associated with robust kinase and GTPase activity. The distinctive levels of kinase/GTPase activity in brain LRRK2 may help explain LRRK2-associated neuronal functions or dysfunctions in the pathogenesis of PD.

17204855
Regulation of neuronal autophagy in axon: implication of autophagy in axonal function and dysfunction/degeneration.
Autophagy has recently emerged as potential drug target for prevention of neurodegeneration. However, the details of autophagy process and regulation in the central nervous system (CNS) are unclear. By using a neuronal excitotoxicity model mice, we engineered expression of a fluorescent autophagic marker and systematically investigated autophagic activity under neurodegenerative condition. The study reveals an early response of Purkinje cells to excitotoxic insult by induction of autophagy in axon terminals, and that axonal autophagy is particularly robust in comparison to the cell body and dendrites. The accessibility of axons to rapid autophagy induction suggests local biogenesis of autophagosomes in axons. Characterization of functional interaction between autophagosome protein LC3 and microtubule-associated protein 1B (MAP1B), which is involved in axonal growth, injury and transport provides evidence for neuron or axon-specific regulation of autophagosomes. Furthermore, we propose that p62/SQSTM1, a putative autophagic substrate can serve as a marker for evaluating impairment of autophagic degradation, which helps resolve the controversy over autophagy levels under various pathological conditions. Future study of the relationship between autophagy and axonal function (e.g., transport) will provide insight into the mechanism underlying axonopathy which is directly linked to neurodegeneration.

