20418391
Initiation of decay of Bacillus subtilis rpsO mRNA by endoribonuclease RNase Y.
rpsO mRNA, a small monocistronic mRNA that encodes ribosomal protein S15, was used to study aspects of mRNA decay initiation in Bacillus subtilis. Decay of rpsO mRNA in a panel of 3'-to-5' exoribonuclease mutants was analyzed using a 5'-proximal oligonucleotide probe and a series of oligonucleotide probes that were complementary to overlapping sequences starting at the 3' end. The results provided strong evidence that endonuclease cleavage in the body of the message, rather than degradation from the native 3' end, is the rate-determining step for mRNA decay. Subsequent to endonuclease cleavage, the upstream products were degraded by polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase), and the downstream products were degraded by the 5' exonuclease activity of RNase J1. The rpsO mRNA half-life was unchanged in a strain that had decreased RNase J1 activity and no RNase J2 activity, but it was 2.3-fold higher in a strain with decreased activity of RNase Y, a recently discovered RNase of B. subtilis encoded by the ymdA gene. Accumulation of full-length rpsO mRNA and its decay intermediates was analyzed using a construct in which the rpsO transcription unit was under control of a bacitracin-inducible promoter. The results were consistent with RNase Y-mediated initiation of decay. This is the first report of a specific mRNA whose stability is determined by RNase Y.

19850915
Bacillus subtilis RNase J1 endonuclease and 5' exonuclease activities in the turnover of DeltaermC mRNA.
RNase J1, a ribonuclease with 5' exonuclease and endonuclease activities, is an important factor in Bacillus subtilis mRNA decay. A model for RNase J1 endonuclease activity in mRNA turnover has RNase J1 binding to the 5' end and tracking to a target site downstream, where it makes a decay-initiating cleavage. The upstream fragment from this cleavage is degraded by 3' exonucleases; the downstream fragment is degraded by RNase J1 5' exonuclease activity. Previously, DeltaermC mRNA was used to show 5'-end dependence of mRNA turnover. Here we used DeltaermC mRNA to probe RNase J1-dependent degradation, and the results were consistent with aspects of the model. DeltaermC mRNA showed increased stability in a mutant strain that contained a reduced level of RNase J1. In agreement with the tracking concept, insertion of a strong stem-loop structure at +65 resulted in increased stability. Weakening this stem-loop structure resulted in reversion to wild-type stability. RNA fragments containing the 3' end were detected in a strain with reduced RNase J1 expression, but were undetectable in the wild type. The 5' ends of these fragments mapped to the upstream side of predicted stem-loop structures, consistent with an impediment to RNase J1 5' exonuclease processivity. A DeltaermC mRNA deletion analysis suggested that decay-initiating endonuclease cleavage could occur at several sites near the 3' end. However, even in the absence of these sites, stability was further increased in a strain with reduced RNase J1, suggesting alternate pathways for decay that could include exonucleolytic decay from the 5' end.

19638340
Bacillus subtilis trp Leader RNA: RNase J1 endonuclease cleavage specificity and PNPase processing.
In the presence of ample tryptophan, transcription from the Bacillus subtilis trp operon promoter terminates to give a 140-nucleotide trp leader RNA. Turnover of trp leader RNA has been shown to depend on RNase J1 cleavage at a single-stranded, AU-rich region just upstream of the 3' transcription terminator. The small size of trp leader RNA and its strong dependence on RNase J1 cleavage for decay make it a suitable substrate for analyzing the requirements for RNase J1 target site specificity. trp leader RNAs with nucleotide changes around the RNase J1 target site were more stable than wild-type trp leader RNA, showing that sequences on either side of the cleavage site contribute to RNase J1 recognition. An analysis of decay intermediates from these mutants suggested limited 3'-to-5' exonuclease processing from the native 3' end. trp leader RNAs were designed that contained wild-type or mutant RNase J1 targets elsewhere on the molecule. The presence of an additional RNase J1 cleavage site resulted in faster RNA decay, depending on its location. Addition of a 5' tail containing 7 A residues caused destabilization of trp leader RNAs. Surprisingly, addition at the 5' end of a strong stem loop structure that is known to stabilize other RNAs did not result in a longer trp leader RNA half-life, suggesting that the RNase J1 cleavage site may be accessed directly. In the course of these experiments, we found evidence that polynucleotide phosphorylase processivity was inhibited by a GCGGCCGC sequence.

19633085
Processing and stability of inducibly expressed rpsO mRNA derivatives in Bacillus subtilis.
The Bacillus subtilis rpsO gene specifies a small (388-nucleotide), monocistronic mRNA that encodes ribosomal protein S15. We showed earlier that rpsO mRNA decay intermediates accumulated to a high level in a strain lacking polynucleotide phosphorylase. Here, we used inducibly expressed derivatives of rpsO, encoding smaller RNAs that had the complex 5' region deleted, to study aspects of mRNA processing in B. subtilis. An IPTG (isopropyl-beta-d-thiogalactopyranoside)-inducible rpsO transcript that contained lac sequences at the 5' end, called lac-rpsO RNA, was shown to undergo processing to result in an RNA that was 24 nucleotides shorter than full length. Such processing was dependent on the presence of an accessible 5' terminus; a lac-rpsO RNA that contained a strong stem-loop at the 5' end was not processed and was extremely stable. Interestingly, this stability depended also on ribosome binding to a nearby Shine-Dalgarno sequence but was independent of downstream translation. Either RNase J1 or RNase J2 was capable of processing lac-rpsO RNA, demonstrating for the first time a particular in vivo processing event that could be catalyzed by both enzymes. Decay intermediates were detected in the pnpA strain only for a lac-rpsO RNA that was untranslated. Analysis of processing of an untranslated lac-rpsO RNA in the pnpA strain shortly after induction of transcription suggested that endonuclease cleavage at 3'-proximal sites was an early step in turnover of mRNA.

19215774
Messenger RNA decay and maturation in Bacillus subtilis.
Our understanding of the ribonucleases that act to process and turn over RNA in Bacillus subtilis, a model Gram-positive organism, has increased greatly in recent years. This chapter discusses characteristics of B. subtilis ribonucleases that have been shown to participate in messenger RNA maturation and decay. Distinct features of a recently discovered ribonuclease, RNase J1, are reviewed, and are put in the context of a mechanism for the mRNA decay process in B. subtilis that differs greatly from the classical model developed for E. coli. This chapter is divided according to three parts of an mRNA-5' end, body, and 3' end-that could theoretically serve as sites for initiation of decay. How 5'-proximal elements affect mRNA half-life, and especially how these elements interface with RNase J1, forms the basis for a set of "rules" that may be useful in predicting mRNA stability.

19161848
Analysis of mRNA decay in Bacillus subtilis.
Studies of mRNA turnover in B. subtilis are less well known than in E. coli. Here we provide researchers who have an interest in gram-positive RNA processing with several protocols for RNA isolation, for 5'- and 3'-mapping of mRNAs and mRNA decay fragments, and we also include a comprehensive listing of B. subtilis mutants that are deficient in ribonucleases thought to be involved in mRNA decay.

18647167
Erythromycin-induced ribosome stalling and RNase J1-mediated mRNA processing in Bacillus subtilis.
SUMMARY: Addition of erythromycin (Em) to a Bacillus subtilis strain carrying the ermC gene results in ribosome stalling in the ermC leader peptide coding sequence. Using DeltaermC, a deletion derivative of ermC that specifies the 254 nucleotide DeltaermC mRNA, we showed previously that ribosome stalling is concomitant with processing of DeltaermC mRNA, generating a 209 nucleotide RNA whose 5' end maps to codon 5 of the DeltaermC coding sequence. Here we probed for peptidyl-tRNA to show that ribosome stalling occurs after incorporation of the amino acid specified by codon 9. Thus, cleavage upstream of codon 5 is not an example of 'A-site cleavage' that has been reported for Escherichia coli. Analysis of DeltaermC mRNA processing in endoribonuclease mutant strains showed that this processing is RNase J1-dependent. DeltaermC mRNA processing was inhibited by the presence of stable secondary structure at the 5' end, demonstrating 5'-end dependence, and was shown to be a result of RNase J1 endonuclease activity, rather than 5'-to-3' exonuclease activity. Examination of processing in derivatives of DeltaermC that had codons inserted upstream of the ribosome stalling site revealed that Em-induced ribosome stalling can occur considerably further from the start codon than would be expected based on previous studies.

18445592
Role of Bacillus subtilis RNase J1 endonuclease and 5'-exonuclease activities in trp leader RNA turnover.
The 140-nucleotide trp leader RNA, which is formed by transcription termination under conditions of high intracellular tryptophan, was used to study RNA turnover in Bacillus subtilis. We showed in vivo that the amount of endonuclease cleavage at approximately nucleotide 100 is decreased under conditions where RNase J1 concentration is reduced. In addition, under these conditions the level of 3'-terminal RNA fragments, which contain the strong transcription terminator structure, increases dramatically. These results implicated RNase J1 in the initiation of trp leader RNA decay as well as in the subsequent steps leading to complete turnover of the terminator fragment. To confirm a direct role for RNase J1, experiments were performed in vitro with various forms of trp leader RNA and 3'-terminal RNA fragments. Specific endonuclease cleavages, which were restricted to single-stranded regions not bound by protein, were observed. Degradation of the 3'-terminal fragment by the 5' to 3'-exonuclease activity of RNase J1 was also demonstrated, although the presence of strong secondary structure impeded RNase J1 processivity to some extent. These results are consistent with a model for mRNA decay in Bacillus subtilis whereby the downstream products of RNase J1 endonucleolytic cleavage become substrates for the 5' to 3'-exoribonuclease activity of the enzyme.

17576666
Processing of Bacillus subtilis small cytoplasmic RNA: evidence for an additional endonuclease cleavage site.
Small cytoplasmic RNA (scRNA) of Bacillus subtilis is the RNA component of the signal recognition particle. scRNA is transcribed as a 354-nt precursor, which is processed to the mature 271-nt scRNA. Previous work demonstrated the involvement of the RNase III-like endoribonuclease, Bs-RNase III, in scRNA processing. Bs-RNase III was found to cleave precursor scRNA at two sites (the 5' and 3' cleavage sites) located on opposite sides of the stem of a large stem-loop structure, yielding a 275-nt RNA, which was then trimmed by a 3' exoribonuclease to the mature scRNA. Here we show that Bs-RNase III cleaves primarily at the 5' cleavage site and inefficiently at the 3' site. RNase J1 is responsible for much of the cleavage that releases scRNA from downstream sequences. The subsequent exonucleolytic processing is carried out largely by RNase PH.

17507374
Initiation of decay of Bacillus subtilis trp leader RNA.
Transcription termination in the leader region of the Bacillus subtilis trp operon is regulated by binding of the 11-mer TRAP complex to nascent trp RNA, which results in formation of a terminator structure. Rapid decay of trp leader RNA, which is required to release the TRAP complex and maintain a sufficient supply of free TRAP, is mediated by polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase). Using purified B. subtilis PNPase, we showed that, when TRAP was present, PNPase binding to the 3' end of trp leader RNA and PNPase digestion of trp leader RNA from the 3' end were inefficient. These results suggested that initiation of trp leader RNA may begin with an endonuclease cleavage upstream of the transcription terminator structure. Such cleavage was observed in vivo. Mutagenesis of nucleotides at the cleavage site abolished processing and resulted in a 4-fold increase in trp leader RNA half-life. This is the first mapping of a decay-initiating endonuclease cleavage site on a native B. subtilis RNA.

18315555
SR proteins ASF/SF2 and SRp55 participate in tissue factor biosynthesis in human monocytic cells.
Human monocytes express two naturally occurring forms of circulating tissue factor (TF) - full-length TF, a membrane-spanning protein, and alternatively spliced TF, a soluble molecule. Presence of the variable exon 5 in TF mRNA determines whether the encoded TF protein is transmembrane, or soluble. Recently, an essential SR protein ASF/SF2 was implicated in TF pre-mRNA processing in human platelets. To examine molecular mechanisms governing regulated processing of TF pre-mRNA in human monocytic cells. In silico analysis of the human TF exon 5, present only in full-length TF mRNA, revealed putative binding motifs termed exonic splicing enhancers (ESE) for the SR proteins ASF/SF2 and SRp55, which were found to be abundantly expressed in monocytic cell lines THP-1 and SC, as well as monocyte-enriched peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Using a splice competent mini-gene reporter system transiently expressed in monocytic cells, it was determined that weakening of either five closely positioned ASF/SF2 ESE (bases 87-117) or a single conserved SRp55 ESE (base 39) results in severe skipping of exon 5. ASF/SF2 and SRp55 were found to physically associate with the identified ESE. SR proteins ASF/SF2 and SRp55 appear to interact with the variable TF exon 5 through ESE at bases 39 and 87-117. Weakening of the above ESE modulates splicing of TF exon 5. This study is the first to identify and experimentally characterize cis-acting splicing elements involved in regulated biosynthesis of human TF.

