21336499
Small bowel adenocarcinoma in Crohn's disease.
An association between small bowel adenocarcinoma and Crohn's disease (CD) is well-established. We present our recent experience with this entity in order to further elucidate its clinicopathological features and update our series from 1991. A retrospective review was undertaken of all surgical patients with small bowel adenocarcinoma and CD seen at our institution between 1993 and 2009. Follow-up was assessed until time of death or by interview with survivors. Survival was calculated based on TNM (tumor extent, lymph node status, metastases staging) staging and comparing between our current and previous series. Twenty-nine patients (ten females and 19 males) were identified and followed for a median of 2 years. The median age at onset of CD symptoms was 25, and the median age at cancer diagnosis was 55.4, for a mean interval of 25.3 years. Twenty-two cancers were ileal and five were jejunal. There were no cancers in excluded intestinal loops. Significant differences in 2-year survival were determined for: node-negative (79.3%, 95%CI 58.3-100%) versus node-positive cancers (49% %, 95%CI 20.0-78.0%), and for localized (92.3%, 95%CI 77.8-100%) versus metastatic disease (33.3%, 95%CI 6.6-60%). Overall 36-month survival was 69.3% (95%CI 51.5-87.1%) compared to 40% among those without excluded loops in our series from 1991. Sixteen patients had long periods of quiescent disease before diagnosis (7-45 years), and 16 required surgery for bowel obstruction that was refractory to medical management. Adequate information was not retrievable for three patients. A comparison to our previous series reveals similar clinical characteristics and a high rate of node-positive cancer at diagnosis. Our findings also confirm two important clinical indicators of malignancy: recrudescent symptoms after long periods of relative quiescence and small bowel obstruction that is refractory to medical therapy.

19333037
Evaluation of one-stage laparoscopic-assisted restorative proctocolectomy at a specialty center: comparison with the open approach.
This study compared outcomes after laparoscopically assisted and open restorative proctocolectomy performed as a one-stage procedure, including anorectal mucosectomy and omission of ileal diversion. We reviewed our prospectively maintained database of patients who underwent restorative proctocolectomy between 1998 and 2006. Demographic data, surgical indications, and intraoperative and postoperative complications were evaluated. Anastomotic leaks were identified by radiologic, endoscopic, or intraoperative evidence. The primary outcome variables were complications, duration of operation, blood loss, intraoperative spillage of enteric contents, and the ability to complete the procedure in one stage. One-stage laparoscopically assisted restorative proctocolectomy was performed in 50 patients and open restorative proctocolectomy was performed in 155 patients. The mean operative time was longer for the laparoscopically assisted group (198.7 vs. 159.1 minutes; P = 0.006). The mean estimated blood loss was less among the patients in the laparoscopically assisted group (287.5 vs. 386.4 ml; P = 0.006). There were no significant differences in intraoperative or postoperative complications between the two groups. Laparoscopically assisted one stage restorative proctocolectomy is a safe and technically feasible procedure. There seems to be no increase in the rate of postoperative complications compared with the open approach. Laparoscopically assisted restorative proctocolectomy should be considered in the surgical management of patients who require this procedure.

19229992
Recurrence patterns after first resection for stricturing or penetrating Crohn's disease.
Crohn's disease (CD) usually recurs after resection, but the factors associated with this risk remain obscure. We set out to determine the role of stricturing (Montreal Classification B2) versus penetrating (Classification B3) disease behavior in predicting early (<3 years) versus late (>or=3 years) postoperative recurrence. We identified a cohort of 34 patients seen at The Mount Sinai Hospital who had undergone a first ileocolic resection prior to December 31, 2004, who had been clinically thought to have had stricturing (B2) disease, and for whom we could verify 1) the operative and surgical pathology findings; and 2) the time of onset of symptoms attributable to recurrent CD by endoscopy, radiology, or surgery. Cases were reclassified as either "stricturing" (B2) or "penetrating" (B3) on the basis of operative and surgical pathology reports. Recurrences were classified as either "early" (<3 years) or "late" (>or=3 years) depending on the first appearance of postoperative symptoms that were verified endoscopically and histologically, radiologically, or surgically as being attributable to anastomotic recurrence of the CD. Among these 34 patients clinically thought to have had B2 disease, 12 had B2 disease confirmed upon review of surgical and pathology reports and none of them had recurrence within 3 years. Among the 22 patients reclassified as B3 disease, 12 (55%) had early recurrence. This difference was significant at the 0.002 level by the Fisher Exact Test. There is a strong proclivity for early postoperative recurrence of penetrating CD compared to stricturing disease, which may not be evident by behavioral classification on clinical grounds alone. Patients with confirmed uncomplicated stricturing obstruction at their first resection seem unlikely to experience a clinical recurrence within the next 3 years.

19177428
Colorectal carcinoma in indeterminate colitis.
For all the interest in the natural history of colorectal cancer (CRC) in ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD), surprisingly few data have been published regarding CRC in indeterminate colitis (IC). We present our experience with 15 cases of IC-associated CRC in order to assess their clinicopathological features and to determine their survival rates. We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of patients with IC admitted to the Mount Sinai Hospital between 1994 and 2007 and who developed CRC. All patients were operated on and follow-up was complete for all patients to the closing date of study or to the time of death. A total of 19 adenocarcinomas were present in this series. There were 3 patients with multiple cancers; all cancers occurred in segments of colitis. The mean age at onset of IC was 28 years and the average time progression from the IC diagnosis to CRC was 19 years. Dysplasia was detected in 10 of the cases; 3 patients had mucinous tumors. Five patients had stage I tumors; 5 stage II; 4 stage III; 1 stage IV. There were 4 deaths due to CRC. The overall 5-year survival was 42%. CRC in IC shares most of the clinical and pathologic features as well as survival outcomes with CRC that occurs in the most prevalent forms of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), UC and CD. Surveillance regimens currently used in the other forms of IBD seem applicable to IC patients as well.

18584247
Septic complications after restorative proctocolectomy do not impair functional outcome: long-term follow-up from a specialty center.
After restorative proctocolectomy, 7 to 8 percent of patients may have a pouch leak. Concern exists that pouch leak may be associated with impaired functional outcome. We evaluated patients who underwent restorative proctocolectomy to determine whether pouch leak adversely affected long-term functional outcome and quality of life. We queried our prospectively maintained database of patients who underwent restorative proctocolectomy for demographic and clinical data. We sent a long-term outcome questionnaire to patients, including the validated Fecal Incontinence Severity Index and Cleveland Global Quality of Life scores. Pouch leak was identified by clinical or radiographic evidence of leak. Patients with leak were compared with those without to determine the impact on long-term functional outcome or quality of life. A total of 817 patients were available for follow-up and 374 patients (46 percent) completed questionnaires. The group with (n = 60; 16 percent) and without (n = 314; 84 percent) leak had similar demographics. The median Fecal Incontinence Severity Index score (15.3 vs. 14.7, P = 0.77), Cleveland Global Quality of Life score (0.79 vs. 0.81, P = 0.48), and bowel movements per 24 hours (7.92 vs. 7.88, P = 0.92) were similar. The pouch loss/permanent ileostomy rate was higher in those who leaked (13.3 vs. 0.9 percent, P < 0.001). Anastomotic leak after restorative proctocolectomy does not adversely affect long-term quality of life or functional outcome. However, pouch loss/permanent ileostomy is significantly more likely in patients who have had an anastomotic leak.

18435885
Laparoscopic-assisted ileocolic resection for Crohn's disease.
This study reviews our experience with laparoscopic-assisted ileocolic resection in patients with Crohn's disease. The adequacy and safety of this procedure as measured by intraoperative and postoperative complications were evaluated. Special attention was paid to the group in which laparoscopy was not feasible and conversion to laparotomy was necessary. Between 1992 and 2005, 168 laparoscopic-assisted ileocolic resections were performed on 167 patients with Crohn's ileal or ileocolic disease. Follow-up data were complete in 158 patients. In 38 patients (24%), conversion to laparotomy was necessary. Previous resection was not a predictor of conversion to laparotomy. Average ileal and colonic length of resected specimens was 20.9 cm and 6.5 cm, respectively, in the laparoscopic group, versus 24.9 cm and 10.6 cm in the converted group. Twenty of 120 specimens (16.6%) in the laparoscopic group were found to have margins microscopically positive for active Crohn's disease. None of the 38 specimens in the converted group had positive ileal margins. Laparoscopic-assisted ileocolic resection can be safely performed in patients with Crohn's disease ileitis. The finding of positive surgical margins following laparoscopic resections compared with none among conventional resections has to be thoroughly evaluated.

18224373
Pelvic cancer ten years after restorative proctocolectomy in indeterminate colitis: report of a case.


20002692
Outcome and long-term function of restorative proctocolectomy for Crohn's disease: comparison to patients with ulcerative colitis.
Restorative proctocolectomy (RPC) is the most common operation for chronic ulcerative colitis (CUC), as it provides excellent functional outcome. However, among patients with Crohn's disease (CD), RPC is generally not recommended, as outcome and long-term function may be poor. Our purpose was to compare matched cohorts of CD and CUC patients to determine whether there are differences in outcome or function. We queried our prospectively maintained database of patients who underwent RPC from 1991 to 2008. We identified patients who underwent RPC for CD and compared them with a matched cohort of patients who underwent RPC for CUC. We identified 13 patients with CD (seven women, median age 34 years) and 39 patients with CUC (21 women, median age 35 years). The patients were well matched for gender, clinical and demographic variables. Seven patients (54%) with CD had proctitis, but none had perianal or ileal disease. There were four (30.8%) postoperative complications and no anastomotic leaks. The CD group experienced significantly fewer median daily bowel movements (P = 0.02), incontinence for liquids (P < 0.01) and pouchitis (P < 0.01). With a median follow up of 44 months, pouch excision rate was significantly higher in the Crohn's group (2 vs 0%, P < 0.01). In patients with CD, RPC may result in fewer daily bowel movements, less liquid incontinence and a lower incidence of pouchitis compared with CUC patients who undergo RPC. However, risk of pouch loss is higher in patients with CD. Therefore, in properly selected patients with CD, RPC provides an acceptable long-term functional outcome.

19207702
Postoperative mesenteric pseudoaneurysm in a patient undergoing bowel resection for Crohn's disease.


