20809521
Islet-expressed TLR2 and TLR4 sense injury and mediate early graft failure after transplantation.
Although islet transplantation is an effective treatment for Type 1 diabetes, primary engraftment failure contributes to suboptimal outcomes. We tested the hypothesis that islet isolation and transplantation activate innate immunity through TLR expressed on islets. Murine islets constitutively express TLR2 and TLR4, and TLR activation with peptidoglycan or LPS upregulates islet production of cytokines and chemokines. Following transplantation into streptozotocin-induced diabetic, syngeneic mice, islets exposed to LPS or peptidoglycan had primary graft failure with intra- and peri-islet mononuclear cell inflammation. The use of knockout mice showed that recipient CD8(+) T cells caused engraftment failure and did so in the absence of islet-derived DC. To mimic physiological islet injury, islets were transplanted with exocrine debris. Transplantation of TLR2/4(-/-) islets reduced proinflammatory cytokine production and improved islet survival. Stressed islets released the alarmin high-mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1) and recombinant HMGB1 (rHMGB1) induced NFkB activation. NFkB activation was prevented in the absence of both TLR2 and TLR4. rHMGB1 pretreatment also prevented primary engraftment through a TLR2/4-dependent pathway. Our results show that islet graft failure can be initiated by TLR2 and TLR4 signaling and suggest that HMGB1 is one likely early mediator. Subsequent downstream signaling results in intra-islet inflammation followed by T-cell-mediated graft destruction.

19641188
Epigenetic mechanisms of regulation of Foxp3 expression.
Regulatory T cells play important roles in the control of autoimmunity and maintenance of transplantation tolerance. Foxp3, a member of the forkhead/winged-helix family of transcription factors, acts as the master regulator for regulatory T-cell (Treg) development and function. Mutation of the Foxp3 gene causes the scurfy phenotype in mouse and IPEX syndrome (immune dysfunction, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked syndrome) in humans. Epigenetics is defined by regulation of gene expression without altering nucleotide sequence in the genome. Several epigenetic markers, such as histone acetylation and methylation, and cytosine residue methylation in CpG dinucleotides, have been reported at the Foxp3 locus. In particular, CpG dinucleotides at the Foxp3 locus are methylated in naive CD4+CD25- T cells, activated CD4+ T cells, and TGF-beta-induced adaptive Tregs, whereas they are completely demethylated in natural Tregs. The DNA methyltransferases DNMT1 and DNMT3b are associated with the Foxp3 locus in CD4+ T cells. Methylation of CpG residues represses Foxp3 expression, whereas complete demethylation is required for stable Foxp3 expression. In this review, we discuss how different cis-regulatory elements at the Foxp3 locus are subjected to epigenetic modification in different subsets of CD4+ T cells and regulate Foxp3 expression, and how these mechanisms can be exploited to generate efficiently large numbers of suppressive Tregs for therapeutic purposes.

19414776
c-Maf regulates IL-10 expression during Th17 polarization.
IL-10 production by Th17 cells is critical for limiting autoimmunity and inflammatory responses. Gene array analysis on Stat6 and T-bet double-deficient Th17 cells identified the Th2 transcription factor c-Maf to be synergistically up-regulated by IL-6 plus TGFbeta and associated with Th17 IL-10 production. Both c-Maf and IL-10 induction during Th17 polarization depended on Stat3, but not Stat6 or Stat1, and mechanistically differed from IL-10 regulation by Th2 or IL-27 signals. TGFbeta was also synergistic with IL-27 to induce c-Maf, and it induced Stat1-independent IL-10 expression in contrast to IL-27 alone. Retroviral transduction of c-Maf was able to induce IL-10 expression in Stat6-deficient CD4 and CD8 T cells, and c-Maf directly transactivated IL-10 gene expression through binding to a MARE (Maf recognition element) motif in the IL-10 promoter. Taken together, these data reveal a novel role for c-Maf in regulating T effector development, and they suggest that TGFbeta may antagonize Th17 immunity by IL-10 production through c-Maf induction.

19303390
Regulatory T cells sequentially migrate from inflamed tissues to draining lymph nodes to suppress the alloimmune response.
To determine the site and mechanism of suppression by regulatory T (Treg) cells, we investigated their migration and function in an islet allograft model. Treg cells first migrated from blood to the inflamed allograft where they were essential for the suppression of alloimmunity. This process was dependent on the chemokine receptors CCR2, CCR4, and CCR5 and P- and E-selectin ligands. In the allograft, Treg cells were activated and subsequently migrated to the draining lymph nodes (dLNs) in a CCR2, CCR5, and CCR7 fashion; this movement was essential for optimal suppression. Treg cells inhibited dendritic cell migration in a TGF-beta and IL-10 dependent fashion and suppressed antigen-specific T effector cell migration, accumulation, and proliferation in dLNs and allografts. These results showed that sequential migration from blood to the target tissue and to dLNs is required for Treg cells to differentiate and execute fully their suppressive function.

19109157
Epigenetic regulation of Foxp3 expression in regulatory T cells by DNA methylation.
Foxp3, a winged-helix family transcription factor, serves as the master switch for CD4(+) regulatory T cells (Treg). We identified a unique and evolutionarily conserved CpG-rich island of the Foxp3 nonintronic upstream enhancer and discovered that a specific site within it was unmethylated in natural Treg (nTreg) but heavily methylated in naive CD4(+) T cells, activated CD4(+) T cells, and peripheral TGFbeta-induced Treg in which it was bound by DNMT1, DNMT3b, MeCP2, and MBD2. Demethylation of this CpG site using the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (Aza) induced acetylation of histone 3, interaction with TIEG1 and Sp1, and resulted in strong and stable induction of Foxp3. Conversely, IL-6 resulted in methylation of this site and repression of Foxp3 expression. Aza plus TGFbeta-induced Treg resembled nTreg, expressing similar receptors, cytokines, and stable suppressive activity. Strong Foxp3 expression and suppressor activity could be induced in a variety of T cells, including human CD4(+)CD25(-) T cells. Epigenetic regulation of Foxp3 can be predictably controlled with DNMT inhibitors to generate functional, stable, and specific Treg.

18037890
The sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 1 causes tissue retention by inhibiting the entry of peripheral tissue T lymphocytes into afferent lymphatics.
Although much is known about the migration of T cells from blood to lymph nodes, less is known about the mechanisms regulating the migration of T cells from tissues into lymph nodes through afferent lymphatics. Here we investigated T cell egress from nonlymphoid tissues into afferent lymph in vivo and developed an experimental model to recapitulate this process in vitro. Agonism of sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 1 inhibited the entry of tissue T cells into afferent lymphatics in homeostatic and inflammatory conditions and caused the arrest, mediated at least partially by interactions of the integrin LFA-1 with its ligand ICAM-1 and of the integrin VLA-4 with its ligand VCAM-1, of polarized T cells at the basal surface of lymphatic but not blood vessel endothelium. Thus, the increased sphingosine 1-phosphate present in inflamed peripheral tissues may induce T cell retention and suppress T cell egress.

19879295
Inhibition of TLR4 signaling prolongs Treg-dependent murine islet allograft survival.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) provide an important link between innate and adaptive immune system. We hypothesized that the recognition of endogenous TLR4 ligands is occurring at the time of transplantation, and these innate signals drive the inflammation and affect alloimmune responses. We confirmed that early after transplantation of allogenic islets, transcripts for TLR4 as well as potential ligands were released or up-regulated. In an allogenic islet transplantation model, genetic disruption of TLR4 on donor islets had no effect on allograft survival, whereas TLR4 deficiency in recipients lead to prolonged graft survival. Low dose rapamycin-treatment of TLR4(-/-) recipients induced permanent engraftment of 45% islet graft (p=0.005) compared to WT recipients. This prolonged graft survival was dependent on the presence of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) Treg. Naïve CD4(+)CD25(-) T cells cultured with the TLR4 ligand lipopolysaccharide showed enhanced IL-4, IL-6, IL-17, IFN gamma secretion and inhibited TGFbeta induced Foxp3(+)Treg generation. Thus, inhibition of recipient TLR4 activation at the time of transplantation decreases proinflammatory signals and allows Treg generation.

