19170217
High resolution computed tomography in idiopathic interstitial pneumonias.
In June 2001, using an "international multidisciplinary consensus," the American Thoracic Society and European Respiratory Society classified the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias (Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;165:277-304). The American Thoracic Society and European Respiratory Society coined the term idiopathic interstitial pneumonias because the diseases in question have both unknown etiologies and various combinations of inflammation and fibrosis within the lung parenchyma. The consensus included the development of a classification standard of the interstitial pneumonias and discussed the role of surgical lung biopsy and bronchoalveolar lavage evaluation. The classification of idiopathic interstitial pneumonias is based on histologic criteria, which correlate to imaging patterns on high-resolution computed tomography. The group of lung diseases under the umbrella of idiopathic interstitial pneumonias includes the following: usual interstitial pneumonia, nonspecific interstitial pneumonia, desquamative interstitial pneumonia, respiratory bronchiolitis interstitial lung disease, acute interstitial pneumonia, cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, and lymphoid interstitial pneumonia.

18772272
Informatics in radiology: image exchange: IHE and the evolution of image sharing.
The sharing of radiologic images has become a fundamental part of radiology services and is essential for delivering high-quality care. Film is quickly becoming obsolete as a means of transporting and sharing large volumes of imaging data. Image sharing has evolved from film to transportable media (eg, compact disks) to direct electronic exchange over the Internet. The latter two means of image sharing have associated work flow-related and technical challenges for which solutions are being developed. Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise (IHE) provides a standards-based approach to the development of robust, universally accepted solutions. Several IHE profiles have been developed to provide a framework for current image sharing efforts. The Philadelphia and New Jersey Health Information Exchanges and the Canada Health Infoway represent efforts to apply IHE technical profiles to facilitate the secure and confidential exchange of electronic images over the Internet. The research community is concomitantly developing solutions that solve image exchange issues that are specific to research (eg, the sharing of deidentified data) but that might also be encountered in the general population. The personal health record is a more recent development that may provide consumers with direct control over the process of sharing images electronically with their healthcare providers.

17693781
Air trapping detected on end-expiratory high-resolution computed tomography in symptomatic World Trade Center rescue and recovery workers.
We utilized end-expiratory chest computed tomography (CT) to investigate air trapping (AT) in symptomatic former World Trade Center (WTC) workers, and correlated the findings with clinical, physiological, and exposure-related characteristics. Twenty-nine WTC workers with lower respiratory symptoms were evaluated. Clinical data included symptom inventories, quantitative respiratory symptom scores, WTC dust exposure duration, pulmonary function tests, and inspiratory and end-expiratory high-resolution chest CT scans. The latter were scored quantitatively for AT (by two methods) and interstitial changes, and those scores were correlated with the clinical data. The two AT scoring methods yielded highly correlated results. AT was demonstrated in 25 of 29 patients, with scores ranging from 0 to 24 (mean, 10.6). There was a statistically significant correlation between AT and the duration of dust exposure. AT scores were significantly higher in patients with restrictive lung function data, and in lifetime nonsmokers. Our data suggest that AT from small airways disease may account for some of the reported clinical and pulmonary functional abnormalities in WTC dust-exposed workers, and support the use of high-resolution CT scans in the investigation and characterization of the pulmonary ailments of selected workers.

