21563296
Overdose with suicidal intent: Ethical considerations for liver transplant programs.
Liver transplant programs encounter patients with fulminant hepatic failure (FHF) resulting from acetaminophen or multidrug ingestions as a part of suicide attempts. Members of the transplant team often have different opinions as to whether such patients should be offered a transplant. Disagreements can delay transfer to the transplant facility and negatively impact patient management. Currently, no guidelines exist to help transplant programs navigate their decisions as to the appropriateness of liver transplantation for these patients. In what follows, we present a clinical case encountered at our facility and discuss the ethical principles that should help programs make informed decisions concerning the transplantation of such patients. Liver Transpl, 2011. © 2011 AASLD.

20945264
Rethinking research ethics.
Contemporary research ethics policies started with reflection on the atrocities perpetrated upon concentration camp inmates by Nazi doctors. Apparently, as a consequence of that experience, the policies that now guide human subject research focus on the protection of human subjects by making informed consent the centerpiece of regulatory attention. I take the choice of context for policy design, the initial prioritization of informed consent, and several associated conceptual missteps, to have set research ethics off in the wrong direction. The aim of this paper is to sort out these confusions and their implications and to offer instead a straightforward framework for considering the ethical conduct of human subject research. In the course of this discussion I clarify different senses of autonomy that have been confounded and present more intelligible justifications for informed consent. I also take issue with several of the now accepted dogmas that govern research ethics. These include: the primacy of informed consent, the protection of the vulnerable, the substitution of beneficence for research's social purpose, and the introduction of an untenable distinction between innovation and research.

20818547
Privacy overkill.


20364454
Transplant tourism.
Because of the ongoing organ donor shortage, transplant tourism is occurring at an increasing rate both in the USA and abroad. To date, there have been little published data to help guide the programmatic philosophy of the USA transplant centers regarding transplant tourism. We summarize position statements from several transplant societies regarding transplant tourism and specifically transplantation occurring in China (because of the use of executed prisoners as organ donors). Transplant tourism is ever increasing and patients may be at risk for greater post-transplant morbidity as well as inadequate follow up care. Transplant centers require some guidance with regard of how to deal with these patients. Transplant tourism is an increasing reality facing the USA transplant centers. Most professional societies do not condone it yet cannot abrogate a physician's right to care for such patients. Ethical principles mandate transplant physicians provide adequate care for returning transplant tourists. Better ways of assessing the scope of the problem are necessary. Transplant tourism may exist because of the disparity between the need for organ donors and their availability and is thus is likely to continue into the future.

20131159
Transplant tourism in China: a tale of two transplants.
The use of organs obtained from executed prisoners in China has recently been condemned by every major transplant organization. The government of the People's Republic of China has also recently made it illegal to provide transplant organs from executed prisoners to foreigners transplant tourists. Nevertheless, the extreme shortage of transplant organs in the U.S. continues to make organ transplantation in China an appealing option for some patients with end-stage disease. Their choice of traveling to China for an organ leaves U.S. transplant programs with decisions about how to respond to the needs of patients who return after transplantation. By discussing two cases that raised this dilemma, we argue for upholding medicine's commitments to traditional principles of beneficence and nonjudgmental regard in sorting out the policies that a transplant program should adopt. We also explain how position statements that aim for the high ground of moral purity fail to give appropriate weight to the needs and suffering of present and future patients in the U.S. and in China.

20131158
Moral complexity and the delusion of moral purity.


20104478
The dilemma and reality of transplant tourism: an ethical perspective for liver transplant programs.
Transplant programs are likely to encounter increasing numbers of patients who return after receiving an organ transplant abroad. These patients will require ongoing medical care to monitor their immunosuppression and to provide treatment when the need arises. Transplant societies have condemned transplantation with organs purchased abroad and with organs procured from executed prisoners in China. Nevertheless, transplant programs require guidance on how to respond to the needs of returning transplant tourists and to the needs of patients who may choose to become transplant tourists. This discussion presents a case that raised such issues in our program. It goes on to offer reasons for considering a program's responses in terms of the most relevant principles of medical ethics, namely beneficence and nonjudgmental regard.

19811167
Improving ethics education during residency training.
Trainees struggle with the evaluation and management of inpatient clinical ethical dilemmas. To meet their needs for both conceptual clarification and practical management, we designed a program to teach medical residents a systematic approach to resolving clinical ethical dilemmas. We instituted monthly resident ethics educational case conferences to clarify residents' understanding of key concepts of medical ethics and to teach an 8-step systematic approach to resolving ethical dilemmas. We surveyed learners on the appropriateness, immediate utility, and potential for future usefulness of the approach. The vast majority of residents found the approach to be applicable and helpful with clinical decisions and interactions with patients and their family members. Teaching residents to use a systematic approach in understanding and resolving ethical dilemmas can facilitate their management of the ethical dilemmas that arise in clinical practice. Providing trainees with a concise structure for the thought process involved gives them confidence in their ability to address the issues directly and to act for reasons that are explicit, transparent, and reflect medical professionalism.

19421973
Dilemmas in surgery: medical ethics education in surgery rotation.


19003705
In defense of the duty to participate in biomedical research.


18581483
Ethics and liver transplantation: a new section in our journal.


18462545
Affective forecasting and its implications for medical ethics.


18171977
Ethics in practice. Terminating the physician-patient relationship.
A.G. is a thirty-six-year-old reading teacher who presented to an orthopaedic surgeon with patellofemoral pain. After an appropriate evaluation, the physician suggested a course of physical therapy and anti-inflammatory medication. The patient asked for and received time off from her work, stating that her job required her to climb stairs. At multiple follow-up visits, A.G. was found to be poorly compliant with physical therapy and home-exercise programs. Her only interest appeared to be in securing the doctor's letter of support for an extended medical leave. At each visit, she demanded that the physician write a letter stating that she was unable to work as a reading teacher due to knee pain. At one point, she became belligerent with the medical office staff when the letter was not prepared. When her physician tried to elicit information about whether there were any unaddressed obstacles to rehabilitation treatment, A.G. did not answer the questions. Instead, she explained that her job required her to climb stairs and that she was unable to return to work because of the continued knee pain. The physician explained that, on the basis of his examination and assessment, he expected that her pain would improve if she complied with the treatment plan. After multiple visits, the orthopaedic surgeon counseled the patient that he did not see that his attempts to help her were providing any benefit and that perhaps it would be best for her to seek help from another physician. A.G. replied that she did not want to start going to another doctor. She stated emphatically that he was her doctor, that she was paying him, and that she wanted a letter saying that she should be granted an extended medical leave from work because of her inability to climb stairs. After this encounter, the surgeon thought it best to terminate the professional relationship.

17558992
A Kantian duty to commit suicide and its implications for bioethics.


