21076159
Association of chronic kidney disease with atrial fibrillation among adults in the United States: REasons for Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) Study.
BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is common among patients with end-stage renal disease, but few data are available on its prevalence among adults with chronic kidney disease (CKD) of lesser severity. methods and results: We evaluated the association of CKD with ECG-detected AF among 26 917 participants in the REasons for Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) study, a population-based cohort of African-American and white US adults ?45 years of age. Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was calculated using the abbreviated Modification of Diet in Renal Disease study equation and albuminuria was defined as a urinary albumin to creatinine ratio ?30 mg/g. Participants were categorized by renal function: no CKD (eGFR ?60 mL/min/1.73 m(2) without albuminuria, n=21 081), stage 1 to 2 CKD (eGFR ?60 mL/min/1.73 m(2) with albuminuria n=2938), stage 3 CKD (eGFR 30 to 59 mL/min/1.73 m(2), n=2683) and stage 4 to 5 CKD (eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m(2), n=215). The prevalence of AF among participants without CKD, and with stage 1 to 2, stage 3, and stage 4 to 5 CKD was 1.0%, 2.8%, 2.7% and 4.2%, respectively. Compared with participants without CKD, the age-, race-, and sex-adjusted odds ratios for prevalent AF were 2.67 (95% confidence interval, 2.04 to 3.48), 1.68 (95% confidence interval, 1.26 to 2.24) and 3.52 (95% confidence interval, 1.73 to 7.15) among those with stage 1 to 2, stage 3, and stage 4 to 5 CKD. The association between CKD and prevalent AF remained statistically significant after further multivariable adjustment and was consistent across numerous subgroups. CONCLUSIONS: Regardless of severity, CKD is associated with an increased prevalence of AF among US adults.

21070928
Bisphosphonate Use and Prevalence of Valvular and Vascular Calcification in Women MESA (The Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis).
the aim of this study was to determine whether nitrogen-containing bisphosphonate (NCBP) therapy is associated with the prevalence of cardiovascular calcification. cardiovascular calcification correlates with atherosclerotic disease burden. Experimental data suggest that NCBP might limit cardiovascular calcification, which has implications for disease prevention. the relationship of NCBP use to the prevalence of aortic valve, aortic valve ring, mitral annulus, thoracic aorta, and coronary artery calcification (AVC, AVRC, MAC, TAC, and CAC, respectively) detected by computed tomography was assessed in 3,710 women within the MESA (Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis) with regression modeling. Analyses were age-stratified, because of a significant interaction between age and NCBP use (interaction p values: AVC p < 0.0001; AVRC p < 0.0001; MAC p = 0.002; TAC p < 0.0001; CAC p = 0.046). After adjusting for age; body mass index; demographic data; diabetes; smoking; blood pressure; cholesterol levels; and statin, hormone replacement, and renin-angiotensin inhibitor therapy, NCBP use was associated with a lower prevalence of cardiovascular calcification in women ? 65 years of age (prevalence ratio: AVC 0.68 [95% confidence interval (CI): 0.41 to 1.13]; AVRC 0.65 [95% CI: 0.51 to 0.84]; MAC 0.54 [95% CI: 0.33 to 0.93]; TAC 0.69 [95% CI: 0.54 to 0.88]; CAC 0.89 [95% CI: 0.78 to 1.02]), whereas calcification was more prevalent in NCBP users among the 2,181 women <65 years of age (AVC 4.00 [95% CI: 2.33 to 6.89]; AVRC 1.92 [95% CI: 1.42 to 2.61]; MAC 2.35 [95% CI: 1.12 to 4.84]; TAC 2.17 [95% CI: 1.49 to 3.15]; CAC 1.23 [95% CI: 0.97 to 1.57]). among women in the diverse MESA cohort, NCBPs were associated with decreased prevalence of cardiovascular calcification in older subjects but more prevalent cardiovascular calcification in younger ones. Further study is warranted to clarify these age-dependent NCBP effects.

20953740
Stroke prevention in the high-risk atrial fibrillation patient: Medical management.
Medical management of patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) at high risk for stroke is limited by problems of imperfect tools for assessment of thromboembolism and bleeding risks. Improved instruments, such as the CHA?DS?VASc and HAS-BLED risk stratification scores, have been incorporated into European practice guidelines. Until recently, the most effective therapy for stroke prevention has been anticoagulation with a vitamin K antagonist, but new oral anticoagulants in development, antiarrhythmic drugs that reduce adverse cardiovascular events in patients with AF, and interventional techniques for occlusion of the left atrial appendage represent promising options for stroke prevention. These new strategies will need focused evaluation in the most challenging AF patients-those with a high risk of bleeding, prior thromboembolism, or thrombosis-prone surfaces such as mechanical heart valve prostheses or drug-eluting coronary stents, for whom the limitations of currently available treatment options and a paucity of data are particularly acute.

20865027
Anticoagulant therapy: warfarin sensitivity genotyping closer to clinical practice.


20700095
Unstable angina in a patient with anomalous origin of the left main coronary artery from the right sinus of Valsalva.
Anomalous coronary arteries are rare. Although most are not clinically significant, the most clinically important coronary anomaly is origin of the left main coronary artery from the right sinus of Valsalva, which can be associated with sudden death. We present a case of a 37-year-old man with unstable angina who underwent cardiac catheterization and was found to have this type of anomaly, which was later confirmed by coronary computed tomography angiography. Diagnosis and management of patients with this coronary anomaly are discussed.

19663669
CYP2C9*8 is prevalent among African-Americans: implications for pharmacogenetic dosing.
Although the frequencies of pharmacogenetic variants differ among racial groups, most pharmacogenetic algorithms for genotype-guided warfarin dosing only include two CYP2C9 alleles (*2 and *3) and a single VKORC1 allele (g.-1639G>A or g.1173C>T) commonly found among Caucasians. Therefore, this study sought to identify other CYP2C9 and VKORC1 alleles important in warfarin dose variability and to determine their frequencies in different racial and ethnic groups. The CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genes were sequenced in selected sensitive (< 21 mg/week) and resistant (> 49 mg/week) individuals with discrepant therapeutic and algorithm-predicted warfarin doses based on prior CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genotyping. The CYP2C9 and VKORC1 allele frequencies were determined in healthy, racially self-identified blood donors. Sequencing identified an African-American male with a lower than predicted therapeutic warfarin dose (14.4 mg/week), previously genotyped as CYP2C9*1/*1, who was homozygous for CYP2C9*8 (c.449G>A; p.R150H). Genotyping 600 African-American alleles identified CYP2C9*8 as their most frequent variant CYP2C9 allele (0.047), and the combined allele frequency of CYP2C9*2, *3, *5, *6, *8 and *11 was 0.133. Given most warfarin pharmacogenetic dosing algorithms only include CYP2C9*2 and *3, the inclusion of CYP2C9*8 alone could reclassify the predicted metabolic phenotypes of almost 10% of African-Americans, or when combined with CYP2C9*5, *6 and *11, more than 15%. In addition, the African-American VKORC1 g.-1639A allele frequency was 0.108 and three g.1331G>A (p.V66M) carriers were identified. CYP2C9*8 is prevalent among African-Americans ( approximately 1 in 11 individuals). Thus, in this racial group, the incorporation of CYP2C9*8 into genotyping panels may improve dose prediction of CYP2C9-metabolized drugs, including warfarin.

19553827
What can ongoing clinical trials of anticoagulants demonstrate?
As the population ages, the burden of thromboembolic disease increases. The development of new anticoagulants that overcome the shortcomings of the vitamin K antagonists represents an important advance.Clinical evaluation of new anticoagulants typically begins in short-term indications, such as prophylaxis against venous thromboembolism in patients undergoing orthopaedic surgery, followed by investigation in chronic conditions, such as stroke prevention in patients with atrial fibrillation. Factors for consideration in clinical trials include methodological issues (blinded versus open-label; active-control statistical designs; patient selection, etc.). Despite its subsequent withdrawal, clinical trials of ximelagatran demonstrated the efficacy of fixed doses of an oral, direct thrombin inhibitor for prevention of thromboembolism. Direct and indirect inhibition of activated Factor X is another target for new anticoagulants. Evidence-based data from trials such as these will pave the way for new anticoagulants, with the goal of bringing optimum prophylactic therapy to those requiring anticoagulation.

18589346
Recurrent orthostatic global amnesia in a patient with postoperative hyperfibrinogenemia.
Transient global amnesia (TGA) is characterized by sudden, temporary dysfunction of antegrade and recent retrograde memory without other neurologic deficits. Although there is sometimes a precipitating event, the origin of TGA remains controversial. We encountered a patient who developed recurrent TGA when upright, in whom the symptom promptly and regularly resolved when supine. Symptoms began about a week after cardiac surgery concurrent with marked hyperfibrinogenemia and acceleration of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and abated without recurrence when these laboratory abnormalities were ameliorated by anticoagulant and corticosteroid therapy. Diagnostic studies, including temporal artery biopsy and cerebral angiography, disclosed no anatomic vascular pathology. This is the first report of TGA associated with postoperative inflammation in which amnesia was provoked by orthostatic positioning. In conclusion, these observations implicate ischemia caused by hemodynamic vascular insufficiency as a possible cause of TGA.

18560407
Thrombocytopenia during heparin therapy: a clinical conundrum.


18364707
Aortic regurgitation: disease progression and management.
Aortic regurgitation (AR) is a common valvular heart disease that unless appropriately managed is associated with morbidity and mortality. Left ventricular (LV) mechanics and aortic impedance are the main determinants of outcome in patients with AR and govern clinical management. Mild and moderate AR in individuals with normal LV dimensions are both generally benign. In the absence of symptoms and before LV dimensions increase, even severe AR is not generally associated with increased morbidity or mortality. Once LV enlargement occurs, however, symptoms and/or a decline in ejection fraction can develop, and both represent an indication for surgical intervention. Disease progression occurs at a variable rate, and is often insidious. Hence, symptoms do not correlate with objective evidence of ventricular dysfunction. Exercise testing can help highlight symptoms related to valve dysfunction. Asymptomatic patients with severe AR and preserved LV function can benefit from vasodilator drug therapy. Several agents from this class can reduce AR severity, but results are inconsistent. In this Review, we examine the epidemiology of AR in terms of the interplay between arterial and ventricular forces marking progression of disease over time, and analyze the practice guidelines regarding diagnosis and treatment.

19803976
Anticoagulation in women with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation: insights from clinical trials.
There is emerging evidence that women with atrial fibrillation, particularly those aged over 75 years, are more prone to strokes than men. It is also generally believed that older women are more vulnerable than men to warfarin-associated hemorrhage, leading to reluctance among physicians to anticoagulate women with atrial fibrillation. In the SPORTIF trials, the largest randomized cohort of women with atrial fibrillation on anticoagulation, including those aged over 75 years, women developed stroke (either ischemic or hemorrhagic) and systemic embolic events more often than men. In population-based studies such as the ATRIA study, female gender increased the relative risk of stroke significantly (incremental relative risk: 20-90%). Both types of studies demonstrated that maintaining the international normalized ratio within the therapeutic range of 2.0-3.0 was associated with similar rates of major bleeding in older women, younger women and men. Better validated predictors of bleeding than gender should be considered when selecting antithrombotic therapy. New oral anticoagulants are under development to reduce the burden and risk of warfarin-associated anticoagulation.

17653118
Percutaneous closure of a patent foramen ovale in left-sided carcinoid heart disease.
A 51-year-old woman with a 5-year history of metastatic small bowel carcinoid disease developed fatigue and gradually worsening dyspnea on exertion, over 6 months. Physical examination, transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography, and aortography. Left-sided carcinoid disease associated with a patent foramen ovale. Percutaneous transcatheter closure of the patent foramen ovale.

17653115
Left atrial appendage closure for stroke prevention in atrial fibrillation: state of the art and current challenges.
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a major risk factor for disabling ischemic strokes. Anticoagulation is highly effective for stroke prevention in patients with AF, but a substantial number of patients are unable to sustain chronic therapy with warfarin. Most strokes in patients with AF are thought to arise from thrombus formation in the left atrial appendage (LAA); therefore, occlusion of the orifice of the LAA provides a theoretically appealing option for stroke prevention. Surgical exclusion of the LAA is increasingly performed in patients undergoing open-heart surgery, and thoracoscopic epicardial occlusion of the LAA has yielded promising early results. Percutaneous LAA occlusion devices have shown some success initial trials, but additional safety and efficacy data are required before this approach can be routinely considered. Here we discuss the LAA in relation to AF-related embolic stroke, and how LAA occlusion devices could be used in stroke prevention in patients who cannot tolerate chronic anticoagulant therapy.

