21232018
RIP1 comes back to life as a cell death regulator in TNFR1 signaling.
Cell death induction by tumor necrosis factor has been an intensively studied area for the last two decades. Although it may appear that the skeleton should have been picked clean by now, new secrets about tumor necrosis factor death signaling are still being uncovered. In particular, the recent evidence that ubiquitination of the death kinase receptor-interacting protein 1 regulates its participation in apoptotic and necrotic cell death is opening up unexplored avenues in the catacombs of tumor necrosis factor death signaling. In this minireview, we focus on two major cell-death checkpoints that determine whether receptor-interacting protein 1 functions as a pro-survival or pro-death molecule.

20237426
Chronicles of a death foretold: Dual sequential cell death checkpoints in TNF signaling.
The kinase RIP1 wears a coat of many colors during TNF receptor signaling and can regulate both activation of pro-survival NFkB and programmed cell death pathways. In this review, we outline how coating RIP1 with K63-linked ubiquitin chains forms a protective layer that prevents RIP1 from binding apoptotic regulators and serves as an early guard against cell death. Further on, binding of NFkB signaling components to the ubiquitin coat of RIP1 activates long-term pro-survival signaling and forms a more impenetrable suit of armor against cell death. If RIP1 is not decorated with ubiquitin chains it becomes an unstoppable harbinger of bad news: programmed cell death.

18636086
The tumour suppressor CYLD is a negative regulator of RIG-I-mediated antiviral response.
On detecting viral RNAs, the RNA helicase retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) activates the interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) signalling pathway to induce type I interferon (IFN) gene transcription. How this antiviral signalling pathway might be negatively regulated is poorly understood. Microarray and bioinformatic analysis indicated that the expression of RIG-I and that of the tumour suppressor CYLD (cylindromatosis), a deubiquitinating enzyme that removes Lys 63-linked polyubiquitin chains, are closely correlated, suggesting a functional association between the two molecules. Ectopic expression of CYLD inhibits the IRF3 signalling pathway and IFN production triggered by RIG-I; conversely, CYLD knockdown enhances the response. CYLD removes polyubiquitin chains from RIG-I as well as from TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1), the kinase that phosphorylates IRF3, coincident with an inhibition of the IRF3 signalling pathway. Furthermore, CYLD protein level is reduced in the presence of tumour necrosis factor and viral infection, concomitant with enhanced IFN production. These findings show that CYLD is a negative regulator of RIG-I-mediated innate antiviral response.

18323015
Teaching resources. Using web-based discussion forums as a model of the peer-review process and a tool for assessment.
This Teaching Resource describes how to use an online asynchronous discussion as a mechanism to introduce students to the peer-review process, as well as to assess student performance and understanding. This method was applied to a graduate course on signal transduction and the Teaching Resource includes a syllabus, detailed plan for incorporating the online discussion, sample journal club questions, and sample student responses to the discussion forum, faculty responses, and student revisions.

18309063
Inquiry learning. Integrating content detail and critical reasoning by peer review.


17548614
Negative regulation of TCR signaling by NF-kappaB2/p100.
The positive regulation of the NF-kappaB-signaling pathway in response to TCR stimulation has been well-studied. However, little is known about the negative regulation of this pathway in T cells. This negative regulation is crucial in controlling the duration of TCR signaling and preventing abnormal lymphocyte activation and proliferation. Therefore, understanding the negative regulation of TCR-mediated NF-kappaB signaling is essential in understanding the mechanisms involved in T cell function and homeostasis. TCR stimulation of human CD4+ T cells resulted in an increase in NF-kappaB2/p100 expression with no appreciable increase in p52, its cleavage product. Due to the presence of inhibitory ankyrin repeats in the unprocessed p100, this observation suggests that p100 may function as a negative regulator of the NF-kappaB pathway. Consistent with this hypothesis, ectopic expression of p100 inhibited TCR-mediated NF-kappaB activity and IL-2 production in Jurkat T cells. Conversely, knockdown of p100 expression enhanced NF-kappaB transcriptional activity and IL-2 production upon TCR activation. p100 inhibited the pathway by binding and sequestering Rel transcription factors in the cytoplasm without affecting the activity of the upstream IkappaB kinase. The kinetics and IkappaB kinase gamma/NF-kappaB essential modulator dependency of p100 induction suggest that NF-kappaB2/p100 acts as a late-acting negative-feedback signaling molecule in the TCR-mediated NF-kappaB pathway.

17306544
Ubiquitination of RIP1 regulates an NF-kappaB-independent cell-death switch in TNF signaling.
TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) can trigger opposing responses within the same cell: a prosurvival response or a cell-death pathway [1, 2]. Cell survival requires NF-kappaB-mediated transcription of prosurvival genes [3-9]; apoptosis occurs if NF-kappaB signaling is blocked [5, 7-9]. Hence, activation of NF-kappaB acts as a cell-death switch during TNF signaling. This study demonstrates that the pathway includes another cell-death switch that is independent of NF-kappaB. We show that lysine 63-linked ubiquitination of RIP1 on lysine 377 inhibits TNF-induced apoptosis first through an NF-kappaB-independent mechanism and, subsequently, through an NF-kappaB-dependent mechanism. In contrast, in the absence of ubiquitination, RIP1 serves as a proapoptotic signaling molecule by engaging CASPASE-8. Therefore, RIP1 is a dual-function molecule that can be either prosurvival or prodeath depending on its ubiquitination state, and this serves as an NF-kappaB-independent cell-death switch early in TNF signaling. These results provide an explanation for the conflicting reports on the role of RIP1 in cell death; this role was previously suggested to be both prosurvival and prodeath [10-12]. Because TRAF2 is the E3 ligase for RIP1 [13], these observations provide an explanation for the NF-kappaB-independent antiapoptotic function previously described for TRAF2 [14-16].

19151591
PIP(2) regulates the ionic current of P2X receptors and P2X(7) receptor-mediated cell death.
P2X(7) receptors are non-selective cation channels gated by extracellular ATP. Prolonged stimulation of the P2X(7) receptor leads to an increase in cell permeability, cytokine release and apoptosis/necrosis. Application of PIP(2) to inside-out patches strongly activated all homomeric members of the P2X receptor family, including P2X(7) channels. Blockade of PIP(2) re-synthesis or induction of PIP(2) hydrolysis diminished ATP-gated P2X(7) currents. Several positively charged residues in the proximal C-terminus of P2X(7) were found to be important for PIP(2) interactions, as mutation of these sites reduced the apparent affinity for PIP(2) and enhanced current inhibition by PIP(2) depletion. In addition, we demonstrated the dependence of ATP-mediated cell death on P2X(7) receptor interaction with PIP(2) in three different cell systems: HEK cells stably transfected with P2X(7), primary T cells and a macrophage cell line. These results identify PIP(2) as a critical regulator of the function of the extracellular ligand-gated P2X receptor/channels and provide a novel way to control ATP-mediated cell death.

19373245
NEMO/IKKgamma regulates an early NF-kappaB-independent cell-death checkpoint during TNF signaling.
TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) ligation can result in cell survival or cell death. What determines which of the two opposing responses is triggered is not fully understood. The current model suggests that it is the activation of the NF-kappaB pathway and its induction of prosurvival genes, or the lack thereof, which determines the outcome. NF-kappaB essential modifier (NEMO)/IkappaB kinase-gamma (IKKgamma)-deficient cells are highly sensitive to apoptosis, and as NEMO is essential for NF-kappaB activation, it has been assumed that this is due to the lack of NF-kappaB. This study demonstrates that this assumption was incorrect and that NEMO has another antiapoptotic function that is independent of its role in the NF-kappaB pathway. NEMO prevents receptor interacting protein-1 (RIP1) from engaging CASPASE-8 before NF-kappaB-mediated induction of antiapoptotic genes. Without NEMO, RIP1 associates with CASPASE-8 resulting in rapid tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-induced apoptosis. These results suggest that there are two cell-death checkpoints following TNF stimulation: an early transcription-independent checkpoint whereby NEMO restrains RIP1 from activating the caspase cascade, followed by a later checkpoint dependent on NF-kappaB-mediated transcription of prosurvival genes.

