19643919
Association of white matter hyperintensity measurements on brain MR imaging with cognitive status, medial temporal atrophy, and cardiovascular risk factors.
White matter hyperintensities (WMHs) are frequently characterized as markers of cerebrovascular disease, whereas medial temporal atrophy (MTA) is a recognized marker of Alzheimer disease (AD). Our purpose was to test the reliability of a visual rating system (VRS) in evaluating WMHs and MTA and in distinguishing healthy from cognitively impaired subjects. Subjects (n = 192) enrolled in the Florida Alzheimer's Disease Research Center were diagnosed with no cognitive impairment, nonamnestic mild cognitive impairment (na-MCI), amnestic MCI (a-MCI), or probable AD. The severity of WMHs was assessed on T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery axial MR images, and the severity of MTA was evaluated on 1.5-mm-thick coronal MR images by using a computer-based visual rating system. Cardiovascular risk factor scores were calculated as the sum of 10 independent cardiovascular risk factors. WMH and MTA scores were greater in subjects with probable AD, relative to those with no cognitive impairment and na-MCI. MTA scores differentiated subjects with a-MCI from those with no cognitive impairment and na-MCI. The total WMH score was significantly related to MTA (r = 0.39; P < .001) but not to cardiovascular risk factor scores (r = 0.07; P = not significant). The overall correct classification rate of probable AD versus no cognitive impairment by using MTA scores was 81.8%, improving to 86.5% when combined with WMH scores. Both MTA and WMH scores distinguished subjects with no cognitive impairment and probable AD. Combining MTA and WMH scores improved the correct classification rate, whereas WMH scores were significantly related to MTA scores, but not to cardiovascular risk factor scores. This finding suggests that among subjects with a-MCI and probable AD, WMHs on MR images are primarily associated with neurodegenerative disease.

19064880
Medial temporal lobe atrophy on MRI scans and the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease.
Despite convenience, accessibility, and strong correlation to severity of Alzheimer disease (AD) pathology, medial temporal lobe atrophy (MTA) has not been used as a criterion in the diagnosis of prodromal and probable AD. Using a newly validated visual rating system, mean MTA scores of three bilateral medial temporal lobe structures were compared for subjects with no cognitive impairment (NCI) (n = 117), nonamnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (n = 46), amnestic MCI (n = 45), and probable AD (n = 53). Correlations between MTA scores and neuropsychological test scores at baseline, and predictors of change in diagnosis at 1-year follow-up were evaluated. With NCI as the reference group, a mean MTA cut score of 1.33 yielded an optimal sensitivity/specificity of 85%/82% for probable AD subjects and 80%/82% for amnestic MCI subjects. MTA and Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes scores at baseline were independent and additive predictors of diagnosis at baseline, and of transition from NCI to MCI or from MCI to dementia at 1-year follow-up. Medial temporal lobe atrophy (MTA) scores 1) distinguish probable Alzheimer disease (AD) and amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) subjects from nonamnestic MCI and no cognitive impairment (NCI) subjects, 2) help predict diagnosis at baseline, and 3) predict transition from NCI to MCI and from MCI to probable AD. MTA scores should be used as a criterion in the clinical diagnosis of AD.

