21599869
Does poor early metabolic control predict subsequent poor control in young children with Type 1 diabetes: An exploratory study.
Background:? We sought to determine whether poor metabolic control during the early stages of Type 1 diabetes mellitus predicts control during subsequent years. We hypothesized that poor control in the first year after diagnosis would predict poor control in the following year, and that poor control in the second year after diagnosis would predict poor metabolic control in subsequent years. Methods:? We conducted a retrospective review of a cohort of urban children treated for diabetes at our institution who were diagnosed between 1992 and 2005. We calculated odds ratios to determine whether control in Year 1 or in Year 2 predicted control in Years 3-6. Cox regression analyses were used to determine whether poor early control predicted progression to subsequent poor control. Results:? Metabolic control in the first year after diagnosis was not a good predictor of future control. However, poor metabolic control in the second year after diagnosis was highly predictive of poor control in subsequent years and predicted faster progression to poor control. Conclusion:? The findings suggest that poor metabolic control in Year 2 may be a predictor of subsequent poor metabolic control. Targeting prevention interventions to reduce non-adherence and to enhance metabolic control to families that show poor metabolic control in Year 2 may prove to be an optimum investment in terms of improved medical outcomes and enhanced quality of life.

21458888
Corticosteroids, but not NSAIDs, are associated with less Alzheimer neuropathology.
The objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that corticosteroid and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) medications are associated with less global and regional Alzheimer's disease (AD) neuropathology. This postmortem study was based on 694 brains of subjects from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine Brain Bank who did not have neuropathologies other than neuritic plaques (NPs), neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), or cerebrovascular disease. Densities of NPs and of NFTs were assessed in several neocortical regions and in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and amygdala. Counts of NPs in several neocortical regions were also assessed. For each neuropathology measure, analyses of covariance controlling for age at death and sex compared subjects who received only corticosteroids (n = 54) or those who received only NSAIDs (n = 56) to the same comparison group, subjects who received neither (n = 576). Subjects receiving corticosteroids had significantly lower ratings and counts of NPs for all neuropathological measures, and NFTs overall and in the cerebral cortex and amygdala. In contrast, no measures were significant for subjects who received NSAIDs. Use of corticosteroids was associated with approximately 50% fewer NPs and NFTs in most brain regions examined, compared with nonmedicated subjects. In contrast, use of NSAIDs was not substantially associated with the reductions in hallmark lesions of AD. Because corticosteroids have anti-inflammatory as well as a myriad of other neurobiological effects, more direct studies in model systems could reveal novel therapeutic targets and mechanisms for AD lesion reduction.

21331351
CARDIOVASCULAR RISK FACTORS AFFECT HIPPOCAMPAL MICROVASCULATURE IN EARLY AD.
There is growing clinical and neuropathologic evidence suggesting that cognitive decline in early Alzheimer's disease (AD) is aggravated by a synergistic relationship between AD and cerebrovascular disease associated with cardiovascular risk factors such as diabetes and hypertension. Here we used the stereologic "Space Balls" method to investigate the relationships between AD pathology and cardiovascular risk factors in postmortem human brains of patients with hypertension and diabetes in two groups - one consisting of cases with AD diagnosis and one of cases without. Hippocampal CA1 and CA3 microvasculature length density estimates were generated to characterize quantitatively the contribution of cardiovascular risk factors to the severity of neuropathologic changes. Our main finding is that the mean and variance of length density values in the AD group were significantly increased from the non-AD group, regardless of the absence or presence of a cardiovascular risk factor. An additional finding is that in the AD group without a risk factor, dementia severity correlated with amount of length density change in the CA1 field-this correlation did not exist in the AD groups with risk factors. Our findings suggest a role for cardiovascular risk factors in quantifiable change of hippocampal CA1 field microvasculature, as well as suggest a possible role of cardiovascular risk factors in altering microvasculature pathology in the presence of AD.

21187583
Profiles of Alzheimer's disease-related pathology in an aging urban population sample in India.
Systematic studies on Alzheimer's disease (AD)-related pathology that complement clinical and epidemiological data on dementia from low and middle income countries are rare. We report the first large study on AD-related pathology in autopsy service-derived brains from an urban center in India, a low/middle income country, and compare findings with a similar sample from New York. Amyloid-? plaques and neurofibrillary tangles were assessed in 91 brain specimens derived from hospital autopsy cases from Mumbai, India (age 60+ years; mean age 71.1 years, ± 8.3 SD; range 60-107 years) and compared with identically examined age-matched sample obtained in New York. These cases had no known clinical history of dementia. Our study showed that in comparison with the New York sample, the mean brain weight of the Mumbai sample was lower (p = 0.013) and mean diffuse plaque density was higher (p = 0.019), while differences in mean density and counts of neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques were not statistically significant (p > 0.05). Our findings indicate that the burden of AD-related pathology was approximately equivalent in Mumbai and New York samples, which is at variance with expected lower AD-related lesion burden based on the clinical/epidemiological studies suggesting lower prevalence of AD in India.

20875727
Non-synonymous variants in the AMACR gene are associated with schizophrenia.
The AMACR gene is located in the schizophrenia susceptibility locus on chromosome 5p13, previously identified in a large Puerto Rican pedigree of Spanish origin. The AMACR-encoded protein is an enzyme involved in the metabolism of branched-chain fatty and bile acids. The enzyme deficiency causes structural and functional brain changes, and disturbances in fatty acid and oxidative phosphorylation pathways observed in individuals with schizophrenia. Therefore, AMACR is both a positional and functional candidate gene for susceptibility to schizophrenia. The study had a two-step design: we performed mutation analysis of the coding and flanking regions of AMACR in affected members of the pedigree, and tested the detected sequence variants for association with schizophrenia in a Puerto Rican case-control sample (n=383) of Spanish descent. We identified three missense variants segregating with the disorder in the family, rs2278008, rs2287939 and rs10941112. Two of them, rs2278008 and rs2287939, demonstrated significant differences in genotype (P = 4 × 10-4, P = 4 × 10-4) and allele (P = 1 × 10-4, P = 9.5 × 10-5) frequencies in unrelated male patients compare to controls, with the odds ratios (OR) 2.24 (95% CI: 1.48-3.40) and 2.25 (95% CI: 1.49-3.38), respectively. The G-C-G haplotype of rs2278008-rs2287939-rs10941112 revealed the most significant association with schizophrenia (P = 4.25 × 10-6, OR = 2.96; 95% CI: 1.85-4.76) in male subjects. There were no statistically significant differences in genotype, allele, and haplotype frequencies between female schizophrenia subjects and controls. Our results suggest that AMACR may play a significant role in susceptibility to schizophrenia in male patients.

20801106
von Economo neurons in autism: a stereologic study of the frontoinsular cortex in children.
The presence of von Economo neurons (VENs) in the frontoinsular cortex (FI) has been linked to a possible role in the integration of bodily feelings, emotional regulation, and goal-directed behaviors. They have also been implicated in fast intuitive evaluation of complex social situations. Several studies reported a decreased number of VENs in neuropsychiatric diseases in which the "embodied" dimension of social cognition is markedly affected. Neuropathological analyses of VENs in patients with autism are few and did not report alterations in VEN numbers. In this study we re-evaluated the possible presence of changes in VEN numbers and their relationship with the diagnosis of autism. Using a stereologic approach we quantified VENs and pyramidal neurons in layer V of FI in postmortem brains of four young patients with autism and three comparably aged controls. We also investigated possible autism-related differences in FI layer V volume. Patients with autism consistently had a significantly higher ratio of VENs to pyramidal neurons (p=0.020) than control subjects. This result may reflect the presence of neuronal overgrowth in young patients with autism and may also be related to alterations in migration, cortical lamination, and apoptosis. Higher numbers of VENs in the FI of patients with autism may also underlie a heightened interoception, described in some clinical observations.

20641005
Days to criterion as an indicator of toxicity associated with human Alzheimer amyloid-beta oligomers.
Recent evidence suggests that high molecular weight soluble oligomeric Abeta (oAbeta) assemblies (also known as Abeta-derived diffusible ligands, or ADDLs) may represent a primary neurotoxic basis for cognitive failure in Alzheimer disease (AD). To date, most in vivo studies of oAbeta/ADDLs have involved injection of assemblies purified from the cerebrospinal fluid of human subjects with AD or from the conditioned media of Abeta-secreting cells into experimental animals. We sought to study the bioactivities of endogenously formed oAbeta/ADDLs generated in situ from the physiological processing of human amyloid precursor protein (APP) and presenitin1 (PS1) transgenes. We produced and histologically characterized single transgenic mice overexpressing APP(E693Q) or APP(E693Q) X PS1DeltaE9 bigenic mice. APP(E693Q) mice were studied in the Morris water maze (MWM) task at 6 and 12 months of age. Following the second MWM evaluation, mice were sacrificed, and brains were assayed for Abetatotal, Abeta40, Abeta42, and oAbeta/ADDLs by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and were also histologically examined. Based on results from the oAbeta/ADDL ELISA, we assigned individual APP(E693Q) mice to either an undetectable oAbeta/ADDLs group or a readily detectable oAbeta/ADDLs group. A days to criterion (DTC) analysis was used to determine delays in acquisition of the MWM task. Both single transgenic and bigenic mice developed intraneuronal accumulation of APP/Abeta, although only APP(E693Q) X PS1Delta9 bigenic mice developed amyloid plaques. The APP(E693Q) mice did not develop amyloid plaques at any age studied, up to 30 months. APP(E693Q) mice were tested for spatial learning and memory, and only 12-month-old APP(E693Q) mice with readily detectable oAbeta/ADDLs displayed a significant delay in acquisition of the MWM task when compared to nontransgenic littermates. These data suggest that cerebral oAbeta/ADDL assemblies generated in brain in situ from human APP transgenes may be associated with cognitive impairment. We propose that a DTC analysis may be a sensitive method for assessing the cognitive impact in mice of endogenously generated oligomeric human Abeta assemblies. ANN NEUROL 2010.

20213269
Changes in dendritic complexity and spine morphology in transgenic mice expressing human wild-type tau.
Neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) are composed of insoluble, hyperphosphorylated aggregates of the microtubule-associated protein tau and are present in various neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD). To investigate how tau affects neuronal function during NFT formation and subsequent neurodegeneration, we examined the morphology, spine density, spine type, and spine volume of layer III pyramidal neurons from the prefrontal cortex of mice expressing wild-type human tau (htau) over time. There were no significant alterations in apical dendritic arbor length in 3-, 6-, and 12-month-old htau mice; however, 12-month-old mice exhibited more complex arborization patterns. In addition, we observed a shift in spine morphology with fewer mushroom and more thin spines in both apical and basal dendrites as a function of htau accumulation. Interestingly, there was an overall decrease in volume of spines from 3 to 12 months. However, the volume of mushroom spines decreased from 3 to 6 months and increased from 6 to 12 months. This increase in complexity and branching in 12-month-old mice and the increase of volume of mushroom spines may represent compensatory mechanisms in the remaining intact neurons. As such, the accumulation of phosphorylated tau over time may contribute to the cognitive decline observed in AD by affecting neuronal structure and synaptic properties. Such alterations in dendrites and spines may result in the deterioration of neuronal function observed in AD, and provide a morphologic substrate for the relationship between synaptic integrity and cognitive decline.

20205790
Extensive proteomic screening identifies the obesity-related NYGGF4 protein as a novel LRP1-interactor, showing reduced expression in early Alzheimer's disease.
ABSTRACT: The low-density lipoprotein receptor related protein 1 (LRP1) has been implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD) but its signalling has not been fully evaluated. There is good evidence that the cytoplasmic domain of LRP1 is involved in protein-protein interactions, important in the cell biology of LRP1. We carried out three yeast two-hybrid screens to identify proteins that interact with the cytoplasmic domain of LRP1. The screens included both conventional screens as well as a novel, split-ubiquitin-based screen in which an LRP1 construct was expressed and screened as a transmembrane protein. The split-ubiquitin screen was validated in a screen using full-length amyloid protein precursor (APP), which successfully identified FE65 and FE65L2, as well as novel interactors (Rab3a, Napg, and ubiquitin b). Using both a conventional screen as well as the split-ubiquitin screen, we identified NYGGF4 as a novel LRP1 interactor. The interaction between LRP1 and NYGGF4 was validated using two-hybrid assays, coprecipitation and colocalization in mammalian cells. Mutation analysis demonstrated a specific interaction of NYGGF4 with an NPXY motif that required an intact tyrosine residue. Interestingly, while we confirmed that other LRP1 interactors we identified, including JIP1B and EB-1, were also able to bind to APP, NYGGF4 was unique in that it showed specific binding with LRP1. Expression of NYGGF4 decreased significantly in patients with AD as compared to age-matched controls, and showed decreasing expression with AD disease progression. Examination of Nyggf4 expression in mice with different alleles of the human APOE4 gene showed significant differences in Nyggf4 expression. These results implicate NYGGF4 as a novel and specific interactor of LRP1. Decreased expression of LRP1 and NYGGF4 over disease, evident with the presence of even moderate numbers of neuritic plaques, suggests that LRP1-NYGGF4 is a system altered early in disease. Genetic and functional studies have implicated both LRP1 and NYGGF4 in obesity and cardiovascular disease and the physical association of these proteins may reflect a common mechanism. This is particularly interesting in light of the dual role of ApoE in both cardiovascular risk and AD. The results support further studies on the functional relationship between NYGGF4 and LRP1.

20079340
Increased expression of cholesterol transporter ABCA1 is highly correlated with severity of dementia in AD hippocampus.
To gain insight into ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) function and its potential role in AD pathology, we analyzed the expression of the cholesterol transporter ABCA1 in postmortem hippocampus from persons at different stages of dementia and AD associated neuropathology relative to cognitively intact normal donors by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and Western blot. In this study clinical dementia rating (CDR) scores were used as a measure of dementia severity, whereas, Braak neuropathological staging and neuritic plaque density were used as an index of the neuropathological progression of AD. Correlation analysis showed that ABCA1 mRNA expression was significantly elevated at the earliest recognizable stage of dementia compared to persons with intact cognition. ABCA1 mRNA was also positively correlated with Braak neuropathological stages and neuritic plaque density counts. Additionally, ABCA1 mRNA levels showed robust correlation with dementia severity even after controlling for the confounding contribution of accompanying neuropathological parameters to ABCA1 mRNA expression. Western blot analyses showed that the differential expression observed at the transcriptional level is also reflected at the protein level. Thus, our study provides transcriptional and translational evidence that the expression of ABCA1, a key modulator of cholesterol transport across the plasma membrane, is dysregulated in the AD brain and that this dysregulation is associated with increasing severity of AD, whether measured functionally as dementia severity or neuropathologically as increased neuritic plaque and neurofibrillary tangle density.

20015484
Slc25a12 disruption alters myelination and neurofilaments: a model for a hypomyelination syndrome and childhood neurodevelopmental disorders.
SLC25A12, a susceptibility gene for autism spectrum disorders that is mutated in a neurodevelopmental syndrome, encodes a mitochondrial aspartate-glutamate carrier (aspartate-glutamate carrier isoform 1 [AGC1]). AGC1 is an important component of the malate/aspartate shuttle, a crucial system supporting oxidative phosphorylation and adenosine triphosphate production. We characterized mice with a disruption of the Slc25a12 gene, followed by confirmatory in vitro studies. Slc25a12-knockout mice, which showed no AGC1 by immunoblotting, were born normally but displayed delayed development and died around 3 weeks after birth. In postnatal day 13 to 14 knockout brains, the brains were smaller with no obvious alteration in gross structure. However, we found a reduction in myelin basic protein (MBP)-positive fibers, consistent with a previous report. Furthermore, the neocortex of knockout mice contained abnormal neurofilamentous accumulations in neurons, suggesting defective axonal transport and/or neurodegeneration. Slice cultures prepared from knockout mice also showed a myelination defect, and reduction of Slc25a12 in rat primary oligodendrocytes led to a cell-autonomous reduction in MBP expression. Myelin deficits in slice cultures from knockout mice could be reversed by administration of pyruvate, indicating that reduction in AGC1 activity leads to reduced production of aspartate/N-acetylaspartate and/or alterations in the dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide/nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide(+) ratio, resulting in myelin defects. Our data implicate AGC1 activity in myelination and in neuronal structure and indicate that while loss of AGC1 leads to hypomyelination and neuronal changes, subtle alterations in AGC1 expression could affect brain development, contributing to increased autism susceptibility.

19852847
Novel cerebrovascular pathology in mice fed a high cholesterol diet.
ABSTRACT: Hypercholesterolemia causes atherosclerosis in medium to large sized arteries. Cholesterol is less known for affecting the microvasculature and has not been previously reported to induce microvascular pathology in the central nervous system (CNS). Mice with a null mutation in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene as well as C57BL/6J mice fed a high cholesterol diet developed a distinct microvascular pathology in the CNS that differs from cholesterol-induced atherosclerotic disease. Microvessel diameter was increased but microvascular density and length were not consistently affected. Degenerative changes and thickened vascular basement membranes were present ultrastructurally. The observed pathology shares features with the microvascular pathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD), including the presence of string-like vessels. Brain apolipoprotein E levels which have been previously found to be elevated in LDLR-/- mice were also increased in C57BL/6J mice fed a high cholesterol diet. In addition to its effects as an inducer of atherosclerosis in medium to large sized arteries, hypercholesterolemia also induces a microvascular pathology in the CNS that shares features of the vascular pathology found in AD. These observations suggest that high cholesterol may induce microvascular disease in a range of CNS disorders including AD.

19622684
Changes in relative glucose metabolic rate following cortisol administration in aging veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder: an FDG-PET neuroimaging study.
The authors aimed to examine central glucocorticoids effects by measuring relative glucose metabolic rate (rGMR) in the hippocampus, amygdala, and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the relationship between amygdala and ACC activity. The participants were male combat veterans with and without PTSD, 52 to 81 years old. The authors utilized randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled examinations of the rGMR response to 17.5 mg hydrocortisone (HCORT) using 2-Deoxy-2-[(18)F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) Positron Emission Tomography (PET) neuroimaging. Group differences in hemispheric laterality of rGMR were observed following placebo administration, reflecting lower rGMR in the right hippocampus and ventral amygdala, and higher rGMR in the left ventral amygdala in the PTSD+ group compared to the PTSD- group. HCORT reduced these group differences in laterality. The net effect of HCORT was to restore a normal inverse association between the ACC and amygdala in the PTSD+ group, but disrupt this neural network in the PTSD- group. The magnitude of improvement in working memory correlated with greater hemispheric laterality in the dorsal amygdala following HCORT in both groups. The restorative effects of HCORT on metabolism and working memory provide a rationale for examining the therapeutic benefits of glucocorticoid manipulation in aging PTSD patients.

19584451
Impact of APOE epsilon4 on the cognitive performance of a sample of non-demented Puerto Rican nonagenarians.
APOE epsilon4 is a major risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. It has also been associated with cognitive impairment and cognitive decline in young-olds, but the impact of the epsilon4 allele on cognitive function in very late life is still unclear. The object of this study was to evaluate the association of the epsilon4 allele of APOE with the cognitive performance of a sample of non-demented oldest-olds. Eighty-seven Spanish-speaking Puerto Rican non-demented nonagenarians were administered a complete neuropsychological assessment and provided a blood sample used for APOE genotyping. A factor analysis generated two factors: 1) verbal memory; and 2) visuo-spatial, naming and attention tasks, accounting for 43.6% of the overall variance in the 13 original neuropsychological variables. The multivariate analysis reflected, after controlling for gender, education, and age, the APOE epsilon4 carriers performed better in overall cognition (both factors analyzed together) than non-carriers (T<formula>;{2}</formula> = 0.082, F(2,80) = 3.289, p = 0.042). Neither gender nor the gender by APOE epsilon4 status interaction was associated with differences in cognition. In conclusion, the results of this study suggest that, among these Puerto Rican non-demented nonagenarians, being an APOE epsilon4 allele carrier is associated with better cognition.

19393990
Gene expression patterns associated with posttraumatic stress disorder following exposure to the World Trade Center attacks.
Although genetic risk factors for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in similarly traumatized cohorts can be confounded with risk for type of exposure, the primary risk for exposure to the 9/11 attack on New York City was proximity, allowing study of PTSD risk in a sample that is not confounded by exposure-related risk. Thirty-five Caucasians (15 with PTSD, stratified for exposure, age, and gender) were selected from a population-representative sample of persons exposed to the attack from which longitudinal data had been collected in four previous waves. Whole blood gene expression and cortisol levels were obtained. Seventeen probe sets were differentially expressed in PTSD. Identified genes were generally involved in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, signal transduction, or brain and immune cell function. FKBP5, a modulator of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) sensitivity, showed reduced expression in PTSD, consistent with enhanced GR responsiveness. FKBP5 expression was predicted by cortisol when entered with PTSD severity in regression analysis. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction confirmed significant reductions in FKBP5. Also less expressed in PTSD were STAT5B, a direct inhibitor of GR, and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) Class II. Consistent with observations of HPA axis dysfunction in PTSD, several genes involved in glucocorticoid signaling are differentially expressed among those with current PTSD.

19382130
The MMSE orientation for time domain is a strong predictor of subsequent cognitive decline in the elderly.
The mini-mental state exam (MMSE) has been used to address questions such as determination of appropriate cutoff scores for differentiation of individuals with intact cognitive function from patients with dementia and rate of cognitive decline. However, little is known about the relationship of performance in specific cognitive domains to subsequent overall decline. To examine the specific and/or combined contribution of four MMSE domains (orientation for time, orientation for place, delayed recall, and attention) to prediction of overall cognitive decline on the MMSE. Linear mixed models were applied to 505 elderly nursing home residents (mean age = 85, > 12 years education = 27%; 79% F, mean follow-up = 3.20 years) to examine the relationship between baseline scores of these domains and total MMSE scores over time. Orientation for time was the only domain significantly associated with MMSE decline over time. Combination of poor delayed recall with either attention or orientation for place was associated with significantly increased decline on the MMSE. The MMSE orientation for time predicts overall decline on MMSE scores over time. A good functioning domain added to good functioning delayed recall was associated with slower rate of decline.

19343227
FE65 binds Teashirt, inhibiting expression of the primate-specific caspase-4.
The Alzheimer disease (AD) amyloid protein precursor (APP) can bind the FE65 adaptor protein and this complex can regulate gene expression. We carried out yeast two-hybrid studies with a PTB domain of FE65, focusing on those genes that might be involved in nuclear signaling, and identified and validated Teashirt proteins as FE65 interacting proteins in neurons. Using reporter systems, we observed that FE65 could simultaneously recruit SET, a component of the inhibitor of acetyl transferase, and Teashirt, which in turn recruited histone deacetylases, to produce a powerful gene-silencing complex. We screened stable cell lines with a macroarray focusing on AD-related genes and identified CASP4, encoding caspase-4, as a target of this silencing complex. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed a direct interaction of FE65 and Teashirt3 with the promoter region of CASP4. Expression studies in postmortem samples demonstrated decreasing expression of Teashirt and increasing expression of caspase-4 with progressive cognitive decline. Importantly, there were significant increases in caspase-4 expression associated with even the earliest neuritic plaque changes in AD. We evaluated a case-control cohort and observed evidence for a genetic association between the Teashirt genes TSHZ1 and TSHZ3 and AD, with the TSHZ3 SNP genotype correlating with expression of Teashirt3. The results were consistent with a model in which reduced expression of Teashirt3, mediated by genetic or other causes, increases caspase-4 expression, leading to progression of AD. Thus the cell biological, gene expression and genetic data support a role for Teashirt/caspase-4 in AD biology. As caspase-4 shows evidence of being a primate-specific gene, current models of AD and other neurodegenerative conditions may be incomplete because of the absence of this gene in the murine genome.

19162277
Enduring effects of severe developmental adversity, including nutritional deprivation, on cortisol metabolism in aging Holocaust survivors.
In animal models, early life exposure to major environmental challenges such as malnutrition and stress results in persisting cardiometabolic, neuroendocrine and affective effects. While such effects have been associated with pathogenesis, the widespread occurrence of 'developmental programming' suggests it has adaptive function. Glucocorticoids may mediate 'programming' and their metabolism is known to be affected by early life events in rodents. To examine these relationships in humans, cortisol metabolism and cardiometabolic disease manifestations were examined in Holocaust survivors in relation to age at exposure and affective dysfunction, notably lifetime posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Fifty-one Holocaust survivors and 22 controls without Axis I disorder collected 24-h urine samples and were evaluated for psychiatric disorders and cardiometabolic diagnoses. Corticosteroids and their metabolites were assayed by gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy (GC-MS); cortisol was also measured by radioimmunoassay (RIA). Holocaust survivors showed reduced cortisol by RIA, and decreased levels of 5alpha-tetrahydrocortisol (5alpha-THF) and total glucocorticoid production by GC-MS. The latter was associated with lower cortisol metabolism by 5alpha-reductase and 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11beta-HSD) type-2. The greatest decrements were associated with earliest age of Holocaust exposure and less severe PTSD symptomatology. Cardiometabolic manifestations were associated with decreased 11beta-HSD-2 activity. In controls, 5alpha-reductase was positively associated with trauma-related symptoms (i.e., to traumatic exposures unrelated to the Holocaust). Extreme malnutrition and related stress during development is associated with long-lived alterations in specific pathways of glucocorticoid metabolism. These effects may be adaptive and link with lower risks of cardiometabolic and stress-related disorders in later life.

19147740
C-reactive protein and memory function suggest antagonistic pleiotropy in very old nondemented subjects.


19129700
Serum lipids are related to Alzheimer's pathology in nursing home residents.
Studies of associations between serum lipids and Alzheimer's disease (AD) or other dementias in the elderly show conflicting results, perhaps due to misclassification of the various dementias. For 358 nursing home residents, serum lipids were studied at admission and diagnoses established at autopsy. We used defined neuropathological criteria to distinguish the presence of AD and to avoid errors of clinical dementia assessment. Residents with any AD pathology, as compared to those without AD pathology, had higher mean serum total cholesterol (TC; 200.4 vs. 185.9 mg/dl; p = 0.02) and higher mean low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL; 124.5 vs. 111.5 mg/dl; p = 0.03). Further, mean TC, LDL and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels all increased progressively with increasing pathological certainty of AD (p for trend = 0.001, 0.02 and 0.02). TC and LDL were significantly related to pathologically defined AD. If serum lipids have a role in the pathogenesis of AD, interventions may modify the course of disease.

18945918
Relationship between type of trauma exposure and posttraumatic stress disorder among urban children and adolescents.
This study examines the association between trauma exposure and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) among 157 help-seeking children (aged 8-17). Structured clinical interviews are carried out, and linear and logistic regression analyses are conducted to examine the relationship between PTSD and type of trauma exposure controlling for age, gender, and ethnicity. Confrontation with traumatic news, witnessing domestic violence, physical abuse, and sexual abuse are each significantly associated with PTSD. Witnessing a crime, being the victim of a crime, and exposure to accidents, fire, or disaster are not associated with PTSD. These findings underscore the association between interpersonal violence and childhood PTSD.

18930323
Dissociation versus posttraumatic stress: cortisol and physiological correlates in adults highly exposed to the World Trade Center attack on 9/11.
Nine months on average after the World Trade Center (WTC) attack, 21 highly exposed adults and 10 healthy controls without major exposure did not differ in cortisol and physiologic measures. Dissociation and posttraumatic stress symptoms were quantified in the exposed group. Dissociation was associated with greater peritraumatic dissociation and, marginally, childhood trauma, lower plasma cortisol levels at 08.00h, and blunted heart rate reactivity to psychosocial stress. Posttraumatic stress was associated with exposure, peritraumatic distress, and early posttraumatic stress, and marginally associated with peritraumatic dissociation; it was not associated with cortisol or physiologic measures. Urinary cortisol differed significantly in its relationship to dissociation versus posttraumatic stress. This small study emphasizes the importance of dissecting the neurobiology of posttraumatic stress versus dissociative traumatic responses.

18768035
Age at diagnosis, gender, and metabolic control in children with type 1 diabetes.
To examine whether age at diagnosis and gender affect early metabolic control in children with type 1 diabetes. Data on age at diagnosis, gender, pubertal status, and metabolic control were gathered by a retrospective chart review of children diagnosed between 1992 and 2005. Mean hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) values were compared at five time points: at diagnosis and at 6, 12, 24, and 36 months after diagnosis. At diagnosis, girls aged 6-12 years presented with significantly higher HbA1c levels than girls diagnosed at older or younger ages. Their HbA1c at diagnosis was also significantly higher than that in boys of the same age. There was no gender difference among children diagnosed at ages 0-5 or 13+ yr. At 6 months after diagnosis, only age at diagnosis was associated with metabolic control, with children diagnosed when older presenting with lower HbA1c levels. At 12, 24, and 36 months after diagnosis, there were no significant effects of age at diagnosis or gender on glycemic status. At initial diagnosis, girls in the 6-12 age group presented with higher HbA1c levels compared with boys and girls of other age groups. Although endocrine changes associated with puberty may partly explain the findings, more investigation to elucidate mechanisms accounting for the interaction of age and gender with glycemic status is needed.

18757771
Better memory functioning associated with higher total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels in very elderly subjects without the apolipoprotein e4 allele.
To examine the association of cholesterol with cognitive functioning in oldest old community dwelling individuals with and without the apolipoprotein e4 (APOE4) allele. One hundred eighty-five nondemented, community dwelling individuals (>or=85) were assessed with a broad neuropsychological battery. Bloods were drawn to assess total, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, as well as for APOE genotyping. In contrast to our expectations, high total cholesterol and high LDL cholesterol were associated with higher memory scores for noncarriers of the APOE4 allele. No significant associations between cognitive performance and lipid profile were found for carriers of the APOE4 allele. In oldest old nondemented noncarriers of the APOE4 allele, high cholesterol is associated with better memory function. Further examination of the role of APOE genotype on the association between cholesterol and cognitive performance, especially in the oldest old is warranted.

18558643
Diffusion tensor imaging findings in first-episode and chronic schizophrenia patients.
Comparisons of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) data between first-episode and chronic schizophrenia patients assessed in different studies have led to the suggestion that the decreased fractional anisotropy observed in chronic schizophrenia patients is less pronounced in first-episode patients. However, such comparisons of imaging data generated across studies are susceptible to numerous confounders, which may limit the interpretation of any differences. In order to address these issues and determine whether the DTI abnormalities of chronic schizophrenia are present at illness onset, the authors conducted a DTI investigation of the largest cohort of first-episode schizophrenia patients yet reported in conjunction with a group of chronic schizophrenia patients and healthy subjects for comparison. Fractional anisotropy data generated by diffusion tensor imaging with a 3-T Siemens Allegra head-dedicated MRI system were compared between 40 first-episode schizophrenia patients and 39 age- and gender-matched healthy comparison subjects and between 40 chronic schizophrenia patients and 40 age- and gender-matched healthy comparison subjects. The following regions of interest were assessed: forceps minor (bilaterally), forceps major (bilaterally), inferior longitudinal fasciculus (bilaterally), and the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum. In most regions, chronic schizophrenia patients showed significant or trend-level lower fractional anisotropy than healthy comparison subjects, whereas the first-episode schizophrenia patients showed only trend-level lower fractional anisotropy in the inferior longitudinal fasciculus. The cross-sectional data reported here suggest less widespread changes in white matter at illness onset in schizophrenia which progress in more chronic states. More definitive conclusions will require follow-up imaging of first-episode schizophrenia patients.

18552630
The relationship between PTSD arousal symptoms and depression among mothers exposed to the World Trade Center attacks.
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is associated with greater risk of developing comorbid depression. However, little is known about the relationship between specific PTSD symptom clusters and comorbid depression. Approximately 4 years after the World Trade Center (WTC) attacks, we examined the association between PTSD symptom clusters and depression severity among 64 mothers directly exposed to the WTC attacks. Severity scores were computed for each PTSD symptom cluster by summing symptom frequency. Partial correlations with depression severity were calculated separately for PTSD symptom clusters, controlling for demographic variables, time elapsed since the attacks, WTC attack exposure, meeting PTSD criterion A, and the other cluster scores. Higher arousal symptom cluster scores were significantly correlated with persistent depression, but the re-experiencing and avoidance symptom clusters were not. Subsequent analyses isolating shared symptoms of PTSD and depression from those unique to PTSD suggest a complex interrelationship among symptoms of arousal, numbing, and depression.

18538995
Religious education and midlife observance are associated with dementia three decades later in Israeli men.
The aim of the study was to examine the association of religious education and observance with dementia among participants in the Israeli Ischemic Heart Disease study. We assessed dementia in 1,890 participants among 2,604 survivors of 10,059 participants in the Israeli Ischemic Heart Disease study, a longitudinal investigation of the incidence and risk factors for cardiovascular disease among Jewish male civil servants in Israel. Face-to-face interviews were conducted with 651 subjects identified as possibly demented by the Modified Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status. Of 1,628 subjects included in this analysis (mean age 82 at assessment), 308 (18.9%) had dementia. The prevalence rates of dementia (and odds ratios (ORs) relative to those with exclusively religious education, adjusted for age, area of birth, and socioeconomic status) were 27.1% for those with exclusively religious education, 12.6% (OR=0.49) for those with mixed education, and 16.1% (OR=0.76) for those with secular education. For religious self-definition and practice, the prevalence rates were 9.7%, 17.7%, 14.1%, 19.3%, and 28.8% for categories from least to most religious (ORs relative to the most religious: 0.43, 0.67, 0.48, 0.55). Examining lifestyles associated with religiosity might shed light onto environmental risks for dementia. Mechanisms underlying these associations remain elusive.

18534209
Hyperglycemia and outcome in the pediatric intensive care unit.
To identify the frequency of hyperglycemia in children who are nondiabetic and critically ill and assess the independent effect of hyperglycemia on outcome. Consecutive admissions to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) were reviewed. The Pediatric Risk of Mortality III score (PRISM) measured patient acuity. Because maximum glucose level in the first day of PICU admission (GLFD) >200mg/dL contributes to PRISM, 200 mg/dL was used to differentiate high glucose (HG) from normal glucose. Of 1550 patients, 221 (14.3%) had HG. GLFD correlated with PRISM (r = 0.39, P < .001). Without controlling for PRISM, the HG group had more mechanical ventilation days (MVD; P < .001), longer PICU length of stay (PLOS; P < .001) and lower percent survival (P < .001) than the normal glucose group. Controlling for PRISM in survivors, GLFD was not associated with PLOS (P = .75) or with MVD (P = .06). GLFD was not significantly associated with survival (P = .76). In nonsurvivors, GLFD was not associated with PLOS (P = .19) or MVD (P = .31). When controlling for disease severity, hyperglycemia within 24 hours of PICU admission was not independently associated with increased mechanical ventilation time, length of stay, or mortality. Prospective evaluation of glycemic control in critically ill children is needed to elucidate its effects on outcome.

18466986
Increased locomotor activity in mice lacking the low-density lipoprotein receptor.
While the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) is best known for its role in regulating serum cholesterol, LDLR is expressed in brain, suggesting that it may play a role in CNS function as well. Here, using mice with a null mutation in LDLR (LDLR-/-), we investigated whether the absence of LDLR affects a series of behavioral functions. We also utilized the fact that plasma cholesterol levels can be regulated in LDLR-/- mice by manipulating dietary cholesterol to investigate whether elevated plasma cholesterol might independently affect behavioral performance. LDLR-/- mice showed no major deficits in general sensory or motor function. However, LDLR-/- mice exhibited increased locomotor activity in an open field test without evidence of altered anxiety in either an open field or a light/dark emergence test. By contrast, modulating dietary cholesterol produced only isolated effects. While both C57BL/6J and LDLR-/- mice fed a high cholesterol diet showed increased anxiety in a light/dark task, and LDLR-/- mice fed a high cholesterol diet exhibited longer target latencies in the probe trial of the Morris water maze, no other findings supported a general effect of cholesterol on anxiety or spatial memory. Collectively these studies suggest that while LDLR-/- mice exhibit no major developmental defects, LDLR nevertheless plays a significant role in modulating locomotor behavior in the adult.

18367838
Clinical dementia rating performed several years prior to death predicts regional Alzheimer's neuropathology.
To assess the relationships between early and late antemortem measures of dementia severity and Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology severity. 40 residents of a nursing home, average age at death 82.0, participated in this longitudinal cohort study with postmortem assessment. Severity of dementia was measured by Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) at two time points, averaging 4.5 and 1.0 years before death. Densities of postmortem neuritic plaques (NPs) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) were measured in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and entorhinal cortex. For most brain areas, both early and late CDRs were significantly associated with NPs and NFTs. CDRs assessed proximal to death predicted NFTs beyond the contribution of early CDRs. NPs were predicted by both early and late CDRs. NPs were predictive of both early and late CDRs after controlling for NFTs. NFTs were only associated significantly with late CDR in the cerebral cortex after controlling for NPs. Even if assessed several years before death, dementia severity is associated with AD neuropathology. NPs are more strongly associated with dementia severity than NFTs. NFTs consistently associate better with late than early CDR, suggesting that these neuropathological changes may occur relatively later in the course of the disease.

18281061
Maternal, not paternal, PTSD is related to increased risk for PTSD in offspring of Holocaust survivors.
A significant association between parental PTSD and the occurrence of PTSD in offspring has been noted, consistent with the idea that risk for the development of PTSD is transmitted from parent to child. Two recent reports linking maternal PTSD and low offspring cortisol prompted us to examine the relative contributions of maternal vs. paternal PTSD in the prediction of PTSD and other psychiatric diagnoses in offspring. One hundred seventeen men and 167 women, recruited from the community, were evaluated using a comprehensive psychiatric battery designed to identify traumatic life experiences and lifetime psychiatric diagnoses. 211 of these subjects were the adult offspring of Holocaust survivors and 73 were demographically comparable Jewish controls. Participants were further subdivided based on whether their mother, father, neither, or both parents met diagnostic criteria for lifetime PTSD. A higher prevalence of lifetime PTSD, mood, anxiety disorders, and to a lesser extent, substance abuse disorders, was observed in offspring of Holocaust survivors than controls. The presence of maternal PTSD was specifically associated with PTSD in adult offspring of Holocaust survivors. However, other psychiatric diagnoses did not show specific effects associated with maternal PTSD. The tendency for maternal PTSD to make a greater contribution than paternal PTSD to PTSD risk suggests that classic genetic mechanisms are not the sole model of transmission, and paves way for the speculation that epigenetic factors may be involved. In contrast, PTSD in any parent contributes to risk for depression, and parental traumatization is associated with increased anxiety disorders in offspring.

18161858
Increased longevity in offspring of mothers with Alzheimer's disease.
Life expectancy is a familial trait. However, the effectiveness of using the age at death of a deceased parent to estimate life expectancy in their offspring can vary depending on whether death in the parent was due to extrinsic versus intrinsic causes, as well as demographic characteristics such as sex. While Alzheimer's disease (AD) risk increases with increased age, mortality for individuals with AD is increased in contrast to comparably aged individuals without AD. Yet in most cases it is not the defining neuropathology of AD that directly terminates life but instead conditions and illnesses extrinsic to AD pathology that nevertheless have increased likelihood in its presence. For this reason, we hypothesized that offspring of AD mothers would have greater longevity than offspring of mothers without AD (insufficient numbers prevented a comparable analysis using fathers with AD). The longevity of 345 offspring of 100 deceased 60+ year old AD mothers was compared with 5,465 offspring in 1,312 deceased 60+ year old non-AD mothers. We used a proportional hazards model that accounted for clustered (nonindependent) observations due to the inclusion of several offspring from the same family. In both an unadjusted model and one that adjusted for the age at death in the mother, and the sex and birth year in the offspring we found evidence for increased longevity in the offspring of AD mothers. The results suggest that, in addition to genes that might directly affect pathways leading to AD, there may be familial/genetic factors not connected to specific pathophysiological processes in AD but instead associated with increased longevity that contribute to the familial aggregation observed in AD.

18079025
Number of children is associated with neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease in women.
To examine the association between number of born children and neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The brains of 86 subjects with data on the number of biological children born, were studied postmortem. Primary analyses included 73 subjects (average age at death=80; 42 women) devoid of cerebrovascular disease associated lesions (i.e., infarcts) or of non-AD related neuropathology. Women were significantly older at death than men (85.6 vs. 73.4; p<.0005) but did not differ significantly from men in number of children or dementia severity. Secondary analyses included 13 additional subjects who had concomitant cerebrovascular disease. Density of neuritic plaques (NPs) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, amygdala and multiple regions of the cerebral cortex, as well as composites of these indices reflecting overall neuropathology, were analyzed. For men and women separately, partial correlations, controlling for age at death and dementia severity, were used to assess the associations of number of children with these neuropathological variables. Among women, all the partial correlations were positive, with statistical significance for overall neuropathology (r=.37; p=.02), overall NPs (r=.36; p=.02), and for NPs in the amygdala (r=.47; p=.002). Among men, none of the partial correlations were statistically significant. Results of the secondary analyses were similar. Since the associations between number of children and neuropathology of AD were found for women only, they might reflect sex-specific mechanisms (such as variations in estrogen or luteinizing hormone levels) rather than social, economic, biological or other mechanisms common to both men and women.

18023042
A phenotype for genetic studies of successful cognitive aging.
Survival from Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other dementias into late old age may be a useful phenotype for genetic studies of successful cognitive aging. To support molecular genetics studies for successful cognitive aging, we conducted a two-stage study to determine an optimal age phenotype for successful cognitive aging. First, risk of AD was evaluated, through informant interviews, in 4,794 parents and siblings of 976 elderly nondemented probands who were divided into three different proband age groups: those aged 60-74, 75-89, and 90+. Relatives of probands aged 90+ had a significantly lower risk than the relatives of the other two proband groups. Second, this sample was combined with an earlier sample (combined nondemented elderly probands: n = 2,025; relatives: n = 10,506), and a series of proband age groups (i.e., 75-79, 80-84, 85-89, 90+) were used to determine which optimally identifies a group of relatives with low AD risk. Using the relatives of the nondemented proband aged 60-74 as the reference group, there were reductions in cumulative risk among relatives of probands aged 85-89 and 90+, but only the latter group also showed significant reductions to the relatives of probands aged 75-79, 80-84, and 85-89. This pattern of results varied little by sex. Finally, cumulative AD risk curves were similar between relatives of probands aged 90-94 and 95+. These results suggest that age 90 is an optimal age threshold to use for both men and women in genetic studies seeking to identify genes associated with successful cognitive aging.

17955524
Ten-year follow-up study of cortisol levels in aging holocaust survivors with and without PTSD.
To investigate the longitudinal course of mean 24-hour urinary cortisol excretion in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), the authors evaluated 24-hour cortisol excretion in 28 Holocaust survivors 10 years after obtaining an initial estimate. Cortisol levels increased in participants whose PTSD had remitted (n = 3) but declined in participants who developed PTSD (n = 3) or whose PTSD status did not change over time (PTSD+: n = 14, PTSD-: n = 8). Cortisol levels at Time 1 predicted diagnostic status change better than psychological variables, including exposure to traumatic events between assessments. The authors conclude that cortisol levels are affected by change in PTSD status and age.

17894412
Autism-related routines and rituals associated with a mitochondrial aspartate/glutamate carrier SLC25A12 polymorphism.
Evidence for a genetic association between autism and two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs2056202 and rs2292813, in the mitochondrial aspartate/glutamate carrier (SLC25A12) gene led us to ask whether any of the four previously identified familial traits in autism spectrum disorders (ASD) varied by these SNPs. In 355 ASD cases from 170 sibships we examined levels of the four traits in these SNPs using ANCOVA models. The primary models selected unrelated affected cases and used age and sex as covariates. An ancillary set of models used all affected siblings and included "sibship" as a random effects independent variable. We found significantly lower levels of routines and rituals associated with the presence of the less frequent A allele in rs2056206. No other significant differences were observed. The rs2056202 polymorphism may be associated with levels of routines and rituals in autism and related disorders.

17845826
Transcriptional vulnerability of brain regions in Alzheimer's disease and dementia.
This study determined (a) the association between stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and overall gene expression change, and (b) brain regions of greatest vulnerability to transcriptional change as the disease progressed. Fifteen cerebrocortical sites and the hippocampus were examined in persons with either no cognitive impairment or neuropathology, or with only AD-associated lesions. Cases were stratified into groups of 7-19 based on the degree of cognitive impairment (clinical dementia rating scale, CDR); neurofibrillary tangle distribution and severity (Braak staging) or density of cerebrocortical neuritic plaque (NP; grouping by NP density). Transcriptional change was assessed by Affymetrix U133 mRNA microarray analysis. The results suggested that (a) gene expression changes in the temporal and prefrontal cortices are more closely related to disease severity than other regions examined; (b) more genes are down-regulated at any given disease severity stage than up-regulated; (c) the degree of gene expression change in a given regions depends on the disease severity classification scheme used; and (d) the classification of cases by CDR provides a more orderly gradient of gene expression change in most brain regions than Braak staging or NP grouping.

17472705
Elevated plasma cholesterol does not affect brain Abeta in mice lacking the low-density lipoprotein receptor.
Epidemiological studies support an association between vascular risk factors, including hypercholesterolemia, and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Recently, there has been much interest in the possibility that hypercholesterolemia might directly promote beta-amyloid (Abeta) production. Indeed, in vitro studies have shown that increasing cellular cholesterol levels enhances Abeta production. However, studies in AD transgenic mouse models have not consistently found that elevated plasma cholesterol leads to increased Abeta production or deposition in vivo. In this study, we determined whether elevated peripheral cholesterol influences Abeta production in mice with a null mutation of the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR). We show that dramatically elevated plasma cholesterol levels, whether induced by high cholesterol, high fat, or high fat/high cholesterol diets, did not affect either levels of brain Abeta40, Abeta42, or APP, or the Abeta42/40 or APP-CTF/APP ratios, nor substantially alter brain cholesterol levels. ApoE protein levels in brain were, however, elevated, in LDLR-/- mice by post-transcriptional mechanisms. Collectively, these studies argue that plasma cholesterol levels do not normally regulate production of brain Abeta.

17392739
Enhanced effects of cortisol administration on episodic and working memory in aging veterans with PTSD.
Though both glucocorticoid alterations and memory impairments have been noted in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), it is not clear if these phenomena are causally linked. As there is emerging evidence that these domains become further altered in PTSD with increasing age, it is of interest to examine these relationships in an older cohort. Aging (mean age, 62.7+/-8.9; range, 52-81) combat veterans with (n=13) and without (n=17) PTSD received an intravenous bolus of 17.5 mg hydrocortisone (cortisol), a naturally occurring glucocorticoid, or placebo in a randomized, double-blind manner, on two mornings approximately 1-2 weeks apart. Neuropsychological testing to evaluate episodic and working memory performance was performed 75 min later. Cortisol enhanced episodic memory performance in both groups of subjects, but enhanced elements of working memory performance only in the PTSD+ group. The preferential effect of cortisol administration on working memory in PTSD may be related to the superimposition of PTSD and age, as cortisol had impairing effects on this task in a previously studied, younger cohort. The findings suggest that there may be opportunities for developing therapeutic strategies using glucocorticoids in the treatment of aging combat veterans.

17289158
Birth order effects on autism symptom domains.
Autism is predominantly genetically determined. Evidence supports familiality of the main sets of behavioral characteristics that define the syndrome of autism; however, possible non-genetic effects have also been suggested. The present study compared levels of autism symptom domains, as measured by the Autism Diagnostic Interview, and useful phrase speech scores between 106 pairs of first- and second-born siblings from multiply affected families. In addition, the intercorrelations between the measures were compared between siblings. The overall mean repetitive behavior total score was significantly higher (worse) in first-born than in second-born siblings. In contrast, first-born siblings had significantly lower (better) useful phrase speech than their younger siblings. Autism social and non-verbal communication scores were significantly correlated in first- and in second-born siblings. However, there was a significant difference in the coefficients between first- and second-born siblings. Performance on the non-verbal communication domain was also significantly and positively correlated with useful phrase speech score in both first- and second-born siblings. It is unclear at this time whether these results are of biologic origin. Nevertheless, the findings suggest that genetic studies in autism using specific levels of familial autism traits as phenotypes should take into account their intercorrelations and birth order effects embedded in the instrument.

17137559
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function in dissociative disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder, and healthy volunteers.
This study investigated basal and stress-induced hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA)-axis alterations in dissociative disorders (DDs). Forty-six subjects with DD without lifetime post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 35 subjects with PTSD, and 58 healthy comparison (HC) subjects, free of current major depression, were studied as inpatients. After a 24-hour urine collection and hourly blood sampling for ambient cortisol determination, a low-dose dexamethasone suppression test was administered, followed by the Trier Social Stress Test. The DD group had significantly elevated urinary cortisol compared with the HC group, which was more pronounced in the absence of lifetime major depression, whereas the PTSD and HC groups did not differ. The DD group demonstrated significantly greater resistance to, and faster escape from, dexamethasone suppression compared with the HC group, whereas the PTSD and HC groups did not differ. The three groups did not differ in cortisol stress reactivity, but both psychiatric groups demonstrated a significant inverse correlation between dissociation severity and cortisol reactivity, after controlling for all other symptomatology. The PTSD subgroup with comorbid DD tended to have blunted stress reactivity compared with the HC group. The study demonstrates a distinct pattern of HPA-axis dysregulation in DDs, emphasizing the importance of further study of stress-response systems in dissociative psychopathology.

17127000
Early rapid rise in EAAT2 expression follows the period of maximal seizure susceptibility in human brain.
Seizures are relatively common in the first weeks of life and can have lasting effects on brain development due to glutamate excitotoxicity. The excitatory amino acid transporter 2 (EAAT2) is responsible for the majority of glutamate uptake in the brain and mice with this gene deleted die from seizures. Therefore, we reasoned that developmental changes in the expression of EAAT2 might correlate with the period of increased susceptibility to seizures in humans, reflecting a changing vulnerability to excitotoxic insults. Expression levels of eight splice forms of EAAT2 were measured using quantitative RT-PCR from human prefrontal cortex and hippocampus at 1-2 months, 1-2 years, 8 years, 15-16 years, and 18-22 years of age. There was a significant increase in expression of most isoforms between 1-2 months and 1-2 years with isoform-specific patterns after that period. The increase in EAAT2 expression during the first 2 years of life corresponds to a period of maximal synapse formation and other changes in the glutamatergic system such as increased NMDA receptor expression. Moreover, the low expression of EAAT2 in the first months of life corresponds to the period of maximum susceptibility to seizures.

21244352
Cholesterol and LDL Relate to Neuritic Plaques and to APOE4 Presence but Not to Neurofibrillary Tangles.
Elevated serum total cholesterol (TC) has been considered a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD), but conflicting results have confused understanding of the relationships of serum lipids to the presence of AD in the elderly. Methods: To clarify these issues, we evaluated correlations of admission TC, low-density (LDL) and high-density (HDL) cholesterol directly with the densities of Alzheimer hallmarks-neuritic plaques (NP) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT)--in nursing home residents (n=281). Results: Significant positive associations of TC and LDL with NP densities were found in both the neocortex (TC: r=0.151, p=0.013 and LDL: r=0.190, p=0.005) and the hippocampal/entorhinal (allocortical) region (TC: r=0.182, p=0.002 and LDL: r=0.203, p=0.003). Associations of HDL with NP were less strong but also significant. In contrast, after adjustment for confounders, no correlations of NFT with any lipid were significant.When subjects with any non-AD neuropathology (largely vascular) were excluded, the TC-plaque and LDL-plaque associations for the remaining "Pure AD" subgroup were consistently stronger than for the full sample. The TC- and LDL-plaque correlations were also stronger for the subgroup of 87 subjects with an APOE ?4 allele. Conclusions: The findings indicate that serum TC and LDL levels clearly relate to densities of NP, but not to densities of NFT. The stronger associations found in the subgroup that excluded all subjects with non-AD neuropathology suggest that cerebrovascular involvement does not explain these lipid-plaque relationships. Since the associations of TC/LDL with NP were particularly stronger in ?4 carriers, varying prevalence of this allele may explain some discrepancies among prior studies.

19228583
Less Alzheimer disease neuropathology in medicated hypertensive than nonhypertensive persons.
To test the hypothesis that use of antihypertensive medication is associated with lower Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology. This was a postmortem study of 291 brains limited to those with normal neuropathology or with uncomplicated AD neuropathology (i.e., without other dementia-associated neuropathology) in persons with or without hypertension (HTN) who were and were not treated with antihypertensive medications. Neuritic plaque (NP) and neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) densities, quantified in selected brain regions according to the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD) neuropathologic criteria, with additional cortical NP counts, yielded 24 neuropathologic regional measures or summaries. Medicated hypertension (HTN-med; n = 77), nonmedicated HTN (HTN-nomed; n = 42), and non-HTN (no-HTN; n = 172) groups were compared by analyses of variance. The HTN-med group had significantly less neuropathology than the no-HTN group. The no-HTN group averaged over 50% higher mean NP and NFT ratings, and double the mean NP count, of the HTN-med group. The HTN-nomed group had significantly more neuropathology than the HTN-med group, but not significantly less than the no-HTN group. There was substantially less Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology in the medicated hypertension group than the nonhypertensive group, which may reflect a salutary effect of antihypertensive medication against AD-associated neuropathology.

18785948
Ten-year follow-up study of PTSD diagnosis, symptom severity and psychosocial indices in aging holocaust survivors.
We performed a longitudinal study of holocaust survivors with and without post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) by assessing symptoms and other measures at two intervals, approximately 10 years apart. The original cohort consisted of 63 community-dwelling subjects, of whom 40 were available for follow-up. There was a general diminution in PTSD symptom severity over time. However, in 10% of the subjects (n=4), new instances of delayed onset PTSD developed between time 1 and time 2. Self-report ratings at both assessments revealed a worsening of trauma-related symptoms over time in persons without PTSD at time 1, but an improvement in those with PTSD at time 1. The findings suggest that a nuanced characterization of PTSD trajectory over time is more reflective of PTSD symptomatology than simple diagnostic status at one time. The possibility of delayed onset trajectory complicates any simplistic overall trajectory summarizing the longitudinal course of PTSD.

18765651
Insulin in combination with other diabetes medication is associated with less Alzheimer neuropathology.
To examine the association between treatment for diabetes and Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology. This postmortem study matched 124 subjects with diabetes to 124 without diabetes from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine Brain Bank, on age (mean = 81.2 + 9.3), sex (57.3% F), and severity of dementia (Clinical Dementia Rating [CDR] 2.4 + 1.7). Densities of neuritic plaques (NPs) and of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) were assessed in several neocortical regions and in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and amygdala. Diabetic subjects were classified according to their recorded lifetime antidiabetic medications: none (n = 29), insulin only (n = 49), diabetes medications other than insulin only (n = 28), or concomitant use of both insulin and any oral antidiabetic medications (n = 18). For each dependent variable, analysis of covariance controlling for age at death, sex, and CDR distinguished among the nondiabetic patients and four diabetic subgroups. There were differences among the five groups for NP ratings in the entorhinal cortex (p = 0.003), amygdala (p = 0.009), and overall NP (p = 0.014) as well as counts of NPs in all regions examined (p values ranging from 0.009 to 0.04). NP ratings in the hippocampus (p = 0.057) and the combined neocortical measure (p = 0.052) approached significance. In each analysis, the concomitant medication group had significantly fewer NPs (approximately 20%) than any of the other groups, which were relatively similar. No significant NFT differences were found. The results of this study suggest that the combination of insulin with other diabetes medication is associated with substantially lower neuritic plaque density consistent with the effects of both on the neurobiology of insulin.

