21605958
Expression of mutant human DISC1 in mice supports abnormalities in differentiation of oligodendrocytes.
Abnormalities in oligodendrocyte (OLG) differentiation and OLG gene expression deficit have been described in schizophrenia (SZ). Recent studies revealed a critical requirement for Disrupted-in-Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) in neural development. Transgenic mice with forebrain restricted expression of mutant human DISC1 (?hDISC1) are characterized by neuroanatomical and behavioral abnormalities reminiscent of some features of SZ. We sought to determine whether the expression of ?hDISC1 may influence the development of OLGs in this mouse model. OLG- and cell cycle-associated gene and protein expression were characterized in the forebrain of ?hDISC1 mice during different stages of neurodevelopment (E15 and P1 days) and in adulthood. The results suggest that the expression of ?hDISC1 exerts a significant influence on oligodendrocyte differentiation and function, evidenced by premature OLG differentiation and increased proliferation of their progenitors. Additional findings showed that neuregulin 1 and its receptors may be contributing factors to the observed upregulation of OLG genes. Thus, OLG function may be perturbed by mutant hDISC1 in a model system that provides new avenues for studying aspects of the pathogenesis of SZ.

21458888
Corticosteroids, but not NSAIDs, are associated with less Alzheimer neuropathology.
The objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that corticosteroid and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) medications are associated with less global and regional Alzheimer's disease (AD) neuropathology. This postmortem study was based on 694 brains of subjects from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine Brain Bank who did not have neuropathologies other than neuritic plaques (NPs), neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), or cerebrovascular disease. Densities of NPs and of NFTs were assessed in several neocortical regions and in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and amygdala. Counts of NPs in several neocortical regions were also assessed. For each neuropathology measure, analyses of covariance controlling for age at death and sex compared subjects who received only corticosteroids (n = 54) or those who received only NSAIDs (n = 56) to the same comparison group, subjects who received neither (n = 576). Subjects receiving corticosteroids had significantly lower ratings and counts of NPs for all neuropathological measures, and NFTs overall and in the cerebral cortex and amygdala. In contrast, no measures were significant for subjects who received NSAIDs. Use of corticosteroids was associated with approximately 50% fewer NPs and NFTs in most brain regions examined, compared with nonmedicated subjects. In contrast, use of NSAIDs was not substantially associated with the reductions in hallmark lesions of AD. Because corticosteroids have anti-inflammatory as well as a myriad of other neurobiological effects, more direct studies in model systems could reveal novel therapeutic targets and mechanisms for AD lesion reduction.

21431547
Microarray database mining and cell differentiation defects in schizophrenia.
The causes of schizophrenia remain unknown, but a key role of oligodendrocytes and of the myelination process carried out by them has gained increasing support. The adult human brain parenchyma contains a relatively large population of progenitor cells that can generate oligodendrocytes. Defects in these adult oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) or in their proliferation/differentiation have received little attention as potential causes of schizophrenia yet. We compared the set of genes whose expression is modified in schizophrenia, as revealed by our microarray studies, with genes specifically expressed in stem cells, as revealed by studies on human embryonic stem cells. We also evaluated the genes that are upregulated when stem cells engage in differentiation programs. These genes can be viewed as fingerprints or signatures for differentiation processes. The comparisons revealed that a substantial fraction of the genes downregulated in the brains of persons with schizophrenia belong to the differentiation signature. A plausible interpretation of our observations is that a cell differentiation process, possibly of adult OPCs to oligodendrocytes, is perturbed in schizophrenia. These observations constitute an incentive for a new direction of study, aimed at investigating the potential role of OPCs in schizophrenia.

21331351
CARDIOVASCULAR RISK FACTORS AFFECT HIPPOCAMPAL MICROVASCULATURE IN EARLY AD.
There is growing clinical and neuropathologic evidence suggesting that cognitive decline in early Alzheimer's disease (AD) is aggravated by a synergistic relationship between AD and cerebrovascular disease associated with cardiovascular risk factors such as diabetes and hypertension. Here we used the stereologic "Space Balls" method to investigate the relationships between AD pathology and cardiovascular risk factors in postmortem human brains of patients with hypertension and diabetes in two groups - one consisting of cases with AD diagnosis and one of cases without. Hippocampal CA1 and CA3 microvasculature length density estimates were generated to characterize quantitatively the contribution of cardiovascular risk factors to the severity of neuropathologic changes. Our main finding is that the mean and variance of length density values in the AD group were significantly increased from the non-AD group, regardless of the absence or presence of a cardiovascular risk factor. An additional finding is that in the AD group without a risk factor, dementia severity correlated with amount of length density change in the CA1 field-this correlation did not exist in the AD groups with risk factors. Our findings suggest a role for cardiovascular risk factors in quantifiable change of hippocampal CA1 field microvasculature, as well as suggest a possible role of cardiovascular risk factors in altering microvasculature pathology in the presence of AD.

21270770
Astrocyte and glutamate markers in the superficial, deep, and white matter layers of the anterior cingulate gyrus in schizophrenia.
Most studies of the neurobiology of schizophrenia have focused on neurotransmitter systems, their receptors, and downstream effectors. Recent evidence suggests that it is no longer tenable to consider neurons and their functions independently of the glia that interact with them. Although astrocytes have been viewed as harbingers of neuronal injury and CNS stress, their principal functions include maintenance of glutamate homeostasis and recycling, mediation of saltatory conduction, and even direct neurotransmission. Results of studies of astrocytes in schizophrenia have been variable, in part because of the assessment of single and not necessarily universal markers and/or assessment of non-discrete brain regions. We used laser capture microdissection to study three distinct partitions of the anterior cingulate gyrus (layers I-III, IV-VI, and the underlying white matter) in the brains of 18 well-characterized persons with schizophrenia and 21 unaffected comparison controls. We studied the mRNA expression of nine specific markers known to be localized to astrocytes. The expression of astrocyte markers was not altered in the superficial layers or the underlying white matter of the cingulate cortex of persons with schizophrenia. However, the expression of some astrocyte markers (diodinase type II, aquaporin-4, S100?, glutaminase, excitatory amino-acid transporter 2, and thrombospondin), but not of others (aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family member L1, glial fibrillary acidic protein, and vimentin) was significantly reduced in the deep layers of the anterior cingulate gyrus. These findings suggest that a subset of astrocytes localized to specific cortical layers is adversely affected in schizophrenia and raise the possibility of glutamatergic dyshomeostasis in selected neuronal populations.

20854419
SCFFbx2-E3-ligase-mediated degradation of BACE1 attenuates Alzheimer's disease amyloidosis and improves synaptic function.
BACE1 (?-secretase) plays a central role in the ?-amyloidogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The ubiquitin-proteasome system, a major intracellular protein quality control system, has been implicated recently in BACE1 metabolism. We report that the SCF(Fbx2) -E3 ligase is involved in the binding and ubiquitination of BACE1 via its Trp 280 residue of F-box-associated domain. Physiologically, we found that Fbx2 was expressed in various intracellular organelles in brain neurons and that BACE1 is colocalized with Fbx2 and the amyloid precursor protein (APP), mainly at the early endosome and endoplasmic reticulum. The former are believed to be the major intracellular compartments where the APP is cleaved by BACE1 and ?-amyloid is produced. Importantly, we found that overexpression of Fbx2 in the primary cortical and hippocampal neurons derived from Tg2576 transgenic mice significantly promoted BACE1 degradation and reduced ?-amyloid production. In the search for specific endogenous modulators of Fbx2 expression, we found that PPAR? coactivator-1? (PGC-1?) was capable of promoting the degradation of BACE1 through a mechanism involving Fbx2 gene expression. Interestingly, we found that the expression of both Fbx2 and PGC-1? was significantly decreased in the brains of aging Tg2576 mice. Our in vivo studies using a mouse model of AD revealed that exogenous adenoviral Fbx2 expression in the brain significantly decreased BACE1 protein levels and activity, coincidentally reducing ?-amyloid levels and rescuing synaptic deficits. Our study is the first to suggest that promoting Fbx2 in the brain may represent a novel strategy for the treatment of AD.

20808140
Cognitive decline in patients with dementia as a function of depression.
There is evidence that major depression increases the risk for dementia, but there is conflicting evidence as to whether depression may accelerate cognitive decline in dementia. The authors tested the hypothesis that decline in cognitive function over time is more pronounced in patients with dementia with comorbid depression, when compared with patients with dementia without depression history. Prospective, longitudinal cohort study of aging. Nursing home. Three hundred thirteen elderly nursing home residents (mean age at baseline: 86.99 years, standard deviation = 6.7; 83.1% women). At baseline, 192 residents were diagnosed with dementia, and another 27 developed dementia during follow-up. Thirty residents suffered from major depression at any point during the study, and 48 residents had a history of depression. The authors measured cognitive decline using change in Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores over up to 36 months. The authors calculated multilevel regression models to estimate the effects of age, gender, education, dementia status, depression, depression history, and an interaction between dementia and depression, on change in MMSE scores over time. Beyond the effects of age, gender, and education, residents showed steeper cognitive decline in the presence of dementia (? = -13.69, standard error = 1.38) and depression (? = -4.16, SE = 1.2), which was further accelerated by the presence of both depression and dementia (? = -2.72, SE = 0.65). In dementia, the presence of depression corresponds to accelerated cognitive decline beyond gender and level of education, suggesting a unique influence of depression on the rate of cognitive decline in dementia.

20205790
Extensive proteomic screening identifies the obesity-related NYGGF4 protein as a novel LRP1-interactor, showing reduced expression in early Alzheimer's disease.
ABSTRACT: The low-density lipoprotein receptor related protein 1 (LRP1) has been implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD) but its signalling has not been fully evaluated. There is good evidence that the cytoplasmic domain of LRP1 is involved in protein-protein interactions, important in the cell biology of LRP1. We carried out three yeast two-hybrid screens to identify proteins that interact with the cytoplasmic domain of LRP1. The screens included both conventional screens as well as a novel, split-ubiquitin-based screen in which an LRP1 construct was expressed and screened as a transmembrane protein. The split-ubiquitin screen was validated in a screen using full-length amyloid protein precursor (APP), which successfully identified FE65 and FE65L2, as well as novel interactors (Rab3a, Napg, and ubiquitin b). Using both a conventional screen as well as the split-ubiquitin screen, we identified NYGGF4 as a novel LRP1 interactor. The interaction between LRP1 and NYGGF4 was validated using two-hybrid assays, coprecipitation and colocalization in mammalian cells. Mutation analysis demonstrated a specific interaction of NYGGF4 with an NPXY motif that required an intact tyrosine residue. Interestingly, while we confirmed that other LRP1 interactors we identified, including JIP1B and EB-1, were also able to bind to APP, NYGGF4 was unique in that it showed specific binding with LRP1. Expression of NYGGF4 decreased significantly in patients with AD as compared to age-matched controls, and showed decreasing expression with AD disease progression. Examination of Nyggf4 expression in mice with different alleles of the human APOE4 gene showed significant differences in Nyggf4 expression. These results implicate NYGGF4 as a novel and specific interactor of LRP1. Decreased expression of LRP1 and NYGGF4 over disease, evident with the presence of even moderate numbers of neuritic plaques, suggests that LRP1-NYGGF4 is a system altered early in disease. Genetic and functional studies have implicated both LRP1 and NYGGF4 in obesity and cardiovascular disease and the physical association of these proteins may reflect a common mechanism. This is particularly interesting in light of the dual role of ApoE in both cardiovascular risk and AD. The results support further studies on the functional relationship between NYGGF4 and LRP1.

20079340
Increased expression of cholesterol transporter ABCA1 is highly correlated with severity of dementia in AD hippocampus.
To gain insight into ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) function and its potential role in AD pathology, we analyzed the expression of the cholesterol transporter ABCA1 in postmortem hippocampus from persons at different stages of dementia and AD associated neuropathology relative to cognitively intact normal donors by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and Western blot. In this study clinical dementia rating (CDR) scores were used as a measure of dementia severity, whereas, Braak neuropathological staging and neuritic plaque density were used as an index of the neuropathological progression of AD. Correlation analysis showed that ABCA1 mRNA expression was significantly elevated at the earliest recognizable stage of dementia compared to persons with intact cognition. ABCA1 mRNA was also positively correlated with Braak neuropathological stages and neuritic plaque density counts. Additionally, ABCA1 mRNA levels showed robust correlation with dementia severity even after controlling for the confounding contribution of accompanying neuropathological parameters to ABCA1 mRNA expression. Western blot analyses showed that the differential expression observed at the transcriptional level is also reflected at the protein level. Thus, our study provides transcriptional and translational evidence that the expression of ABCA1, a key modulator of cholesterol transport across the plasma membrane, is dysregulated in the AD brain and that this dysregulation is associated with increasing severity of AD, whether measured functionally as dementia severity or neuropathologically as increased neuritic plaque and neurofibrillary tangle density.

19896333
Cortical neuritic plaques and hippocampal neurofibrillary tangles are related to dementia severity in elderly schizophrenia patients.
Cognitive decline has been described in elderly patients with schizophrenia, but the underlying pathology remains unknown. Some studies report increases in plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, but there is no evidence for an increased risk for Alzheimer's disease (AD) in elderly schizophrenics. Models of a decreased cerebral reserve suggest that increases in AD-related neuropathology below the threshold for a neuropathological diagnosis could be related to dementia severity in elderly schizophrenia patients. We tested this hypothesis in 110 autopsy specimens of schizophrenia patients, without a neuropathological diagnosis of AD or other neurodegenerative disorders. Furthermore, we assessed the effects of apolipoprotein E (ApoE) status, a known genetic risk factor for AD. Measures of density of neuritic plaques were obtained in five cortical regions, and the degree of hippocampal neurofibrillary tangles was rated. Dementia severity was measured prior to postmortem using the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale. multivariate analyses of variance were conducted with the factors dementia severity, by ApoE4 carrier status. Hippocampal neurofibrillary tangles correlated with increased dementia severity (p<.05). Neuritic plaque density increased with greater dementia severity (p<.005), and ApoE4 carrier status (p<.005), and these differences were magnified by the ApoE4 carrier status (p<.01). Even below the threshold for a neuropathological diagnosis of AD, neuritic plaques and hippocampal neurofibrillary tangles are associated with dementia severity in schizophrenia patients, even more so in the presence of genetic risk factors, suggesting that a decreased cerebral reserve in elderly schizophrenics may increase susceptibility for dementia.

19865478
Gain in brain immunity in the oldest-old differentiates cognitively normal from demented individuals.
Recent findings suggest that Alzheimer's disease (AD) neuropathological features (neuritic plaques and NFTs) are not strongly associated with dementia in extreme old (over 90 years of age) and compel a search for neurobiological indices of dementia in this rapidly growing segment of the elderly population. We sought to characterize transcriptional and protein profiles of dementia in the oldest-old. Gene and protein expression changes relative to non-demented age-matched controls were assessed by two microarray platforms, qPCR and Western blot in different regions of the brains of oldest-old and younger old persons who died at mild or severe stages of dementia. Our results indicate that: i) consistent with recent neuropathological findings, gene expression changes associated with cognitive impairment in oldest-old persons are distinct from those in cognitively impaired youngest-old persons; ii) transcripts affected in young-old subjects with dementia participate in biological pathways related to synaptic function and neurotransmission while transcripts affected in oldest-old subjects with dementia are associated with immune/inflammatory function; iii) upregulation of immune response genes in cognitively intact oldest-old subjects and their subsequent downregulation in dementia suggests a potential protective role of the brain immune-associated system against dementia in the oldest-old; iv) consistent with gene expression profiles, protein expression of several selected genes associated with the inflammatory/immune system in inferior temporal cortex is significantly increased in cognitively intact oldest-old persons relative to cognitively intact young-old persons, but impaired in cognitively compromised oldest-old persons relative to cognitively intact oldest-old controls. These results suggest that disruption of the robust immune homeostasis that is characteristic of oldest-old individuals who avoided dementia may be directly associated with dementia in the oldest-old and contrast with the synaptic and neurotransmitter system failures that typify dementia in younger old persons.

19585955
The effects of cardiovascular risk factors on cognitive compromise.
As life expectancy in the United States continues to increase, the projected numbers of elderly people who will develop dementia will grow rapidly. This paper reviews four well-established cardiovascular risk factors (type 2 diabetes, hypertension, cholesterol, and inflammation), for which there is longitudinal epidemiological evidence of increased risk of dementia, Alzheimer's disease, mild cognitive impairment, and cognitive decline. These risk factors are of special interest because of their potential modifiability, which may affect the course of cognitive compromise. Diabetes is the cardiovascular risk factor (CvRF) most consistently associated with cognition. Hypertension in midlife is consistently associated with cognition, but its associations with late-life hypertension are less clear. Total cholesterol is not consistently associated with cognition. Interleukin-6 and C-reactive protein are inflammatory markers relatively consistently associated with cognition. Composites of the CvRFs increase the risk for dementia in a dose-dependent fashion, suggesting a cumulative effect of these factors on neuronal stress. In the relatively few studies that have reported interactions of risk factors, they potentiate each other. The effect of each of these risk factors varies according to apolipoprotein E genotype. It may be that the effect of these risk factors varies according to the presence of the others, and these complex relationships underlie the biological mechanisms of cognitive compromise. This may be crucial for understanding the effects on cognition of drugs and other approaches, such as lifestyle change, for treating these risk factors.

19585952
Is there a neuropathology difference between mild cognitive impairment and dementia?
The number of studies that have investigated the neuropathology of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is small, but growing. In this paper we have restricted our focus to the consideration of the presence and extent of postmortem findings relevant to the neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease. We have drawn from studies that have investigated the postmortem neurobiology of the brains of persons with cognitive function at the interface between unimpaired normal function and mild but definite dementia. The data derived from these studies suggest that i) the brains of persons with MCI evidence significant neuropathological and neurobiological changes relative to those without cognitive impairment; ii) in general, the neuropathological and neurobiological changes are qualitatively similar to those observed in the brains of persons with frank AD-like dementia; and iii) the neuropathological and neurobiological brain changes associated with MCI are quantitatively less than those of persons who meet criteria for dementia. Thus, the available, albeit limited, data suggests that MCI is associated with the early stages of the neurobiological and neuropathological changes that culminate in the florid lesions of AD; including the accumulation of neuritic plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, synaptic and neurotransmitter associated deficits, and significant neuronal cell death.

19382130
The MMSE orientation for time domain is a strong predictor of subsequent cognitive decline in the elderly.
The mini-mental state exam (MMSE) has been used to address questions such as determination of appropriate cutoff scores for differentiation of individuals with intact cognitive function from patients with dementia and rate of cognitive decline. However, little is known about the relationship of performance in specific cognitive domains to subsequent overall decline. To examine the specific and/or combined contribution of four MMSE domains (orientation for time, orientation for place, delayed recall, and attention) to prediction of overall cognitive decline on the MMSE. Linear mixed models were applied to 505 elderly nursing home residents (mean age = 85, > 12 years education = 27%; 79% F, mean follow-up = 3.20 years) to examine the relationship between baseline scores of these domains and total MMSE scores over time. Orientation for time was the only domain significantly associated with MMSE decline over time. Combination of poor delayed recall with either attention or orientation for place was associated with significantly increased decline on the MMSE. The MMSE orientation for time predicts overall decline on MMSE scores over time. A good functioning domain added to good functioning delayed recall was associated with slower rate of decline.

19343227
FE65 binds Teashirt, inhibiting expression of the primate-specific caspase-4.
The Alzheimer disease (AD) amyloid protein precursor (APP) can bind the FE65 adaptor protein and this complex can regulate gene expression. We carried out yeast two-hybrid studies with a PTB domain of FE65, focusing on those genes that might be involved in nuclear signaling, and identified and validated Teashirt proteins as FE65 interacting proteins in neurons. Using reporter systems, we observed that FE65 could simultaneously recruit SET, a component of the inhibitor of acetyl transferase, and Teashirt, which in turn recruited histone deacetylases, to produce a powerful gene-silencing complex. We screened stable cell lines with a macroarray focusing on AD-related genes and identified CASP4, encoding caspase-4, as a target of this silencing complex. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed a direct interaction of FE65 and Teashirt3 with the promoter region of CASP4. Expression studies in postmortem samples demonstrated decreasing expression of Teashirt and increasing expression of caspase-4 with progressive cognitive decline. Importantly, there were significant increases in caspase-4 expression associated with even the earliest neuritic plaque changes in AD. We evaluated a case-control cohort and observed evidence for a genetic association between the Teashirt genes TSHZ1 and TSHZ3 and AD, with the TSHZ3 SNP genotype correlating with expression of Teashirt3. The results were consistent with a model in which reduced expression of Teashirt3, mediated by genetic or other causes, increases caspase-4 expression, leading to progression of AD. Thus the cell biological, gene expression and genetic data support a role for Teashirt/caspase-4 in AD biology. As caspase-4 shows evidence of being a primate-specific gene, current models of AD and other neurodegenerative conditions may be incomplete because of the absence of this gene in the murine genome.

19273754
PGC-1alpha expression decreases in the Alzheimer disease brain as a function of dementia.
To explore mechanisms through which altered peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha) expression may influence Alzheimer disease (AD) amyloid neuropathology and to test the hypothesis that promotion of PGC-1alpha expression in neurons might be developed as a novel therapeutic strategy in AD. Case-control. Patients Human postmortem brain (hippocampal formation) samples from AD cases and age-matched non-AD cases. Using genome-wide complementary DNA microarray analysis, we found that PGC-1alpha messenger RNA expression was significantly decreased as a function of progression of clinical dementia in the AD brain. Following confirmatory real-time polymerase chain reaction assay, we continued to explore the role of PGC-1alpha in clinical dementia and found that PGC-1alpha protein content was negatively associated with both AD-type neuritic plaque pathology and beta-amyloid (Abeta)(X-42) contents. Moreover, we found that the predicted elevation of amyloidogenic Abeta(1-42) and Abeta(1-40) peptide accumulation in embryonic cortico-hippocampal neurons derived from Tg2576 AD mice under hyperglycemic conditions (glucose level, 182-273 mg/dL) coincided with a dose-dependent attenuation in PGC-1alpha expression. Most importantly, we found that the reconstitution of exogenous PGC-1alpha expression in Tg2576 neurons attenuated the hyperglycemic-mediated beta-amyloidogenesis through mechanisms involving the promotion of the "nonamyloidogenic" alpha-secretase processing of amyloid precursor protein through the attenuation of the forkheadlike transcription factor 1 (FoxO3a) expression. Therapeutic preservation of neuronal PGC-1alpha expression promotes the nonamyloidogenic processing of amyloid precursor protein precluding the generation of amyloidogenic Abeta peptides.

19129700
Serum lipids are related to Alzheimer's pathology in nursing home residents.
Studies of associations between serum lipids and Alzheimer's disease (AD) or other dementias in the elderly show conflicting results, perhaps due to misclassification of the various dementias. For 358 nursing home residents, serum lipids were studied at admission and diagnoses established at autopsy. We used defined neuropathological criteria to distinguish the presence of AD and to avoid errors of clinical dementia assessment. Residents with any AD pathology, as compared to those without AD pathology, had higher mean serum total cholesterol (TC; 200.4 vs. 185.9 mg/dl; p = 0.02) and higher mean low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL; 124.5 vs. 111.5 mg/dl; p = 0.03). Further, mean TC, LDL and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels all increased progressively with increasing pathological certainty of AD (p for trend = 0.001, 0.02 and 0.02). TC and LDL were significantly related to pathologically defined AD. If serum lipids have a role in the pathogenesis of AD, interventions may modify the course of disease.

18466986
Increased locomotor activity in mice lacking the low-density lipoprotein receptor.
While the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) is best known for its role in regulating serum cholesterol, LDLR is expressed in brain, suggesting that it may play a role in CNS function as well. Here, using mice with a null mutation in LDLR (LDLR-/-), we investigated whether the absence of LDLR affects a series of behavioral functions. We also utilized the fact that plasma cholesterol levels can be regulated in LDLR-/- mice by manipulating dietary cholesterol to investigate whether elevated plasma cholesterol might independently affect behavioral performance. LDLR-/- mice showed no major deficits in general sensory or motor function. However, LDLR-/- mice exhibited increased locomotor activity in an open field test without evidence of altered anxiety in either an open field or a light/dark emergence test. By contrast, modulating dietary cholesterol produced only isolated effects. While both C57BL/6J and LDLR-/- mice fed a high cholesterol diet showed increased anxiety in a light/dark task, and LDLR-/- mice fed a high cholesterol diet exhibited longer target latencies in the probe trial of the Morris water maze, no other findings supported a general effect of cholesterol on anxiety or spatial memory. Collectively these studies suggest that while LDLR-/- mice exhibit no major developmental defects, LDLR nevertheless plays a significant role in modulating locomotor behavior in the adult.

18462708
Ionotropic glutamate receptor mRNA expression in the human thalamus: absence of change in schizophrenia.
Abnormalities in glutamate neurotransmission are thought to be among the major contributing factors to the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Although schizophrenia has been regarded mostly as a disorder of higher cortical function, the cortex and thalamus work as a functional unit. Existing data regarding alterations of glutamate receptor subunit expression in the thalamus in schizophrenia remain equivocal. This postmortem study examined mRNA expression of ionotropic glutamate receptor (iGluR) subunits and PSD95 in 5 precisely defined and dissected thalamic subdivisions (medial and lateral sectors of the mediodorsal nucleus; and the ventral lateral posterior, ventral posterior, and centromedian nuclei) of persons with schizophrenia and matched controls using quantitative PCR with normalization to multiple endogenous controls. Among 15 genes examined (NR1 and NR2A-D subunits of the NMDA receptor; GluR1-4 subunits of the AMPA receptor; GluR5-7 and KA1-2 subunits of the kainate receptor; PSD95), all but two (GluR4 and KA1) were expressed at quantifiable levels. Differences in iGluR gene expression were seen between different thalamic nuclei but not between diagnostic groups. The relative abundance of transcripts was: NR1>>NR2A>NR2B>NR2D>NR2C for NMDA, GluR2>GluR1>GluR3 for AMPA, and KA2>GluR5>GluR7>GluR6 for kainate receptors. The expression of PSD95 correlated with the expression of NR1, NR2A, NR2B, NR2D and GluR6 in all nuclei. These results provide detailed and quantitative information on iGluR subunit expression in multiple nuclei of the human thalamus but suggest that alterations in their expression are not a prominent feature of schizophrenia.

18367838
Clinical dementia rating performed several years prior to death predicts regional Alzheimer's neuropathology.
To assess the relationships between early and late antemortem measures of dementia severity and Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology severity. 40 residents of a nursing home, average age at death 82.0, participated in this longitudinal cohort study with postmortem assessment. Severity of dementia was measured by Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) at two time points, averaging 4.5 and 1.0 years before death. Densities of postmortem neuritic plaques (NPs) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) were measured in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and entorhinal cortex. For most brain areas, both early and late CDRs were significantly associated with NPs and NFTs. CDRs assessed proximal to death predicted NFTs beyond the contribution of early CDRs. NPs were predicted by both early and late CDRs. NPs were predictive of both early and late CDRs after controlling for NFTs. NFTs were only associated significantly with late CDR in the cerebral cortex after controlling for NPs. Even if assessed several years before death, dementia severity is associated with AD neuropathology. NPs are more strongly associated with dementia severity than NFTs. NFTs consistently associate better with late than early CDR, suggesting that these neuropathological changes may occur relatively later in the course of the disease.

18322470
Abnormal indices of cell cycle activity in schizophrenia and their potential association with oligodendrocytes.
The goal of this study was to determine what signaling pathways may elicit myelin-specific gene expression deficits in schizophrenia (SZ). Microarray analyses indicated that genes associated with canonical cell cycle pathways were significantly affected in the anterior cingulate gyrus (ACG), the region exhibiting the most profound myelin-specific gene expression changes, in persons with SZ (N=16) as compared with controls (N=19). Detected gene expression changes of key regulators of G1/S phase transition and genes central to oligodendrocyte differentiation were validated using qPCR in the ACG in an independent cohort (Ns=45/34). The relative abundance of phosphorylated retinoblastoma protein (pRb) was increased in the white matter underlying the ACG in SZ subjects (Ns=12). The upregulation of cyclin D1 gene expression and the downregulation of p57(Kip2), accompanied by increased cyclin D/CDK4-dependent phosphorylation of pRb, acting as a checkpoint for G1/S phase transition, suggest abnormal cell cycle re-entry in postmitotic oligodendrocytes in SZ. Furthermore, gene expression profiling of brain samples from myelin mutant animal models, quaking and myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) null mice, showed that cell cycle gene expression changes were not a necessary consequence of the reduced gene expression of structural myelin proteins, such as MAG. While, quaking, a known modulator of cell cycle activity during oligodendrocyte differentiation impairs the expression of multiple myelin genes, including those that are affected in SZ. These data suggest that the normal patterns of cell cycle gene and protein expression are disrupted in SZ and that this disruption may contribute to the oligodendroglial deficits observed in SZ.

18303585
Altered serotonin 2C receptor RNA splicing in suicide: association with editing.
In an earlier study, we showed increases in serotonin 2C receptor (5-HT2CR) pre-mRNA editing in prefrontal cortex that were specific to suicide victims irrespective of associated psychiatric diagnoses. Here we demonstrate that the ratio between the two 5-HT2CR splice variants is increased in people who committed suicide, but does not vary among the diagnostic groups. This provides further evidence for suicide-specific neurobiology and suggests that, as it was previously shown in vitro, 5-HT2CR editing modulates its splicing in human brain. The association analysis indicates, however, that the efficiency of 5-HT2CR editing is an imperfect predictor of the splicing outcome, and that splice site selection is only partially controlled by the level of editing in vivo.

18239198
Increased neurofibrillary tangles in patients with Alzheimer disease with comorbid depression.
Recent evidence suggests that a history of major depression may lead to increases in hippocampal neuropathology in Alzheimer disease (AD). The authors tested the hypothesis that neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are more pronounced in the brains of patients with AD with comorbid depression as compared with patients with AD without depression. Brain samples from patients were selected from the U.S. National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center database. The primary analysis included 7164 individuals: 6468 had AD as the primary neuropathologic diagnosis and 696 were considered neuropathologically normal. Depression at study inclusion was rated as present or absent in consensus conferences. Neuropathologic ratings from the Consortium to Establish a Registry in Alzheimer's Disease rating of neuritic plaques and Braak staging of neurofibrillary tangles were used for between-group analyses. Brains of patients with AD with comorbid depression showed higher levels of cortical tangle formation than brains of patients with AD without comorbid depression. Results remained stable when controlling for age, gender, level of education, and cognitive status. Within patients with AD, comorbid depression increased the odds for advanced neuropathologic disease stage (odds ratio: 1.47; 95% confidence interval: 1.03-2.08). In AD, the presence of depression comorbidity corresponds to increases in AD-related neuropathologic changes beyond age, gender, level of education, and cognitive status, suggesting an interaction between depression and the neuropathologic processes in AD.

18079025
Number of children is associated with neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease in women.
To examine the association between number of born children and neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The brains of 86 subjects with data on the number of biological children born, were studied postmortem. Primary analyses included 73 subjects (average age at death=80; 42 women) devoid of cerebrovascular disease associated lesions (i.e., infarcts) or of non-AD related neuropathology. Women were significantly older at death than men (85.6 vs. 73.4; p<.0005) but did not differ significantly from men in number of children or dementia severity. Secondary analyses included 13 additional subjects who had concomitant cerebrovascular disease. Density of neuritic plaques (NPs) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, amygdala and multiple regions of the cerebral cortex, as well as composites of these indices reflecting overall neuropathology, were analyzed. For men and women separately, partial correlations, controlling for age at death and dementia severity, were used to assess the associations of number of children with these neuropathological variables. Among women, all the partial correlations were positive, with statistical significance for overall neuropathology (r=.37; p=.02), overall NPs (r=.36; p=.02), and for NPs in the amygdala (r=.47; p=.002). Among men, none of the partial correlations were statistically significant. Results of the secondary analyses were similar. Since the associations between number of children and neuropathology of AD were found for women only, they might reflect sex-specific mechanisms (such as variations in estrogen or luteinizing hormone levels) rather than social, economic, biological or other mechanisms common to both men and women.

18029146
Schizophrenia and sex associated differences in the expression of neuronal and oligodendrocyte-specific genes in individual thalamic nuclei.
Considerable evidence based on the study of postmortem brain tissue suggests deficits in both neuronal and myelin systems in schizophrenia (SZ). To date, the majority of the biochemical and molecular biological studies have focused on the cerebral cortex. Most information traveling to or from the cortex is relayed or synaptically gated through the thalamus, and numerous studies suggest structural and functional abnormalities in interconnected regions of the thalamus and cortex in SZ. The present study extends our gene expression studies of neuronal and myelin systems to the thalamus. Quantitative PCR was employed to assess the expression of 10 genes in 5 divisions of the thalamus which were precisely harvested using Laser Capture Microdissection. The divisions studied were present on coronal sections at the level of the centromedian nucleus (CMN) taken from 14 schizophrenic and 16 normal control postmortem brains. The genes examined were specific for oligodendrocytes (MAG, CNP, MBP), neurons (ENO2), glutamatergic neurons (VGlut1, VGlut2, PV, CB) or GABAergic neurons (GAD65, GAD67). Expression levels for each of these markers were quantitated and compared between diagnoses, between sexes, and across nuclei. CB was much more highly expressed in the CMN in SZs compared to NCs. No other diagnosis related differences in gene expression were observed. The expression levels of CNP and MAG, but not MBP, were highly correlated with one another and both, but not MBP, were much more highly expressed in females than in males in all thalamic divisions examined. All markers were differentially expressed across nuclei.

17919127
Autism brain tissue banking.
One avenue of progress toward understanding the neurobiological basis of autism is through the detailed study of the post-mortem brain from affected individuals. The primary purpose of autism brain tissue banking is to make well-characterized and optimally preserved post-mortem brain tissue available to the neuroscience research community. In this paper we discuss our current understanding of the criteria for optimal characterization and preservation of post-mortem brain tissue; the pitfalls associated with inadequate clinical and neuropathological characterization and the advantages and disadvantages of post-mortem studies of the brain. We then describe the current status of the brain tissue bank supported by the Autism Tissue Program, including the demographic characteristics of the tissue donors, post-mortem interval, sex, age and the method of preservation. Finally, we provide information on the policies and procedures that govern the distribution of brain specimens by this bank and the nature of the studies that are currently being supported directly by this program.

17918747
Developmental expression profile of quaking, a candidate gene for schizophrenia, and its target genes in human prefrontal cortex and hippocampus shows regional specificity.
Decreased expression of oligodendrocyte/myelin-related (OMR) genes, including quaking (QKI), is a consistent finding in gene expression studies of post-mortem brain from subjects with schizophrenia, and these changes are most prominent in the hippocampus vs. the prefrontal cortex (PFC). Although expression of QKI and other OMR genes has been examined in rodents, little is known about their developmental trajectory in the human brain. Therefore, we examined expression of QKI and several putative mRNA targets of QKI in human PFC and hippocampus at different ages. The pattern of QKI expression in the PFC resembled that reported in rodents, with high QKI-5 in the fetal brain and an increase in QKI-6 and QKI-7 during the period of active myelination, although QKI-5 expression did not decrease substantially during postnatal development in the PFC in humans as it does in rodent brain. Most of the putative QKI target genes also showed linear increases in expression with increasing age in the PFC. In contrast, expression of these genes showed little evidence of developmental regulation in the hippocampus. Correlations between expression levels of the nuclear vs. cytoplasmic QKI isoforms, and putative splicing targets of the former, also differed between tissues. Thus, we speculate that a robust increase in OMR gene expression normally occurs with age in the PFC, but not in the hippocampus, which may explain why decreases in OMR gene expression in schizophrenia are more pronounced in the latter tissue. We also suggest that OMR transcripts might be processed by different splicing proteins in different tissues.

17845826
Transcriptional vulnerability of brain regions in Alzheimer's disease and dementia.
This study determined (a) the association between stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and overall gene expression change, and (b) brain regions of greatest vulnerability to transcriptional change as the disease progressed. Fifteen cerebrocortical sites and the hippocampus were examined in persons with either no cognitive impairment or neuropathology, or with only AD-associated lesions. Cases were stratified into groups of 7-19 based on the degree of cognitive impairment (clinical dementia rating scale, CDR); neurofibrillary tangle distribution and severity (Braak staging) or density of cerebrocortical neuritic plaque (NP; grouping by NP density). Transcriptional change was assessed by Affymetrix U133 mRNA microarray analysis. The results suggested that (a) gene expression changes in the temporal and prefrontal cortices are more closely related to disease severity than other regions examined; (b) more genes are down-regulated at any given disease severity stage than up-regulated; (c) the degree of gene expression change in a given regions depends on the disease severity classification scheme used; and (d) the classification of cases by CDR provides a more orderly gradient of gene expression change in most brain regions than Braak staging or NP grouping.

17583597
Introduction to the special section: Myelin and oligodendrocyte abnormalities in schizophrenia.
A central tenet of modern views of the neurobiology of schizophrenia is that the symptoms of schizophrenia arise from a failure of adequate communication between different brain regions and disruption of the circuitry that underlies behaviour and perception. Historically this disconnectivity syndrome has been approached from a neurotransmitter-based perspective. However, efficient communication between brain circuits is also contingent on saltatory signal propagation and salubrious myelination of axons. The papers in this Special Section examine the neuroanatomical and molecular biological evidence for abnormal myelination and oligodendroglial function in schizophrenia through studies of post-mortem brain tissue and animal model systems. The picture that emerges from the studies described suggests that although schizophrenia is not characterized by gross abnormalities of white matter such as those evident in multiple sclerosis, it does involve a profound dysregulation of myelin-associated gene expression, reductions in oligodendrocyte numbers, and marked abnormalities in the ultrastructure of myelin sheaths.

17472705
Elevated plasma cholesterol does not affect brain Abeta in mice lacking the low-density lipoprotein receptor.
Epidemiological studies support an association between vascular risk factors, including hypercholesterolemia, and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Recently, there has been much interest in the possibility that hypercholesterolemia might directly promote beta-amyloid (Abeta) production. Indeed, in vitro studies have shown that increasing cellular cholesterol levels enhances Abeta production. However, studies in AD transgenic mouse models have not consistently found that elevated plasma cholesterol leads to increased Abeta production or deposition in vivo. In this study, we determined whether elevated peripheral cholesterol influences Abeta production in mice with a null mutation of the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR). We show that dramatically elevated plasma cholesterol levels, whether induced by high cholesterol, high fat, or high fat/high cholesterol diets, did not affect either levels of brain Abeta40, Abeta42, or APP, or the Abeta42/40 or APP-CTF/APP ratios, nor substantially alter brain cholesterol levels. ApoE protein levels in brain were, however, elevated, in LDLR-/- mice by post-transcriptional mechanisms. Collectively, these studies argue that plasma cholesterol levels do not normally regulate production of brain Abeta.

17420070
Stereologic estimates of total spinophilin-immunoreactive spine number in area 9 and the CA1 field: relationship with the progression of Alzheimer's disease.
The loss of presynaptic markers is thought to represent a strong pathologic correlate of cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Spinophilin is a postsynaptic marker mainly located to the heads of dendritic spines. We assessed total numbers of spinophilin-immunoreactive puncta in the CA1 and CA3 fields of hippocampus and area 9 in 18 elderly individuals with various degrees of cognitive decline. The decrease in spinophilin-immunoreactivity was significantly related to both Braak neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) staging and clinical severity but not A beta deposition staging. The total number of spinophilin-immunoreactive puncta in CA1 field and area 9 were significantly related to MMSE scores and predicted 23.5 and 61.9% of its variability. The relationship between total number of spinophilin-immunoreactive puncta in CA1 field and MMSE scores did not persist when adjusting for Braak NFT staging. In contrast, the total number of spinophilin-immunoreactive puncta in area 9 was still significantly related to the cognitive outcome explaining an extra 9.6% of MMSE and 25.6% of the Clinical Dementia Rating scores variability. Our data suggest that neocortical dendritic spine loss is an independent parameter to consider in AD clinicopathologic correlations.

17342407
Gene expression alterations in the sphingolipid metabolism pathways during progression of dementia and Alzheimer's disease: a shift toward ceramide accumulation at the earliest recognizable stages of Alzheimer's disease?
There is mounting evidence linking Abeta42 generation in Alzheimer's disease (AD) with sphingomyelin catabolism. Using microarray technology to study 17 brain regions from subjects with varying severity of AD and dementia we detected multiple gene expression abnormalities of the key enzymes that control sphingolipid metabolism. These changes were correlated with the progression of clinical dementia. The upregulation of gene expression of the enzymes controlling synthesis de novo of Cer and the downregulation of the enzymes involved in glycosphingolipid synthesis was evident as early in disease progression as in mild dementia. Together these changes suggest a shift in sphingolipid metabolism towards accumulation of Cer, depletion of glycosphingolipids and the reduction of synthesis of the anti-apoptosis signaling lipid-sphingosine 1-phosphate as a function of disease progression. This disrupted balance within the sphingolipid metabolism may trigger signaling events promoting neurodegeneration across cortical regions. This potential mechanism may provide a link between lipid metabolism disturbance and AD.

17291370
Variations in oligodendrocyte-related gene expression across multiple cortical regions: implications for the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.
The disconnectivity syndrome hypothesis of schizophrenia suggests that communication between multiple brain circuits and regions may be disrupted. Microarray studies analysed gene expression in 15 different brain regions derived from 13 persons with schizophrenia and controls. The superior temporal gyrus, cingulate gyrus and hippocampus evidence the greatest numbers of abnormally expressed genes. Gene ontology categorization suggested that gene classes associated with oligodendrocytes and myelin function were among the most profoundly affected. qPCR and additional microarray studies have validated these oligodendrocyte- and myelin-associated findings in independent cohorts. At least some of the affected genes are associated with the regulation of axoglial contacts, axon calibre and the integrity of functional elements involved in signal propagation. The confluence of emerging evidence shows that myelination abnormalities are major components of the neurobiology of schizophrenia and suggest that re-evaluation of some long-held hypotheses and beliefs regarding the biological substrates of schizophrenia may be warranted.

16769157
Insulin degrading enzyme activity selectively decreases in the hippocampal formation of cases at high risk to develop Alzheimer's disease.
In this study we report that the membrane-bound, but not cytosolic insulin degrading enzyme (IDE) protein concentration and IDE activity are significantly decreased in the hippocampal formation of cases affected by mild cognitive impairment (MCI) which are at high risk to develop Alzheimer's disease (AD), relative to normal neurological controls. Membrane-bound IDE protein concentrations and activity in the hippocampal formation continued to decrease during the conversion from MCI to mild-severe AD. This selective decrease in hippocampal membrane-bound, but not cytosolic, IDE concentration and activity was tissue specific since no changes in either membrane-bound or cytosolic IDE were found in the occipital cortex of the same cases examined. Most interestingly, the decreased hippocampal membrane-bound IDE protein activity negatively correlated with brain beta-amyloid (Abeta)X-42 content in MCI and in AD brain. The study tentatively suggests that interventions aimed at promoting membrane-bound IDE activities in the brain of MCI cases may help to prevent the onset and possibly the progression into AD through mechanisms involving the clearance of monomeric Abeta from the brain.

21244352
Cholesterol and LDL Relate to Neuritic Plaques and to APOE4 Presence but Not to Neurofibrillary Tangles.
Elevated serum total cholesterol (TC) has been considered a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD), but conflicting results have confused understanding of the relationships of serum lipids to the presence of AD in the elderly. Methods: To clarify these issues, we evaluated correlations of admission TC, low-density (LDL) and high-density (HDL) cholesterol directly with the densities of Alzheimer hallmarks-neuritic plaques (NP) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT)--in nursing home residents (n=281). Results: Significant positive associations of TC and LDL with NP densities were found in both the neocortex (TC: r=0.151, p=0.013 and LDL: r=0.190, p=0.005) and the hippocampal/entorhinal (allocortical) region (TC: r=0.182, p=0.002 and LDL: r=0.203, p=0.003). Associations of HDL with NP were less strong but also significant. In contrast, after adjustment for confounders, no correlations of NFT with any lipid were significant.When subjects with any non-AD neuropathology (largely vascular) were excluded, the TC-plaque and LDL-plaque associations for the remaining "Pure AD" subgroup were consistently stronger than for the full sample. The TC- and LDL-plaque correlations were also stronger for the subgroup of 87 subjects with an APOE ?4 allele. Conclusions: The findings indicate that serum TC and LDL levels clearly relate to densities of NP, but not to densities of NFT. The stronger associations found in the subgroup that excluded all subjects with non-AD neuropathology suggest that cerebrovascular involvement does not explain these lipid-plaque relationships. Since the associations of TC/LDL with NP were particularly stronger in ?4 carriers, varying prevalence of this allele may explain some discrepancies among prior studies.

19228583
Less Alzheimer disease neuropathology in medicated hypertensive than nonhypertensive persons.
To test the hypothesis that use of antihypertensive medication is associated with lower Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology. This was a postmortem study of 291 brains limited to those with normal neuropathology or with uncomplicated AD neuropathology (i.e., without other dementia-associated neuropathology) in persons with or without hypertension (HTN) who were and were not treated with antihypertensive medications. Neuritic plaque (NP) and neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) densities, quantified in selected brain regions according to the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD) neuropathologic criteria, with additional cortical NP counts, yielded 24 neuropathologic regional measures or summaries. Medicated hypertension (HTN-med; n = 77), nonmedicated HTN (HTN-nomed; n = 42), and non-HTN (no-HTN; n = 172) groups were compared by analyses of variance. The HTN-med group had significantly less neuropathology than the no-HTN group. The no-HTN group averaged over 50% higher mean NP and NFT ratings, and double the mean NP count, of the HTN-med group. The HTN-nomed group had significantly more neuropathology than the HTN-med group, but not significantly less than the no-HTN group. There was substantially less Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology in the medicated hypertension group than the nonhypertensive group, which may reflect a salutary effect of antihypertensive medication against AD-associated neuropathology.

18765651
Insulin in combination with other diabetes medication is associated with less Alzheimer neuropathology.
To examine the association between treatment for diabetes and Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology. This postmortem study matched 124 subjects with diabetes to 124 without diabetes from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine Brain Bank, on age (mean = 81.2 + 9.3), sex (57.3% F), and severity of dementia (Clinical Dementia Rating [CDR] 2.4 + 1.7). Densities of neuritic plaques (NPs) and of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) were assessed in several neocortical regions and in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and amygdala. Diabetic subjects were classified according to their recorded lifetime antidiabetic medications: none (n = 29), insulin only (n = 49), diabetes medications other than insulin only (n = 28), or concomitant use of both insulin and any oral antidiabetic medications (n = 18). For each dependent variable, analysis of covariance controlling for age at death, sex, and CDR distinguished among the nondiabetic patients and four diabetic subgroups. There were differences among the five groups for NP ratings in the entorhinal cortex (p = 0.003), amygdala (p = 0.009), and overall NP (p = 0.014) as well as counts of NPs in all regions examined (p values ranging from 0.009 to 0.04). NP ratings in the hippocampus (p = 0.057) and the combined neocortical measure (p = 0.052) approached significance. In each analysis, the concomitant medication group had significantly fewer NPs (approximately 20%) than any of the other groups, which were relatively similar. No significant NFT differences were found. The results of this study suggest that the combination of insulin with other diabetes medication is associated with substantially lower neuritic plaque density consistent with the effects of both on the neurobiology of insulin.

17848916
Increased serotonin 2C receptor mRNA editing: a possible risk factor for suicide.
Suicide is a major public health problem with approximately 1 million victims each year worldwide. Up to 90% of adults who commit suicide have at least one psychiatric diagnosis such as major depression, bipolar disorder (BPD), schizophrenia (SZ), substance abuse or dependence. A question that has remained unanswered is whether the biological substrates of suicide are distinct from those of the psychiatric disorders in which it occurs. The serotonin 2C receptor (5-HT 2C R) has been implicated in depression and suicide. We, therefore, compared the frequencies of its mRNA editing variants in postmortem prefrontal cortical specimens from subjects who committed suicide or who died from other causes. All suicides occurred in the context of either SZ or BPD. The non-suicide cases included subjects with either SZ or BPD as well as subjects with no psychiatric diagnosis. We identified 5-HT 2CR mRNA editing variations that were associated with suicide but not with the comorbid psychiatric diagnoses, and were not influenced by demographic characteristics (age and sex) and alcohol or drug use. These variations consisted of a significant increase in the pool of mRNA variants (ACD and ABCD) that encode one of the most prevalent and highly edited isoforms of 5-HT 2C R, that is, VSV (Val156-Ser158-Val160). Because the VSV isoform of 5-HT 2C R exhibits low functional activity, an increase in its expression frequency may significantly influence the serotonergic regulation of the brain. Thus, at least in patients with SZ or BPD, overexpression of the VSV isoform in the prefrontal cortex may represent an additional risk factor for suicidal behavior.

