19908945
Kupffer cell activation by ambient air particulate matter exposure may exacerbate non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
Owing to increased obesity, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is now the most prevalent liver disease in the United States. NAFLD is considered a component of metabolic syndrome, a cluster of disorders that also includes diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, arteriosclerosis, and hypertension. Exposure to ambient air particulate matter with aerodynamic diameters < 2.5 microm (PM(2.5)) is a risk factor for arteriosclerosis and lung disease, but its effect on NAFLD is unknown. PM(2.5) induces pulmonary dysfunction via Toll-like receptor (TLR) activation on alveolar macrophages. TLR activation of Kupffer cells, resident hepatic macrophages, and subsequent pro-inflammatory cytokine production have been shown to play a key role in NAFLD progression. We hypothesized that PM(2.5) exposure is a significant risk factor for the progression of NAFLD. Thus, following exposure of male C57BL/6 mice fed high fat chow (HFC) to concentrated air particulate matter (CAPs) or filtered air for 6 weeks, progression of NAFLD was evaluated by standardized histological assessment of hepatic inflammation and fibrosis. In mice fed HFC, the hepatic inflammatory grade (3.00 +/- 0.00 vs. 1.50 +/- 0.71, P < 0.001) and fibrosis stage (1.00 +/- 0.00 vs. 0.60 +/- 0.52, P = 0.023) were both significantly higher in mice exposed to CAPs versus filtered air, respectively. Increased numbers of Kupffer cells contained PM in CAPs-exposed mice scores of (2.00 +/- 0.94 vs. 0.20 +/- 0.42, respectively, P < 0.001). PM exposure increased IL-6 secretion up to seven-fold in a dose-dependent manner by isolated wild-type but not TLR4(-/-) Kupffer cells (P < 0.050). In conclusion, ambient PM(2.5) exposure may be a significant risk factor for NAFLD progression.

19676005
Vaccination as a triggering event for autoimmune hepatitis.
The pathogenesis of autoimmune hepatitis entails complex interactions between triggering factors, autoantigens, genetic predisposition, and immunoregulatory networks. Implicated triggering factors are numerous and include toxins, medications, and infectious agents. In this article, we present a unique case of a 31-year-old woman with severe autoimmune hepatitis apparently abruptly triggered by vaccination. All evidence suggests this was an idiosyncratic response to either hepatitis A or yellow fever vaccination.

18456181
Recent advances in the epidemiology of primary biliary cirrhosis.
Since initial reports in the mid-1970s provided epidemiology data on primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), many studies have characterized the variable frequency of this disease in diverse populations worldwide and sought to identify associated risk factors. Recent research confirms earlier work suggesting that the incidence and prevalence of PBC are on the rise, although geographic variation persists. Analysis of familial and geographic clustering supports the hypothesis that development and progression of the disease hinge on a complex interplay between genetic and environmental risk factors. International clinical data systems are needed to advance PBC epidemiologic research. Given this complexity, international clinical data systems are needed to advance PBC epidemiologic research.

18452122
Cholestatic liver injury associated with whey protein and creatine supplements.
We present a case of acute cholestatic liver injury associated with the combination of whey protein and creatine supplements. The difficulty of diagnosing drug-induced liver injury is emphasized. The patient is a healthy, 27-year-old man who presented with painless jaundice. He had no occupational exposures to solvents, was not taking prescription medications, and did not use recreational drugs or alcohol. He was an enthusiastic weight-lifter and had been taking creatine for 8 to 9 months and whey protein supplements for 4 weeks prior to the development of symptoms. Laboratory tests revealed elevated total bilirubin (54.7 mg/dL) and alkaline phosphatase (436 U/L), minimally elevated transaminases, and a creatinine of 3.1 mg/dL. Serologic work-up was negative for viral hepatitis and autoimmune liver disease, and Wilson's disease was ruled out. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatogram was unremarkable, but a liver biopsy showed marked cholestasis with ductular proliferation. He had dramatic clinical improvement with intravenous fluids and discontinuation of the nutritional supplements. In patients with acute liver injury, clinicians should inquire about dietary supplement usage and consider immediate discontinuation of all unnecessary products. We describe a case of profound jaundice related to a commonly used and reportedly safe combination of such supplements.

18392679
Atorvastatin does not improve liver biochemistries or Mayo Risk Score in primary biliary cirrhosis.
Statin treatment reduces hypercholesterolemia and may be anti-inflammatory. Case reports noted decreased alkaline phosphatase and histological improvement following statin treatment in primary biliary cirrhosis. The objective of this study was to assess the long-term effects of statin treatment in primary biliary cirrhosis. A retrospective analysis compared clinical and biochemical data from 15 hypercholesterolemic individuals with primary biliary cirrhosis who were treated long-term with atorvastatin with an age and gender matched, primary biliary cirrhosis control group. A significant decrease in total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol (p < or = 0.002) was observed throughout atorvastatin treatment (median time 2.5 years). LDL-cholesterol levels in the control group were not significantly changed after 2 years (p > 0.050). No significant changes were noted in alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin and Mayo Risk Score in either group (p > 0.05). Long-term atorvastatin treatment reduced LDL-cholesterol in primary biliary cirrhosis, but there was no evidence of any anti-inflammatory effect.

18382859
Pathogenic role of environmental toxins in immune-mediated liver diseases.
Immune-mediated liver diseases contribute significantly to morbidity and mortality due to liver failure and the need for liver transplantation. The pathogenesis of the immune-mediated chronic liver diseases, primary sclerosing cholangitis, autoimmune hepatitis, and primary biliary cirrhosis, is poorly understood. Genetic susceptibility factors may play a role, but increasing attention is being given to the association between environmental factors and these diseases. The existence of such a relationship is supported by epidemiologic surveys, animal models, and geographic clustering analyses. Unearthing the cause of this association may provide insight into the pathogenesis of immune-mediated chronic liver diseases and autoimmunity.

18023559
Anti-CD16 autoantibodies and delayed phagocytosis of apoptotic cells in primary biliary cirrhosis.
Primary biliary cirrhosis is characterized by chronic hepatic inflammation and immune mediated apoptosis of bile duct epithelial cells. Delayed macrophage phagocytosis of opsonized apoptotic cells, noted in other autoimmune diseases, may promote inflammation. Recent studies suggest serum anti-CD16 autoantibodies contribute to impaired macrophage phagocytosis by blocking complement receptor 3 (CR3) signaling via CD16. Therefore, serum anti-CD16 levels and the ability of monocyte derived macrophages from individuals with PBC to phagocytosis apoptotic cells were compared to controls. The mean level of anti-CD16 IgM autoantibodies (0.86+/-0.62 v. 0.35+/-0.22, respectively, p=0.031) was increased in PBC compared to control sera, and mean PBC phagocytosis of opsonized apoptotic cells was significantly decreased compared to controls (23.9+/-12.2% v. 43.9+/-14.4%, respectively, p=0.020). However, PBC phagocytosis of opsonized apoptotic cells was not significantly affected by the presence or absence of autologous serum (20.8+/-13.5% v. 23.9+/-12.2%, respectively, p=0.560). PBC phagocytosis of opsonized apoptotic cells inversely correlated with CD16 (and CR3) expression levels on Day 5 after culture in the presence or absence of autologous serum (r=-0.546, p=0.033 and r=-0.519, p=0.042, respectively). Phagocytosis of non-opsonized apoptotic cells did not correlate with CD16 or CR3 expression (p>0.050). In conclusion, PBC macrophage phagocytosis of opsonized apoptotic cells is impaired, irrespective of serum factors and may increase hepatic inflammation.

17222534
T cell targeting and phagocytosis of apoptotic biliary epithelial cells in primary biliary cirrhosis.
Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is characterized by loss of tolerance against ubiquitously expressed mitochondrial autoantigens followed by biliary and salivary gland epithelial cell (BEC and SGEC) destruction by autoreactive T cells. It is unclear why BECs and SGECs are targeted. Previous work demonstrated that the reduced form of the major PBC autoantigen predominated in apoptotic BECs and SGECs as opposed to an oxidized form in other apoptotic cells. This led to the hypothesis that presentation of novel self-peptides from phagocytosed apoptotic BECs might contribute to BEC targeting by autoreactive T cells. The effect of autoantigen redox status on self-peptide formation was examined along with the phagocytic ability of BECs. Oxidation of PBC autoantigens first was shown to be due to protein S-glutathionylation of lipoyllysine residues. Absence of protein S-glutathionylation generated novel self-peptides and affected T cell recognition of a lipoyllysine containing peptide. Liver biopsy staining revealed BEC phagocytosis of apoptotic BECs (3.74+/-2.90% of BEC) was present in PBC (7 of 7 cases) but not in normal livers (0 of 3). BECs have the ability to present novel mitochondrial self-peptides derived from phagocytosed apoptotic BECs. Apoptotic cell phagocytosis by non-professional phagocytes may influence the tissue specificity of autoimmune diseases.

