21601913
Dietary baked milk accelerates the resolution of cow's milk allergy in children.
BACKGROUND: The majority (approximately 75%) of children with cow's milk allergy tolerate extensively heated (baked) milk products. Long-term effects of inclusion of dietary baked milk have not been reported. OBJECTIVE: We report on the outcomes of children who incorporated baked milk products into their diets. METHODS: Children evaluated for tolerance to baked milk (muffin) underwent sequential food challenges to baked cheese (pizza) followed by unheated milk. Immunologic parameters were measured at challenge visits. The comparison group was matched to active subjects (by using age, sex, and baseline milk-specific IgE levels) to evaluate the natural history of development of tolerance. RESULTS: Over a median of 37 months (range, 8-75 months), 88 children underwent challenges at varying intervals (range, 6-54 months). Among 65 subjects initially tolerant to baked milk, 39 (60%) now tolerate unheated milk, 18 (28%) tolerate baked milk/baked cheese, and 8 (12%) chose to avoid milk strictly. Among the baked milk-reactive subgroup (n = 23), 2 (9%) tolerate unheated milk, and 3 (13%) tolerate baked milk/baked cheese, whereas the majority (78%) avoid milk strictly. Subjects who were initially tolerant to baked milk were 28 times more likely to become unheated milk tolerant compared with baked milk-reactive subjects (P < .001). Subjects who incorporated dietary baked milk were 16 times more likely than the comparison group to become unheated milk tolerant (P < .001). Median casein IgG(4) levels in the baked milk-tolerant group increased significantly (P < .001); median milk IgE values did not change significantly. CONCLUSIONS: Tolerance of baked milk is a marker of transient IgE-mediated cow's milk allergy, whereas reactivity to baked milk portends a more persistent phenotype. The addition of baked milk to the diet of children tolerating such foods appears to accelerate the development of unheated milk tolerance compared with strict avoidance.

21565391
Reply.


21464708
Quality of life in food allergy.
The purpose of this review is to provide a review of studies examining health-related quality of life (HRQL) in food-allergic individuals, with an emphasis on publications since 2007. Over the past few years, an increasing number of studies have addressed the impact that food allergy has on HRQL. Many studies have used generic quality-of-life instruments to compare HRQL between food-allergic patients and healthy controls or between food-allergic patients and persons with other disease states. A significant achievement for this area of investigation is the existence of validated, disease-specific quality-of-life instruments for all age groups. These have been validated in multiple countries and translated into multiple languages. Food allergy clearly affects a patient's HRQL. With validated, disease-specific instruments to measure HRQL, researchers will be able to use HRQL as an end-point in therapeutic clinical trials, and clinicians will have a further aid in caring for patients suffering from food allergies.

21453813
Living with food allergy: allergen avoidance.
The primary treatment of food allergy is to avoid the culprit foods. This is a complex undertaking that requires education about reading the labels of manufactured products, understanding how to avoid cross-contact with allergens during food preparation, and communicating effectively with persons who are providing allergen-safe meals including relatives and restaurant personnel. Successful avoidance also requires a knowledge of nuances such as appropriate cleaning practices, an understanding of the risks of ingestion compared to skin contact or inhalation, that exposure could occur through unanticipated means such as through sharing utensils or passionate kissing, and that food may be a component of substances that are not ingested such as cosmetics, bath products, vaccines and medications. The authors review the necessary tools of avoidance that physicians and medical practitioners can use to guide their patients through the complexities of food avoidance.

21236480
Epidemiology of food allergy.
Adverse reactions to foods can occur for a variety of reasons, but a food allergy is caused by a specific immune response. Challenges to determine the prevalence of food allergy include misclassification, biased participation, lack of simple diagnostic tests, rapid evolution of disease, large numbers of potential triggers, and varied clinical phenotypes. Nonetheless, it is clear that this is a common disorder, with studies suggesting a cumulative prevalence of 3% to 6%, representing a significant impact on quality of life and costs. The inclusion of mild reactions to fruits and vegetables could result in calculation of prevalence exceeding 10% in some regions. There are data from numerous studies to suggest an increase in prevalence, but methodologic concerns warrant caution. Prevalence varies by age, geographic location, and possibly race/ethnicity. Many childhood food allergies resolve. Population-based epidemiologic studies have generated numerous novel theories regarding risks, including modifiable factors such as components of the maternal and infant diet, obesity, and the timing of food introduction. Recent and ongoing studies provide insights on risk factors, prevalence, and natural course that may inform clinical trials to improve diagnosis, prevention, and treatment.

21190728
Advances in allergic skin disease, anaphylaxis, and hypersensitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and insects in 2010.
This review highlights some of the research advances in anaphylaxis; hypersensitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and insects; and allergic skin disease that were reported in the Journal in 2010. Key epidemiologic observations include an apparent increase in peanut allergy, with more than 1% of children affected, and increasing evidence that early food allergen exposure, rather than avoidance, might improve allergy outcomes. Advances in food allergy diagnosis include improved insights into prognosis and estimation of severity through component-resolved diagnostics and characterization of IgE binding to specific epitopes. Regarding treatment, oral and epicutaneous immunotherapy show promise. Studies of drug allergies show insights into pathophysiology, and studies on insect hypersensitivity reveal improved diagnostic methods. Genetic and functional studies have revealed the important role of epidermal differentiation products in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis. Cross-talk between the atopic immune response with the innate immune response have also been found to predispose to infection in patients with atopic dermatitis. New therapeutic approaches to control chronic urticaria have also been identified during the past year.

21144222
The diagnosis of food allergy.
Food allergy is increasingly common; however, there is a discrepancy between the large number of people who believe they or their children are affected and the actual number with true food allergies. It is therefore imperative that physicians evaluating patients with possible adverse reactions to foods understand the current modalities used to diagnose food allergies. Simple tests including skin-prick testing (SPT) and serum food-specific IgE testing are the most commonly used diagnostic tests to evaluate for IgE-mediated food reactions. However, these tests have pitfalls and their usefulness must be appreciated to avoid over- and underdiagnosis. A firm diagnosis is imperative because a misdiagnosis could lead to life-threatening reactions and overdiagnosis will lead to unnecessary elimination diets with nutritional and social implications. Physician-supervised oral food challenges (OFC) remain the gold standard for food allergy diagnosis; however, a careful medical history and simple tests can often provide a reliable diagnosis. In this review, we examine the usefulness and pitfalls of SPT used by allergists and serum food-specific IgE levels that are available to all practitioners. We also review the OFC as a diagnostic modality in food allergy. Finally, we describe emerging tests, such as the basophil activation test, atopy patch testing, and component-resolved diagnostics, that may be of benefit in the future.

21055662
Development of a questionnaire to measure quality of life in adolescents with food allergy: the FAQL-teen.
Living with food allergies affects quality of life (QOL) and may be particularly problematic for teenagers. To develop a validated food allergy QOL assessment tool for US adolescents (FAQL-teen). Initial items were developed through expert opinion, literature review, and adolescent focus groups, resulting in an 88-question impact assessment questionnaire. This questionnaire was completed by 52 adolescents for effect scoring; final instrument questions were determined through analysis of effect scores. The final 17-item instrument was completed by 203 participants aged 13 to 19 years via an Internet link on the Food Allergy & Anaphylaxis Network Web site and via paper surveys distributed at a Food Allergy & Anaphylaxis Network conference. Items were scored on a 7-point Likert scale: 0 corresponded to "not troubled/limited," 3 to "moderately troubled/limited," and 6 to "extremely troubled/limited." Areas most troubling included limitations on social activities (score, 2.7), not being able to eat what others were eating (score, 2.7), and limited choice of restaurants (score, 3.9). Instrument validation steps showed strong internal validity (Cronbach ? = .9). The instrument discriminated by disease severity: adolescents with a history of anaphylaxis had significantly lower QOL (higher scores) than did those without a history of anaphylaxis (P = .003). While developing a food allergy QOL assessment tool for US adolescents (FAQL-teen), we identified multiple social and emotional concerns that could be targeted for adolescent counseling. This instrument is internally valid and has the ability to discriminate, making it a useful tool in adolescent food allergy studies.

21035177
Maternal consumption of peanut during pregnancy is associated with peanut sensitization in atopic infants.
Peanut allergy is typically severe, lifelong, and prevalent. To identify factors associated with peanut sensitization. We evaluated 503 infants 3 to 15 months of age (mean, 9.4 months) with likely milk or egg allergy but no previous diagnosis of peanut allergy. A total of 308 had experienced an immediate allergic reaction to cow's milk and/or egg, and 204 had moderate to severe atopic dermatitis and a positive allergy test to milk and/or egg. A peanut IgE level ?5 kU(A)/L was considered likely indicative of peanut allergy. A total of 140 (27.8%) infants had peanut IgE levels ?5 kU(A)/L. Multivariate analysis including clinical, laboratory, and demographic variables showed frequent peanut consumption during pregnancy (odds ratio, 2.9; 95% CI, 1.7-4.9; P < .001), IgE levels to milk (P = .001) and egg (P < .001), male sex (P = .02), and nonwhite race (P = .02) to be the primary factors associated with peanut IgE ?5 kUA/L. Frequency of peanut consumption during pregnancy and breast-feeding showed a dose-response association with peanut IgE ?5 kU(A)/L, but only consumption during pregnancy was a significant predictor. Among 71 infants never breast-fed, frequent consumption of peanut during pregnancy was strongly associated with peanut IgE ?5 kU(A)/L (odds ratio, 4.99, 95% CI, 1.69-14.74; P < .004). In this cohort of infants with likely milk or egg allergy, maternal ingestion of peanut during pregnancy was strongly associated with a high level of peanut sensitization.

20934627
Bullying among pediatric patients with food allergy.
There are reports of children and teens with food allergy being harassed because of their food allergy, yet no study to date has attempted to characterize these occurrences. To determine the presence and characteristics of bullying, teasing, or harassment of food-allergic patients owing to their food allergies. Questionnaires were completed by food-allergic teens and adults and by parents of food-allergic children. A total of 353 surveys were completed. Because most food-allergic individuals were children, most surveys were completed by parents of food-allergic individuals. The ages of the food-allergic individuals were younger than 4 years (25.9%), 4 to 11 years (55.0%), 12 to 18 years (12.5%), 19 to 25 years (2.6%), and older than 25 years (4.0%). Including all age groups, 24% of respondents reported that the food-allergic individual had been bullied, teased, or harassed because of food allergy. Of those who were bullied, teased, or harassed, 86% reported multiple episodes. Eighty-two percent of episodes occurred at school, and 80% were perpetrated mainly by classmates. Twenty-one percent of those who were bullied, teased, or harassed reported the perpetrators to be teachers or school staff. Overall, 79% of those bullied, teased, or harassed attributed this solely to food allergy. Of those bullied, 57% described physical events, such as being touched by an allergen and having an allergen thrown or waved at them, and several reported intentional contamination of their food with allergen. Bullying, teasing, and harassment of children with food allergy seems to be common, frequent, and repetitive. These actions pose emotional and physical risks that should be addressed in food allergy management.

20922509
Diagnosis of food allergy: epicutaneous skin tests, in vitro tests, and oral food challenge.
Food allergy is becoming an increasingly common diagnosis. Because of this increase in prevalence, it is imperative that physicians evaluating patients with possible adverse reactions to foods understand the currently available assays and how they should best be used to accurately diagnose the disease. Simple tests such as skin prick testing (SPT) and serum food-specific IgE testing are the most commonly used diagnostic tests to evaluate for IgE-mediated food reactions. However, these tests, which measure sensitization and not clinical allergy, are not without pitfalls, and their utility must be appreciated to avoid over- and underdiagnosis. Although the physician-supervised oral food challenge remains the gold standard for food allergy diagnosis, a careful medical history paired with SPT and serum food-specific IgE testing often can provide a reliable diagnosis. In this review, we examine the usefulness and pitfalls of SPT and serum food-specific IgE levels, as well as examine atopy patch testing and other emerging tests, such as component-resolved diagnostics and the basophil activation test. Finally, we describe the use of the double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food challenge as the current gold standard for food allergy diagnosis.

20579608
Food allergy educational needs of pediatric dietitians: a survey by the Consortium of Food Allergy Research.
To determine pediatric dietitians' self-reported proficiency, educational needs, and preferences regarding food allergy (FA) management. An Internet-based, anonymous survey was distributed to the Pediatric Nutrition Practice Group (PNPG) of the American Dietetic Association. Respondents (n = 311) were registered dietitians and members of the PNPG. Results are presented using descriptive statistics. Chi-square tests were applied for subgroup analyses. Percentage responses were calculated per question based on the number of respondents answering the question. On a 4-point scale of proficiency ("high," "moderate," "low," and "none"), respondents primarily rated themselves "moderate" for educating families, creating diets, and evaluating safe food items, and "low" for creating diagnostic food challenges. Education was primarily self-taught (75%). Preferences for future resources included handbooks (77%) and Web-based instructional programs (53%). On a 4-point scale ("very" to "not at all" needed) among practices that included >10% patients with FA, ratings of "very" were defined as need resources to update FA knowledge (87%) and need for a FA "tool kit" (84%). Pediatric dietitians manage FA for a substantial patient base although their self-reported proficiency is overall only moderate. Dietitians would prefer and likely benefit from Internet-accessible management handbooks and patient handouts.

20477008
Immunologic therapeutic approaches in the management of food allergy.
Food allergy affects up to 6% of children and 3-4% of adults in Westernized countries, and is the most common cause of outpatient anaphylaxis in most studies. The mainstay of treatment is strict avoidance of the offending allergens and education regarding the use of emergency medication in cases of accidental ingestions or exposures. While these approaches are generally effective, there are no definitive treatments that cure or provide long-term remission from food allergy. However, with recent advances in characterizing food allergens and understanding humoral and cellular immune responses in food allergy, several therapeutic strategies are being investigated. Potential treatments include allergen-specific immunotherapy as well as allergen-nonspecific approaches to downregulate the overall allergic response in food-allergic individuals.

20462634
US prevalence of self-reported peanut, tree nut, and sesame allergy: 11-year follow-up.
Allergy to peanuts and tree nuts (TNs) is the leading cause of fatal allergic reactions in the United States, and the prevalence appears to be increasing. We sought to determine the US prevalence of self-reported peanut, TN, and sesame allergy in 2008 and compare results with comparable surveys conducted in 1997 and 2002. A nationwide, cross-sectional, random telephone survey for peanut and TN allergy was conducted with a previously used questionnaire, with additional questions about sesame. A total of 5,300 households (13,534 subjects) were surveyed (participation rate, 42% vs 52% in 2002 and 67% in 1997). Peanut allergy, TN allergy, or both was reported by 1.4% of subjects (95% CI, 1.2% to 1.6%) compared with 1.2% in 2002 and 1.4% in 1997. For adults, the prevalence was 1.3% (95% CI, 1.1% to 1.6%), which was not significantly different from prior surveys. However, the prevalence of peanut or TN allergy for children younger than 18 years was 2.1% (95% CI, 1.6% to 2.7%) compared with 1.2% in 2002 (P = .007) and 0.6% in 1997 (P < .001). The prevalence of peanut allergy in children in 2008 was 1.4% (95% CI, 1.0% to 1.9%) compared with 0.8% in 2002 (P = not significant) and 0.4% in 1997 (P < .0001). The prevalence of childhood TN allergy increased significantly across the survey waves (1.1% in 2008, 0.5% in 2002, and 0.2% in 1997). Sesame allergy was reported by 0.1% (95% CI, 0.0% to 0.2%). Although caution is required in comparing surveys, peanut allergy, TN allergy, or both continue to be reported by more than 1% of the US population (eg, >3 million subjects) and appear to be increasingly reported among children over the past decade. Sesame allergy is reported much less commonly.

20451041
Immunologic features of infants with milk or egg allergy enrolled in an observational study (Consortium of Food Allergy Research) of food allergy.
Immune features of infants with food allergy have not been delineated. We sought to explore the basic mechanisms responsible for food allergy and identify biomarkers, such as skin prick test (SPT) responses, food-specific IgE levels, and mononuclear cell responses, in a cohort of infants with likely milk/egg allergy at increased risk of peanut allergy. Infants aged 3 to 15 months were enrolled with a positive SPT response to milk or egg and either a corresponding convincing clinical history of allergy to milk or egg or moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis. Infants with known peanut allergy were excluded. Overall, 512 infants (67% male) were studied, with 308 (60%) having a history of a clinical reaction. Skin test responses, detectable food-specific IgE, or both revealed sensitization as follows: milk, 78%; egg, 89%; and peanut, 69%. SPT responses and food-specific IgE levels were discrepant for peanut (15% for IgE > or = 0.35 kU(A)/L and negative SPT response vs 8% for positive SPT response and IgE <0.35 kU(A)/L, P = .001). Mononuclear cell allergen stimulation screening for CD25, cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CISH), forkhead box protein 3 (FOXP3), GATA3, IL10, IL4, IFNG, and T-box transcription factor (TBET) expression by using casein, egg white, and peanut revealed that only allergen-induced IL4 expression was significantly increased in those with clinical allergy to milk (compared with nonallergic subjects) and in those sensitized to peanut, despite the absence of an increase in GATA3 mRNA expression. Infants with likely milk/egg allergy are at considerably high risk of having increased peanut-specific IgE levels (potential allergy). Peanut-specific serum IgE levels were a more sensitive indicator of sensitization than SPT responses. Allergen-specific IL4 expression might be a marker of allergic risk. Absence of an increase in GATA3 mRNA expression suggests that allergen-specific IL-4 might not be of T-cell origin.

20109740
Advances in allergic skin disease, anaphylaxis, and hypersensitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and insects in 2009.
This review highlights some of the research advances in anaphylaxis and hypersensitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and insects, as well as advances in allergic skin disease that were reported in the Journal in 2009. Among key epidemiologic observations, several westernized countries report that more than 1% of children have peanut allergy, and there is some evidence that environmental exposure to peanut is a risk factor. The role of regulatory T cells, complement, platelet-activating factor, and effector cells in the development and expression of food allergy were explored in several murine models and human studies. Delayed anaphylaxis to mammalian meats appears to be related to IgE binding to the carbohydrate moiety galactose-alpha-1,3-galactose, which also has implications for hypersensitivity to murine mAb therapeutics containing this oligosaccharide. Oral immunotherapy studies continue to show promise for the treatment of food allergy, but determining whether the treatment causes tolerance (cure) or temporary desensitization remains to be explored. Increased baseline serum tryptase levels might inform the risk of venom anaphylaxis and might indicate a risk for mast cell disorders in persons who have experienced such episodes. Reduced structural and immune barrier function contribute to local and systemic allergen sensitization in patients with atopic dermatitis, as well as increased propensity of skin infections in these patients. The use of increased doses of nonsedating antihistamines and potential usefulness of omalizumab for chronic urticaria was highlighted. These exciting advances reported in the Journal can improve patient care today and provide insights on how we can improve the diagnosis and treatment of these allergic diseases in the future.

20042231
Food allergy.
Adverse immune responses to foods affect approximately 5% of young children and 3% to 4% of adults in westernized countries and appear to have increased in prevalence. Food-induced allergic reactions are responsible for a variety of symptoms and disorders involving the skin and gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts and can be attributed to IgE-mediated and non-IgE-mediated (cellular) mechanisms. Genetic disposition and environmental factors might abrogate oral tolerance, leading to food allergy. Disease outcomes are influenced by the characteristics of the immune response and of the triggering allergen. Diagnosis is complicated by the observation that detection of food-specific IgE (sensitization) does not necessarily indicate clinical allergy. Therefore diagnosis requires a careful medical history, laboratory studies, and, in many cases, an oral food challenge to confirm a diagnosis. Novel diagnostic methods, including ones that focus on immune responses to specific food proteins or epitopes of specific proteins, are under study. Currently, management of food allergies consists of educating the patient to avoid ingesting the responsible allergen and to initiate therapy (eg, with injected epinephrine for anaphylaxis) in case of an unintended ingestion. Improved therapeutic strategies under study include oral and sublingual immunotherapy, Chinese herbal medicine, anti-IgE antibodies, and modified vaccines.

20004784
Epinephrine treatment is infrequent and biphasic reactions are rare in food-induced reactions during oral food challenges in children.
Data about epinephrine use and biphasic reactions in childhood food-induced anaphylaxis during oral food challenges are scarce. To determine the prevalence and risk factors of reactions requiring epinephrine and the rate of biphasic reactions during oral food challenges (OFCs) in children. Reaction details of positive OFCs in children between 1999 and 2007 were collected by using a computerized database. Selection of patients for OFCs was generally predicated on < or =50% likelihood of a positive challenge and a low likelihood of a severe reaction on the basis of the clinical history, specific IgE levels, and skin prick tests. A total of 436 of 1273 OFCs resulted in a reaction (34%). Epinephrine was administered in 50 challenges (11% of positive challenges, 3.9% overall) for egg (n = 15, 16% of positive OFCs to egg), milk (n = 14, 12%), peanut (n = 10, 26%), tree nuts (n = 4, 33%), soy (n = 3, 7%), wheat (n = 3, 9%), and fish (n = 1, 9%). Reactions requiring epinephrine occurred in older children (median, 7.9 vs 5.8 years; P < .001) and were more often caused by peanuts (P = .006) compared with reactions not treated with epinephrine. There was no difference in the sex, prevalence of asthma, history of anaphylaxis, specific IgE level, skin prick tests, or amount of food administered. Two doses of epinephrine were required in 3 of 50 patients (6%) reacting to wheat, cow's milk, and pistachio. There was 1 (2%) biphasic reaction. No reaction resulted in life-threatening respiratory or cardiovascular compromise. Older age and reactions to peanuts were risk factors for anaphylaxis during oral food challenges. Reactions requiring multiple doses of epinephrine and biphasic reactions were infrequent.

19596145
Audit of manufactured products: use of allergen advisory labels and identification of labeling ambiguities.
The Food Allergy Labeling and Consumer Protection Act became effective January 1, 2006, and mandates disclosure of the 8 major allergens in plain English and as a source of ingredients in the ingredient statement. It does not regulate advisory labels. We sought to determine the frequency and language used in voluntary advisory labels among commercially available products and to identify labeling ambiguities affecting consumers with allergy. Trained surveyors performed a supermarket survey of 20,241 unique manufactured food products (from an original assessment of 49,604 products) for use of advisory labels. A second detailed survey of 744 unique products evaluated additional labeling practices. Overall, 17% of 20,241 products surveyed contain advisory labels. Chocolate candy, cookies, and baking mixes were the 3 categories of 24 with the greatest frequency (> or = 40%). Categorically, advisory warnings included "may contain" (38%), "shared equipment" (33%), and "within plant" (29%). The subsurvey disclosed 25 different types of advisory terminology. Nonspecific terms, such as "natural flavors" and "spices," were found on 65% of products and were not linked to a specific ingredient for 83% of them. Additional ambiguities included unclear sources of soy (lecithin vs protein), nondisclosure of sources of gelatin and lecithin, and simultaneous disclosure of "contains" and "may contain" for the same allergen, among others. Numerous products have advisory labeling and ambiguities that present challenges to consumers with food allergy. Additional allergen labeling regulation could improve safety and quality of life for individuals with food allergy.

19500710
Work Group report: oral food challenge testing.
Oral food challenges are procedures conducted by allergists/immunologists to make an accurate diagnosis of immediate, and occasionally delayed, adverse reactions to foods. The timing of the challenge is carefully chosen based on the individual patient history and the results of skin prick tests and food specific serum IgE values. The type of the challenge is determined by the history, the age of the patient, and the likelihood of encountering subjective reactions. The food challenge requires preparation of the patient for the procedure and preparation of the office for the organized conduct of the challenge, for a careful assessment of the symptoms and signs and the treatment of reactions. The starting dose, the escalation of the dosing, and the intervals between doses are determined based on experience and the patient's history. The interpretation of the results of the challenge and arrangements for follow-up after a challenge are important. A negative oral food challenge result allows introduction of the food into the diet, whereas a positive oral food challenge result provides a sound basis for continued avoidance of the food.

19203656
Advances in allergic skin disease, anaphylaxis, and hypersensitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and insects in 2008.
This review highlights some of the research advances in anaphylaxis, and hypersensitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and insects and in allergic skin disease that were reported in the Journal in 2008. Key epidemiologic observations include a rise in anaphylaxis in a population-based study and lower rates of peanut allergy in Israel, where infants consume peanut early compared with the United Kingdom, where dietary introduction is generally delayed. Advances in food allergy diagnosis include IgE epitope mapping that discloses the likelihood and severity of allergy; studies correlating likelihood of clinical reactivity on the basis of food-specific IgE to sesame, peanut, milk, and tree nuts; and an observation that a low baseline angiotensin-converting enzyme level may be associated with having pharyngeal edema during a reaction. Molecular, immunologic, and genetic studies are discerning pathways that are key in development of food allergy, identifying new modalities to interrupt mast cell degranulation, and elucidating risks associated with penicillin allergy. Regarding treatment, clinical studies show a majority of children with milk and egg allergy tolerate these proteins in modest amounts when they are extensively heated in baked goods, and studies show promise for oral immunotherapy to treat milk allergy and sublingual immunotherapy for honey bee venom hypersensitivity. The importance of skin barrier dysfunction has continued to be highlighted in the pathophysiology of atopic dermatitis (AD). Research has also continued to identify immunologic defects that contribute to the propensity of patients with AD to develop viral and bacterial infection. New therapeutic approaches to AD, urticaria, and angioedema have been reported including use of probiotics, biologics, vitamin D, and skin barrier creams.

18851876
Immunologic changes in children with egg allergy ingesting extensively heated egg.
Prior studies have suggested that heated egg might be tolerated by some children with egg allergy. We sought to confirm tolerance of heated egg in a subset of children with egg allergy, to evaluate clinical and immunologic predictors of heated egg tolerance, to characterize immunologic changes associated with continued ingestion of heated egg, and to determine whether a diet incorporating heated egg is well tolerated. Subjects with documented IgE-mediated egg allergy underwent physician-supervised oral food challenges to extensively heated egg (in the form of a muffin and a waffle), with tolerant subjects also undergoing regular egg challenges (in a form of scrambled egg or French toast). Heated egg-tolerant subjects incorporated heated egg into their diets. Skin prick test wheal diameters and egg white, ovalbumin, and ovomucoid IgE levels, as well as ovalbumin and ovomucoid IgG4 levels, were measured at baseline for all subjects and at 3, 6, and 12 months for those tolerant of heated egg. Sixty-four of 117 subjects tolerated heated egg, 23 tolerated regular egg, and 27 reacted to heated egg. Heated egg-reactive subjects had larger skin test wheals and greater egg white-specific, ovalbumin-specific, and ovomucoid-specific IgE levels compared with heated egg- and egg-tolerant subjects. Continued ingestion of heated egg was associated with decreased skin test wheal diameters and ovalbumin-specific IgE levels and increased ovalbumin-specific and ovomucoid-specific IgG4 levels. The majority of subjects with egg allergy were tolerant of heated egg. Continued ingestion of heated egg was well tolerated and associated with immunologic changes that paralleled the changes observed with the development of clinical tolerance to regular egg.

18828521
Immunotherapy for food and latex allergy.


18826650
Development of a food allergy education resource for primary care physicians.
Food allergy is estimated to affect 3-4% of adults in the US, but there are limited educational resources for primary care physicians. The goal of this study was to develop and pilot a food allergy educational resource based upon a needs survey of non-allergist healthcare providers. A survey was undertaken to identify educational needs and preferences for providers, with a focus on physicians caring for adults and teenagers, including emergency medicine providers. The results of the survey were used to develop a teaching program that was subsequently piloted on primary care and emergency medicine physicians. Knowledge base tests and satisfaction surveys were administered to determine the effectiveness of the educational program. Eighty-two physicians (response rate, 65%) completed the needs assessment survey. Areas of deficiency and educational needs identified included: identification of potentially life-threatening food allergies, food allergy diagnosis, and education of patients about treatment (food avoidance and epinephrine use). Small group, on-site training was the most requested mode of education. A slide set and narrative were developed to address the identified needs. Twenty-six separately enrolled participants were administered the teaching set. Pre-post knowledge base scores increased from a mean of 38% correct to 64% correct (p < 0.001). Ability to correctly demonstrate the use of epinephrine self injectors increased significantly. Nearly all participants (>95%) indicated that the teaching module increased their comfort with recognition and management of food allergy. Our pilot food allergy program, developed based upon needs assessments, showed strong participant satisfaction and educational value.

18729729
Food allergy: recent advances in pathophysiology and treatment.
Food allergies, defined as an adverse immune response to food proteins, affect as many as 6% of young children and 3%-4% of adults in westernized countries, and their prevalence appears to be rising. In addition to well-recognized acute allergic reactions and anaphylaxis triggered by IgE antibody-mediated immune responses to food proteins, there is an increasing recognition of cell-mediated disorders such as eosinophilic gastroenteropathies and food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome. We are gaining an increasing understanding of the pathophysiology of food allergic disorders and are beginning to comprehend how these result from a failure to establish or maintain normal oral tolerance. Many food allergens have been characterized at a molecular level, and this knowledge, combined with an increasing appreciation of the nature of humoral and cellular immune responses resulting in allergy or tolerance, is leading to novel therapeutic approaches. Currently, management of food allergies consists of educating the patient to avoid ingesting the responsible allergen and initiating therapy if ingestion occurs. However, numerous strategies for definitive treatment are being studied, including sublingual/oral immunotherapy, injection of anti-IgE antibodies, cytokine/anticytokine therapies, Chinese herbal therapies, and novel immunotherapies utilizing engineered proteins and strategic immunomodulators.

18620743
Tolerance to extensively heated milk in children with cow's milk allergy.
Cow's milk allergy is the most common childhood food allergy. Previously we noted that children who outgrew their milk allergy had milk-specific IgE antibodies primarily directed against conformational epitopes; those with persistent milk allergy also had IgE antibodies directed against specific sequential epitopes. Because high temperature largely destroys conformational epitopes, we hypothesized that some children with milk allergy would tolerate extensively heated (baked) milk products. Children with milk allergy were challenged with heated milk products; heated milk-tolerant subjects were subsequently challenged with unheated milk. Heated milk-tolerant, unheated milk-reactive subjects ingested heated milk products for 3 months and were then re-evaluated. Immune responses were assessed in all subjects; growth and intestinal permeability were followed in heated milk-tolerant subjects. One hundred children (mean age, 7.5 years; range, 2.1-17.3 years) underwent heated milk challenges. Sixty-eight subjects tolerated extensively heated milk only, 23 reacted to heated milk, and 9 tolerated both heated and unheated milk. Heated milk-reactive subjects had significantly larger skin prick test wheals and higher milk-specific and casein-specific IgE levels than other groups. At 3 months, subjects ingesting heated milk products had significantly smaller skin prick test wheals and higher casein-IgG(4) compared with baseline; other immunologic parameters, growth, and intestinal permeability were not significantly different. Heated milk-reactive subjects had more severe symptoms during heated milk challenge than heated milk-tolerant subjects experienced during their unheated milk challenge. The majority (75%) of children with milk allergy tolerate heated milk.

18547626
Use of multiple doses of epinephrine in food-induced anaphylaxis in children.
Food allergy is the most common cause of anaphylaxis outside the hospital setting. We sought to determine the rate, circumstances, and risk factors for repeated doses of epinephrine in the treatment of food-induced anaphylaxis in children. Anonymous questionnaires were distributed to families of children with food allergies during allergy outpatient visits to a food allergy referral center. Demographic information, allergy and reaction history, and details regarding the last 2 anaphylactic reactions requiring epinephrine were collected. A total of 413 questionnaires were analyzed. Seventy-eight children (median, 4.5 years of age; range, 0.5-17.5 years) reported 95 reactions for which epinephrine was administered. Two doses were administered in 12 (13%) and 3 doses in an additional 6 (6%) reactions treated with epinephrine. Peanut, tree nuts, and cow's milk were responsible for >75% of reactions requiring epinephrine. Patients receiving multiple doses of epinephrine more often had asthma (P = .027) than children receiving a single dose. The amount of food ingested or a delay in the initial administration of epinephrine were not risk factors for receiving multiple doses. The second dose of epinephrine was administered by a health care professional in 94% of reactions. In this referral population of children and adolescents with multiple food allergies, 19% of food-induced anaphylactic reactions were treated with more than 1 dose of epinephrine. Prospective studies are necessary to identify risk factors for severe anaphylaxis and to establish rational guidelines for prescribing multiple epinephrine autoinjectors for children with food allergy.

18325575
Advances in allergic skin disease, anaphylaxis, and hypersensitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and insects in 2007.
This review highlights some of the research advances in allergic skin disease, anaphylaxis, and hypersensitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and insects that were reported primarily in the Journal in 2007. Advances in diagnosis include possible biomarkers for anaphylaxis, improved understanding of the relevance of food-specific serum IgE tests, identification of possibly discriminatory T-cell responses for drug allergy, and an elucidation of irritant responses for vaccine allergy diagnostic skin tests. Mechanistic studies are discerning T-cell and cytokine responses central to eosinophilic gastroenteropathies and food allergy, including the identification of multiple potential therapeutic targets. Regarding treatment, clinical studies of oral immunotherapy and allergen vaccination strategies show promise, whereas several clinical studies raise questions about whether oral allergen avoidance reduces atopic risks and whether probiotics can prevent or treat atopic disease. The importance of skin barrier dysfunction has been highlighted in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis (AD), particularly as it relates to allergen sensitization and eczema severity. Research has also continued to identify immunologic defects that contribute to the propensity of patients with AD to have viral and bacterial infections. New therapeutic approaches to AD, urticaria, and angioedema have been reported, including use of sublingual immunotherapy, anti-IgE, and a kallikrein inhibitor.

17873749
Multiple exudative ulcers and pseudopolyps in allergic eosinophilic gastroenteritis that responded to dietary therapy.


17689596
Peanut allergy: emerging concepts and approaches for an apparent epidemic.
Peanut allergy is typically lifelong, often severe, and potentially fatal. Because reactions can occur from small amounts, the allergy presents patients with significant obstacles to avoid allergic reactions. In North America and the United Kingdom, prevalence rates among schoolchildren are now in excess of 1%, framing an increasing public health concern and raising research questions about environmental, immunologic, and genetic factors that may influence outcomes of peanut allergy. This review focuses on recent observations that continue to question the influences of maternal and infant diet on outcomes of peanut allergy, and explore how peanut may be uniquely suited to induce an allergic response. We highlight studies that affect current diagnosis, management, and the nature of advice that can be provided to patients, including the utility of diagnostic tests, doses that elicit reactions, characteristics of reactions from exposure, issues of cross-reactivity, concerns about peanut contamination of manufactured goods, and the natural course of the allergy. Clinical, molecular, and immunologic advances are reviewed, highlighting research discoveries that influence strategies for improved diagnosis, prevention, and treatment. Among the therapeutic strategies reviewed are sublingual and oral immunotherapy, anti-IgE, Chinese herbal medicine, and vaccine strategies.

17613633
Food allergy as a risk factor for asthma morbidity in adults.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the relationship between food allergy and asthma morbidity in adults. We interviewed a cohort of persistent asthmatics from an inner-city clinic. Allergies to food were assessed by patient report of convincing symptoms of acute allergic reactions. Outcome variables included health resource utilization and medication use. The prevalence of allergy to fish, peanut, tree-nut, shellfish, and seed allergies were 3%, 3%, 3%, 13%, and 1%. Patients with allergies to > 1 food had increased asthma hospitalizations, ED visits, and use of oral steroids (p < 0.05 for all comparisons). Specifically, allergy to fish was associated with a greater risk of health resource utilization and increased frequency of oral steroid use (p < or = 0.03 for all comparisons). Self-reported allergy to foods was associated with worse outcomes, suggesting that food allergy may be a risk factor for increased asthma morbidity in adults.

17458430
Food-allergy management from the perspective of restaurant and food establishment personnel.
Restaurant and food establishment dining poses dangers for food-allergic consumers. To identify, from the restaurant's perspective, factors that affect providing allergen-safe meals. A structured questionnaire was administered to a convenience sample of restaurant personnel. Participants included 100 individuals (42 managers, 32 servers, 24 chefs, and 2 others) in 100 establishments (48 restaurants [17 continental, 19 Asian, and 12 Italian], 18 fast food, and 34 take-out [8 bakery, 13 ice cream, 9 Asian, and 4 pizza]). Food-allergy training was reported by 42% (76% apprenticing and 24% set program). On a 5-point Likert scale, a rating of "very" or "somewhat" comfortable was selected by 72% for providing a safe meal, 70% for "guaranteeing" a safe meal, and 47% for managing a food-allergy emergency. Regarding knowledge questions, 24% indicated that consuming a small amount of allergen would be safe, 35% believed that fryer heat would destroy allergens, 54% considered a buffet safe if kept "clean," and 25% thought that removing an allergen from a finished meal (eg, taking off nuts) was safe. More than 80% recognized peanut, milk, and seafood as major allergens (61% recognized egg). In practice, 58% indicated having a plan in place in the event of a reaction, and 62% had a plan to provide safe meals. An interest in further training was expressed by 61% of participants. The restaurant personnel surveyed expressed a relatively high comfort level in providing safe meals to allergic consumers, but there are deficits in their knowledge base, indicating the need for more training and consumer caution.

17412401
Advances in allergic skin disease, anaphylaxis, and hypersensitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and insects.
This review highlights some of the research advances in anaphylaxis and hypersensitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and insects and in allergic skin disease that were reported primarily in the Journal in 2006. Advances in diagnosis include identification of food proteins to which IgE binding is associated with severe reactions; elucidation of diagnostic relationships of skin prick test wheal size with outcomes of egg, tree nut, and sesame allergy; evaluation of the diagnostic utility of atopy patch testing for food; and the observation that yellow jacket sting outcomes are influenced by species. Mechanistic observations include the following: heating of birch pollen-related foods disrupts IgE binding but not T-cell epitopes; a simple imbalance of T(H)1/T(H)2 response does not explain variations in clinical expression of peanut allergy; and elucidation of the role of dendritic cells in drug hypersensitivity. With regard to treatment, a rapidly disintegrating epinephrine tablet showed promise for sublingual treatment of anaphylaxis, RNA interference techniques showed promise in creating lower-allergenic foods, and anti-IL-5 showed promise for treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis. Progress in our understanding of the immunology and the etiology of skin barrier dysfunction in atopic dermatitis has also been made. These observations will likely contribute toward optimizing management of these common allergic disorders.

