21538048
Establishment of fibrillin-deficient osteoprogenitor cell lines identifies molecular abnormalities associated with extracellular matrix perturbation of osteogenic differentiation.
Fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 are structural components of the extracellular matrix which are also involved in modulating local TGF? and BMP bioavailability. Loss of fibrillin-1 or fibrillin-2 is associated with perturbed osteoblast maturation principally as the result of unbalanced TGF? and BMP signaling. Here, we demonstrated that stable expression of small hairpin RNAs against fibrillin-1(Fbn1) or fibrillin-2 (Fbn2) transcripts in the clonal osteoprogenitor cell line Kusa-A1 led to the same phenotypic and molecular manifestations as germline Fbn1- or Fbn2-null mutations in primary calvarial osteoblast cultures. Proof-of-concept experiments are also presented showing that Fbn1- or Fbn2-silenced Kusa-A1 cell lines are suitable models to identify candidate determinants of osteogenesis which are under the control of extracellular microfibrils. Specific findings included: the inference of a potential role for fibrillin-1-mediated cell-matrix interactions in regulating Kusa-A1 proliferation; the possibility of fibrillin-2 involvement in modulating the activity of transcription factor Runx2 by restricting microRNA expression and/or processing; and the suggestion that fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 influence Notch signaling indirectly by differentially regulating BMP signaling. Collectively, the data reiterated the notion that fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 exert opposite effects on osteoblast differentiation through the discrete modulation of a broad network of interacting signaling molecules.

21440062
Material and mechanical properties of bones deficient for fibrillin-1 or fibrillin-2 microfibrils.
The contribution of non-collagenous components of the extracellular matrix to bone strength is largely undefined. Here we report that deficiency of fibrillin-1 or fibrillin-2 microfibrils causes distinct changes in bone material and mechanical properties. Morphometric examination of mice with hypomorphic or null mutations in fibrillin-1 or fibrillin-2, respectively, revealed appreciable differences in the postnatal shaping and growth of long bones. Fourier transform infrared imaging spectroscopy indicated that fibrillin-1 plays a predominantly greater role than fibrillin-2 in determining the material properties of bones. Biomechanical tests demonstrated that fibrillin-2 exerts a greater positive influence on the mechanical properties of bone than fibrillin-1 assemblies. Published evidence indirectly supports the notion that the above findings are mostly, if not exclusively, related to the differential control of TGF? family signaling by fibrillin proteins. Our study therefore advances our understanding of the role that extracellular microfibrils play in bone physiology and implicitly, in the pathogenesis of bone loss in human diseases caused by mutations in fibrillin-1 or -2.

21362163
Ha-Ras stabilization mediates pro-fibrotic signals in dermal fibroblasts.
ABSTRACT: Scleroderma (systemic sclerosis; SSc) is a clinically heterogeneous and often lethal acquired disorder of the connective tissue that is characterized by vascular, immune/inflammatory and fibrotic manifestations. Tissue fibrosis is the main cause of morbidity and mortality in SSc and an unmet medical challenge, mostly because of our limited understanding of the molecular factors and signalling events that trigger and sustain disease progression. Recent evidence has correlated skin fibrosis in SSc with stabilization of proto-oncogene Ha-Ras secondary to auto-antibody stimulation of reactive oxygen species production. The goal of the present study was to explore the molecular connection between Ha-Ras stabilization and collagen I production, the main read-out of fibrogenesis, in a primary dermal fibroblast culture system that replicates the early stages of disease progression in SSc. Forced expression of proto-oncogene Ha-Ras in dermal fibroblasts demonstrated the promotion of an immediate collagen I up-regulation, as evidenced by enhanced activity of a collagen I-driven luciferase reporter plasmid and increased accumulation of endogenous collagen I proteins. Moreover, normal levels of Tgf? transcripts and active transforming growth factor-beta (TGF?) implied Ha-Ras stimulation of the canonical Smad2/3 signalling pathway independently of TGF? production or activation. Heightened Smad2/3 signalling was furthermore correlated with greater Smad3 phosphorylation and Smad3 protein accumulation, suggesting that Ha-Ras may target both Smad2/3 activation and turnover. Additional in vitro evidence excluded a contribution of ERK1/2 signalling to improper Smad3 activity and collagen I production in cells that constitutively express Ha-Ras. Our study shows for the first time that constitutively elevated Ha-Ras protein levels can directly stimulate Smad2/3 signalling and collagen I accumulation independently of TGF? neo-synthesis and activation. This finding therefore implicates the Ha-Ras pathway with the early onset of fibrosis in SSc and implicitly identifies new therapeutic targets in SSc.

21304473
Diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for small abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) affect 5% of the population in developed countries and are characterized by progressive aortic dilatation with an unpredictable time course. This condition is more common in men than in women, and in smokers than in nonsmokers. If left untreated, AAA can result in aortic rupture and death. Pathologically, aortic extracellular matrix degradation, inflammation, and neovascularization are hallmarks of AAA. Diagnosis of AAA and subsequent surveillance utilize established aortic imaging methods, such as ultrasound, CT, and MRI. More-speculative diagnostic approaches include molecular and cellular imaging methods that interrogate the underlying pathological processes at work within the aneurysm. In this Review, we explore the current diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for the management of AAA. We also describe the diagnostic potential of new imaging techniques and therapeutic potential of new treatments for the management of small AAA.

21126338
Fibrillin assemblies: extracellular determinants of tissue formation and fibrosis.
ABSTRACT: The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a key role in tissue formation, homeostasis and repair, mutations in ECM components have catastrophic consequences for organ function and therefore, for the fitness and survival of the organism. Collagen, fibrillin and elastin polymers represent the architectural scaffolds that impart specific mechanic properties to tissues and organs. Fibrillin assemblies (microfibrils) have the additional function of distributing, concentrating and modulating local transforming growth factor (TGF)-? and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signals that regulate a plethora of cellular activities, including ECM formation and remodeling. Fibrillins also contain binding sites for integrin receptors, which induce adaptive responses to changes in the extracellular microenvironment by reorganizing the cytoskeleton, controlling gene expression, and releasing and activating matrix-bound latent TGF-? complexes. Genetic evidence has indicated that fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 contribute differently to the organization and structural properties of non-collagenous architectural scaffolds, which in turn translate into discrete regulatory outcomes of locally released TGF-? and BMP signals. Additionally, the study of congenital dysfunctions of fibrillin-1 has yielded insights into the pathogenesis of acquired connective tissue disorders of the connective tissue, such as scleroderma. On the one hand, mutations that affect the structure or expression of fibrillin-1 perturb microfibril biogenesis, stimulate improper latent TGF-? activation, and give rise to the pleiotropic manifestations in Marfan syndrome (MFS). On the other hand, mutations located around the integrin-binding site of fibrillin-1 perturb cell matrix interactions, architectural matrix assembly and extracellular distribution of latent TGF-? complexes, and lead to the highly restricted fibrotic phenotype of Stiff Skin syndrome. Understanding the molecular similarities and differences between congenital and acquired forms of skin fibrosis may therefore provide new therapeutic tools to mitigate or even prevent disease progression in scleroderma and perhaps other fibrotic conditions.

20855508
Fibrillin-1 and -2 differentially modulate endogenous TGF-? and BMP bioavailability during bone formation.
Extracellular regulation of signaling by transforming growth factor (TGF)-? family members is emerging as a key aspect of organ formation and tissue remodeling. In this study, we demonstrate that fibrillin-1 and -2, the structural components of extracellular microfibrils, differentially regulate TGF-? and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) bioavailability in bone. Fibrillin-2-null (Fbn2(-/-)) mice display a low bone mass phenotype that is associated with reduced bone formation in vivo and impaired osteoblast maturation in vitro. This Fbn2(-/-) phenotype is accounted for by improper activation of latent TGF-? that selectively blunts expression of osterix, the transcriptional regulator of osteoblast maturation, and collagen I, the structural template for bone mineralization. Cultured osteoblasts from Fbn1(-/-) mice exhibit improper latent TGF-? activation as well, but mature faster because of increased availability of otherwise matrix-bound BMPs. Additional in vitro evidence excludes a direct role of microfibrils in supporting mineral deposition. Together, these findings identify the extracellular microfibrils as critical regulators of bone formation through the modulation of endogenous TGF-? and BMP signaling.

20729550
Extracellular microfibrils control osteoblast-supported osteoclastogenesis by restricting TGF{beta} stimulation of RANKL production.
Mutations in fibrillin-1 or fibrillin-2, the major structural components of extracellular microfibrils, cause pleiotropic manifestations in Marfan syndrome and congenital contractural arachnodactyly, respectively. We recently found that fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 control bone formation by regulating osteoblast differentiation through the differential modulation of endogenous TGF? and bone morphogenetic protein signals. Here, we describe in vivo and ex vivo experiments that implicate the fibrillins as negative regulators of bone resorption. Adult Fbn2(-/-) mice display a greater than normal osteolytic response to locally implanted lipopolysaccharide-coated titanium particles. Although isolated cultures of Fbn2(-/-) preosteoclasts exhibited normal differentiation and activity, these features were substantially augmented when mutant or wild-type preosteoclasts were co-cultured with Fbn2(-/-) but not wild-type osteoblasts. Greater osteoclastogenic potential of Fbn2(-/-) osteoblasts was largely accounted for by up-regulation of the Rankl gene secondary to heightened TGF? activity. This conclusion was based on the findings that blockade of TGF? signaling blunts Rankl up-regulation in Fbn2(-/-) osteoblasts and bones and that systemic TGF? antagonism improves locally induced osteolysis in Fbn2(-/-) mice. Abnormally high Rankl expression secondary to elevated TGF? activity was also noted in cultured osteoblasts from Fbn1(-/-) mice. Collectively our data demonstrated that extracellular microfibrils balance local catabolic and anabolic signals during bone remodeling in addition to implying distinct mechanisms of bone loss in Marfan syndrome and congenital contractural arachnodactyly.

20687182
Drug-based therapies for vascular disease in Marfan syndrome: from mouse models to human patients.
Marfan syndrome is a congenital disorder of the connective tissue with a long history of clinical and basic science breakthroughs that have forged our understanding of vascular-disease pathogenesis. The biomedical importance of Marfan syndrome was recently underscored by the discovery that the underlying genetic lesion impairs both tissue integrity and transforming growth factor-beta regulation of cell behavior. This discovery has led to the successful implementation of the first pharmacological intervention in a connective-tissue disorder otherwise incurable by either gene-based or stem cell-based therapeutic strategies. More generally, information gathered from the study of Marfan syndrome pathogenesis has the potential to improve the clinical management of common acquired disorders of connective-tissue degeneration.

20392244
Extracellular regulation of transforming growth factor beta and bone morphogenetic protein signaling in bone.
Systemic and local factors regulate the activity of osteoblasts and osteoclasts during bone growth and remodeling by modulating a complex array of intracellular signaling events. Recent genetic evidence implicates extracellular fibrillin assemblies (microfibrils and elastic fibers) in imparting contextual specificity to endogenous transforming growth factor-beta and bone morphogenetic protein ligands in the forming and mature skeleton. The evidence is based on the characterization of the cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for the unique bone manifestations that characterize mouse models of Marfan syndrome and congenital contractural arachnodactyly. Collectively, the studies indicate that fibrillin assemblies play a key role both in establishing morphogen gradients within the developing limbs and in restricting growth factors activity in remodeling bones. The latter finding is likely to improve the design of more effective therapeutic interventions in osteoporosis and of bioengineering formulations for the repair of bone fractures.

19850904
Discrete contributions of elastic fiber components to arterial development and mechanical compliance.
Even though elastin and fibrillin-1 are the major structural components of elastic fibers, mutations in elastin and fibrillin-1 lead to narrowing of large arteries in supravalvular aortic stenosis and dilation of the ascending aorta in Marfan syndrome, respectively. A genetic approach was therefore used here to distinguish the differential contributions of elastin and fibrillin-1 to arterial development and compliance. Key parameters of cardiovascular function were compared among adult mice haploinsufficient for elastin (Eln(+/-)), fibrillin-1 (Fbn1(+/-)), or both proteins (dHet). Physiological and morphological comparisons correlate elastin haploinsufficiency with increased blood pressure and vessel length and tortuosity in dHet mice, and fibrillin-1 haploinsufficiency with increased aortic diameter in the same mutant animals. Mechanical tests confirm that elastin and fibrillin-1 impart elastic recoil and tensile strength to the aortic wall, respectively. Additional ex vivo analyses demonstrate additive and overlapping contributions of elastin and fibrillin-1 to the material properties of vascular tissues. Lastly, light and electron microscopy evidence implicates fibrillin-1 in the hypertension-promoted remodeling of the elastin-deficient aorta. These results demonstrate that elastin and fibrillin-1 have both differential and complementary roles in arterial wall formation and function, and advance our knowledge of the structural determinants of vascular physiology and disease.

19525102
Extracellular microfibrils: contextual platforms for TGFbeta and BMP signaling.
The extracellular matrix plays a key role in organ formation and tissue homeostasis. Recent studies have revealed that fibrillin assemblies (microfibrils) confer both tissue integrity and regulate signaling events that instruct cell performance and that perturbation of either function manifests in disease. These analyses have also indicated that fibrillin assemblies impart contextual specificity to TGFbeta and BMP signaling. Moreover, correlative evidence suggests functional coupling between cell-directed assembly of microfibrils and targeting of TGFbeta and BMP complexes to fibrillins. Hence, the emerging view is that fibrillin-rich microfibrils are molecular integrators of structural and instructive signals with TGFbetas and BMPs as nodal points that convert extracellular inputs into discrete and context-dependent cellular responses.

19513754
Biogenesis and function of fibrillin assemblies.
Fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 are large cysteine-rich glycoproteins that serve two key physiological functions: as supporting structures that impart tissue integrity and as regulators of signaling events that instruct cell performance. The structural role of fibrillins is exerted through the temporal and hierarchical assembly of microfibrils and elastic fibers, whereas the instructive role reflects the ability of fibrillins to sequester transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) complexes in the extracellular matrix. Characterization of fibrillin mutations in human patients and in genetically engineered mice has demonstrated that perturbation of either function manifests in disease. More generally, these studies have indicated that fibrillins are integral components of a broader biological network of extracellular, cell surface, and signaling molecules that orchestrate morphogenetic and homeostatic programs in multiple organ systems. They have also suggested that the relative composition of fibrillin-rich microfibrils imparts contextual specificity to TGFbeta and BMP signaling by concentrating the ligands locally so as to regulate cell differentiation within a spatial context during organ formation (positive regulation) and by restricting their bioavailability so as to modulate cell performance in a timely fashion during tissue remodeling/repair (negative regulation). Correlative evidence suggests functional coupling of the cell-directed assembly of microfibrils and targeting of TGFbeta and BMP complexes to fibrillins. Hence, the emerging view is that fibrillin-rich microfibrils are molecular integrators of structural and instructive signals, with TGFbeta and BMPs as the nodal points that convert extracellular inputs into discrete and context-dependent cellular responses.

19188363
Extracellular microfibrils in vertebrate development and disease processes.


19109253
p38 MAPK is an early determinant of promiscuous Smad2/3 signaling in the aortas of fibrillin-1 (Fbn1)-null mice.
Excessive transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling characterizes the progression of aortic aneurysm in mouse models of Marfan syndrome, a systemic disorder of the connective tissue that is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the extracellular matrix protein fibrillin-1. Fibrillin-1 mutations are believed to promote abnormal Smad2/3 signaling by impairing the sequestration of latent TGF-beta complexes into the extracellular matrix. Here we report that promiscuous Smad2/3 signaling is the cell-autonomous phenotype of primary cultures of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) explanted from the thoracic aortas of Fbn1 mutant mice with either neonatal onset or progressively severe aortic aneurysm. This cellular phenotype was characterized in VSMC isolated from Fbn1-null (mgN/mgN) mice, which recapitulate the most severe form of Marfan syndrome. We found that loss of fibrillin-1 deposition promotes the production of intracellular reactive oxygen species and abnormal accumulation of phosphorylated TGF-beta-activated kinase 1 and p38 MAPK, in addition to increasing the levels of endogenous phospho-Smad2. We showed that improper Smad2/3 signaling in Fbn1-null VSMC is in part stimulated by phospho-p38 MAPK, which is in turn activated in response to signals other than those mediated by the kinase activity of the ALK5 receptor. Consistent with these cell culture data, in vivo analyses documented that phospho-p38 MAPK accumulates earlier than phospho-Smad2 in the aortic wall of mgN/mgN mice and that systemic inhibition of phospho-p38 MAPK activity lowers the levels of phospho-Smad2 in this tissue. Collectively, these findings indicate that improper activation of p38 MAPK is a precursor of constitutive Smad2/3 signaling in the aortic wall of a mouse model of neonatal lethal Marfan syndrome.

