21557611
Multifunctional Nanoemulsion Platform for Imaging Guided Therapy Evaluated in Experimental Cancer.
Nanoparticle applications in medicine have seen a tremendous growth in the past decade. In addition to their drug targeting application and their ability to improve bioavailability of drugs, nanoparticles can be designed to allow their detection with a variety of imaging methodologies. In the current study, we developed a multimodal nanoparticle platform to enable imaging guided therapy, which was evaluated in a colon cancer mouse model. This "theranostic" platform is based on oil-in-water nanoemulsions and carries iron oxide nanocrystals for MRI, the fluorescent dye Cy7 for NIRF imaging, and the hydrophobic glucocorticoid prednisolone acetate valerate (PAV) for therapeutic purposes. Angiogenesis-targeted nanoemulsions functionalized with ?v?(3)-specific RGD peptides were evaluated, as well. When subcutaneous tumors were palpable, the nanoemulsions were administered at a dose of 30 mg of FeO/kg and 10 mg of PAV/kg. MRI and NIRF imaging showed significant nanoparticle accumulation in the tumors, while tumor growth profiles revealed a potent inhibitory effect in all of the PAV nanoemulsion-treated animals as compared to the ones treated with control nanoemulsions, the free drug, or saline. This study demonstrated that our nanoemulsions, when loaded with PAV, iron oxide nanocrystals, and Cy7, represent a flexible and unique theranostic nanoparticle platform that can be applied for imaging guided therapy of cancer.

21304473
Diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for small abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) affect 5% of the population in developed countries and are characterized by progressive aortic dilatation with an unpredictable time course. This condition is more common in men than in women, and in smokers than in nonsmokers. If left untreated, AAA can result in aortic rupture and death. Pathologically, aortic extracellular matrix degradation, inflammation, and neovascularization are hallmarks of AAA. Diagnosis of AAA and subsequent surveillance utilize established aortic imaging methods, such as ultrasound, CT, and MRI. More-speculative diagnostic approaches include molecular and cellular imaging methods that interrogate the underlying pathological processes at work within the aneurysm. In this Review, we explore the current diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for the management of AAA. We also describe the diagnostic potential of new imaging techniques and therapeutic potential of new treatments for the management of small AAA.

21183488
Science to practice: versatile method to track transplanted encapsulated islet cells with multiple imaging modalities.
Pancreatic islet transplantation may provide an effective therapy for patients with type I diabetes. By encapsulating islets in alginate capsules, their survival is substantially improved. Methods to monitor the distribution of the encapsulated islets during delivery and afterward would help to optimize this type of therapy. Barnett and coworkers (1) showed, for the first time, it is possible to visualize encapsulated islets by using magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, computed tomography (CT), and ultrasonography (US) after the inclusion of perfluorocarbon in the capsules. Importantly, it was shown that the therapeutic effect of the islets was sustained for more than 50 days when implanted into mice.

21118852
Monitoring of arterial wall remodelling in atherosclerotic rabbits with a magnetic resonance imaging contrast agent binding to matrix metalloproteinases.
Aims P947 is a gadolinium-based magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agent with high affinity for several matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) involved in arterial wall remodelling. We tested whether the intensity of enhancement detected in vivo in the arterial wall with P947 and MRI correlates with actual tissue MMP-related enzymatic activity measured in a rabbit atherosclerotic model subjected to dietary manipulations. Methods and results Aortas of 15 rabbits in which atherosclerotic lesions were induced by balloon angioplasty and 4 months of hypercholesterolaemic diet were imaged at 'baseline' with P947-enhanced MRI. Atherosclerotic rabbits were divided into three groups: five rabbits were sacrificed ('baseline' group); five rabbits continued to be fed a lipid-supplemented diet ('high-fat' group); and five rabbits were switched from atherogenic to a purified chow diet ('low-fat' group). Four months later, a second P947-enhanced MRI was acquired in the 10 remaining rabbits. A significantly lower signal was detected in the aortic wall of rabbits from the 'low-fat' group as compared with rabbits from the 'high-fat' group (21 ± 6 vs. 46 ± 3%, respectively; P = 0.04). Such differences were not detected with the contrast agent P1135, which lacks the MMP-specific peptide sequence. In addition, the intensity of aortic wall enhancement detected with MRI after injection of P947 strongly correlated with actual MMP-2 gelatinolytic activity measured in corresponding aortic segments using zymography (r = 0.87). Conclusion P947-enhanced MRI can distinguish dietary-induced variations in MMP-related enzymatic activity within plaques in an experimental atherosclerotic model, supporting its utility as a clinical imaging tool for in vivo detection of arterial wall remodelling.

21106318
Targeted iron oxide particles for in vivo magnetic resonance detection of atherosclerotic lesions with antibodies directed to oxidation-specific epitopes.
The aim of this study was to determine whether iron oxide particles targeted to oxidation-specific epitopes image atherosclerotic lesions. Oxidized low-density lipoprotein plays a major role in atherosclerotic plaque progression and destabilization. Prior studies indicate that gadolinium micelles labeled with oxidation-specific antibodies allow for in vivo detection of vulnerable plaques with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). However, issues related to biotransformation/retention of gadolinium might limit clinical translation. Iron oxides are recognized as safe and effective contrast agents for MRI. Because the efficacy of passively targeted iron particles remains variable, it was hypothesized that iron particles targeted to oxidation-specific epitopes might increase the utility of this platform. Lipid-coated ultra-small superparamagnetic iron particles (LUSPIOs) (<20 nm) and superparamagnetic iron particles (<40 nm) were conjugated with antibodies targeted to either malondialdehyde-lysine or oxidized phospholipid epitopes. All formulations were characterized, and their in vivo efficacy evaluated in apolipoprotein E deficient mice 24 h after bolus administration of a 3.9-mg Fe/kg dose with MRI. In vivo imaging data were correlated with the presence of oxidation-specific epitopes with immunohistochemistry. MRI of atherosclerotic lesions, as manifested by signal loss, was observed after administration of targeted LUSPIOs. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the presence of malondialdehyde-epitopes and iron particles. Limited signal attenuation was observed for untargeted LUSPIOs. Additionally, no significant arterial wall uptake was observed for targeted or untargeted lipid-coated superparamagnetic iron oxide particles, due to their limited ability to penetrate the vessel wall. This study demonstrates that LUSPIOs targeted to oxidation-specific epitopes image atherosclerotic lesions and suggests a clinically translatable platform for the detection of atherosclerotic plaque.

21102631
Molecular imaging: Measuring myocardial fatty acid metabolism with BMIPP SPECT.


21028895
Multimodal clinical imaging to longitudinally assess a nanomedical anti-inflammatory treatment in experimental atherosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease causing great morbidity and mortality in the Western world. To increase the anti-inflammatory action and decrease adverse effects of glucocorticoids (PLP), a nanomedicinal liposomal formulation of this drug (L-PLP) was developed and intravenously applied at a dose of 15 mg/kg PLP to a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Since atherosclerosis is a systemic disease, emerging imaging modalities for assessing atherosclerotic plaque are being developed. (18)F-Fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography and dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging, methods commonly used in oncology, were applied to longitudinally assess therapeutic efficacy. Significant anti-inflammatory effects were observed as early as 2 days that lasted up to at least 7 days after administration of a single dose of L-PLP. No significant changes were found for the free PLP treated animals. These findings were corroborated by immunohistochemical analysis of macrophage density in the vessel wall. In conclusion, this study evaluates a powerful two-pronged strategy for efficient treatment of atherosclerosis that includes nanomedical therapy of atherosclerotic plaques and the application of noninvasive and clinically approved imaging techniques to monitor delivery and therapeutic responses. Importantly, we demonstrate unprecedented rapid anti-inflammatory effects in atherosclerotic lesions after the nanomedical therapy.

20967875
Nanoparticles as magnetic resonance imaging contrast agents for vascular and cardiac diseases.
Advances in nanoparticle contrast agents for molecular imaging have made magnetic resonance imaging a promising modality for noninvasive visualization and assessment of vascular and cardiac disease processes. This review provides a description of the various nanoparticles exploited for imaging cardiovascular targets. Nanoparticle probes detecting inflammation, apoptosis, extracellular matrix, and angiogenesis may provide tools for assessing the risk of progressive vascular dysfunction and heart failure. The utility of nanoparticles as multimodal probes and/or theranostic agents has also been investigated. Although clinical application of these nanoparticles is largely unexplored, the potential for enhancing disease diagnosis and treatment is considerable. WIREs Nanomed Nanobiotechnol 2010 DOI: 10.1002/wnan.114For further resources related to this article, please visit the WIREs website.

20926130
The biological properties of iron oxide core high-density lipoprotein in experimental atherosclerosis.
Lipoproteins are a family of plasma nanoparticles responsible for the transportation of lipids throughout the body. High-density lipoprotein (HDL), the smallest of the lipoprotein family, measures 7-13 nm in diameter and consists of a cholesteryl ester and triglyceride core that is covered with a monolayer of phospholipids and apolipoproteins. We have developed an iron oxide core HDL nanoparticle (FeO-HDL), which has a lipid based fluorophore incorporated in the phospholipid layer. This nanoparticle provides contrast for optical imaging, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Consequently, FeO-HDL can be visualized on the anatomical, cellular and sub-cellular level. In the current study we show that the biophysical features of FeO-HDL closely resemble those of native HDL and that FeO-HDL possess the ability to mimic HDL characteristics both in vitro as well as in vivo. We demonstrate that FeO-HDL can be applied to image HDL interactions and to investigate disease settings where HDL plays a key function. More generally, we have demonstrated a multimodal approach to study the behavior of biomaterials in vitro as well as in vivo. The approach allowed us to study nanoparticle dynamics in circulation, as well as nanoparticle targeting and uptake by tissues and cells of interest. Moreover, we were able to qualitatively assess nanoparticle excretion, critical for translating nanotechnologies to the clinic.

20668118
Atherosclerotic plaque composition: analysis with multicolor CT and targeted gold nanoparticles.
To investigate the potential of spectral computed tomography (CT) (popularly referred to as multicolor CT), used in combination with a gold high-density lipoprotein nanoparticle contrast agent (Au-HDL), for characterization of macrophage burden, calcification, and stenosis of atherosclerotic plaques. The local animal care committee approved all animal experiments. A preclinical spectral CT system in which incident x-rays are divided into six different energy bins was used for multicolor imaging. Au-HDL, an iodine-based contrast agent, and calcium phosphate were imaged in a variety of phantoms. Apolipoprotein E knockout (apo E-KO) mice were used as the model for atherosclerosis. Gold nanoparticles targeted to atherosclerosis (Au-HDL) were intravenously injected at a dose of 500 mg per kilogram of body weight. Iodine-based contrast material was injected 24 hours later, after which the mice were imaged. Wild-type mice were used as controls. Macrophage targeting by Au-HDL was further evaluated by using transmission electron microscopy and confocal microscopy of aorta sections. Multicolor CT enabled differentiation of Au-HDL, iodine-based contrast material, and calcium phosphate in the phantoms. Accumulations of Au-HDL were detected in the aortas of the apo E-KO mice, while the iodine-based contrast agent and the calcium-rich tissue could also be detected and thus facilitated visualization of the vasculature and bones (skeleton), respectively, during a single scanning examination. Microscopy revealed Au-HDL to be primarily localized in the macrophages on the aorta sections; hence, the multicolor CT images provided information about the macrophage burden. Spectral CT used with carefully chosen contrast agents may yield valuable information about atherosclerotic plaque composition.

20593373
Longitudinal tracking of human dendritic cells in murine models using magnetic resonance imaging.
Ex vivo generated dendritic cells are currently used to induce therapeutic immunity in solid tumors. Effective immune response requires dendritic cells to home and remain in lymphoid organs to allow for adequate interaction with T lymphocytes. The aim of the current study was to detect and track Feridex labeled human dendritic cells in murine models using magnetic resonance imaging. Human dendritic cells were incubated with Feridex and the effect of labeling on dendritic cells immune function was evaluated. Ex vivo dendritic cell phantoms were used to estimate sensitivity of the magnetic resonance methods and in vivo homing was evaluated after intravenous or subcutaneous injection. R2*-maps of liver, spleen, and draining lymph nodes were obtained and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry or relaxometry methods were used to quantify the Feridex tissue concentrations. Correlations between in vivo R2* values and iron content were then determined. Feridex labeling did not affect dendritic cell maturation or function. Phantom results indicated that it was possible to detect 125 dendritic cells within a given slice. Strong correlation between in vivo R2* values and iron deposition was observed. Importantly, Feridex-labeled dendritic cells were detected in the spleen for up to 2 weeks postintravenous injection. This study suggests that magnetic resonance imaging may be used to longitudinally track Feridex-labeled human dendritic cells for up to 2 weeks after injection.

20578026
Reproducibility of black blood dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging in aortic plaques of atherosclerotic rabbits.
To investigate the short-term reproducibility of black-blood dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in atherosclerotic rabbits to evaluate the potential of this technique to be a reliable readout of plaque progression and/or regression upon therapeutic intervention. Atherosclerotic rabbits were imaged at baseline and 24 hours later with DCE-MRI on a 1.5T MRI system. DCE-MRI images were analyzed by calculating the area under the signal intensity versus time curve (AUC). Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) were used to evaluate interscan, intraobserver, and interobserver reproducibility. In addition, the test-retest coefficient of variation (CoV) was evaluated. Statistical analyses showed excellent interscan, intraobserver, and interobserver agreement. All ICCs were greater than 0.75, P < 0.01 indicating excellent agreement between measurements. Experimental results show good interscan and excellent intra- and interobserver reproducibility, suggesting that DCE-MRI could be used in preclinical settings as a read-out for novel therapeutic interventions for atherosclerosis. This preliminary work encourages investigating the reproducibility of DCE-MRI also in clinical settings, where it could be used for monitoring high-risk patients and in longitudinal clinical drug trials.

20526859
Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of atherosclerotic plaque angiogenesis.
Atherosclerosis is a progressive systemic disease of the large arteries characterized by the formation of plaques in the vessel wall. Despite our knowledge of its pathogenesis, many vulnerable plaques still remain undiagnosed while in their asymptomatic phase and manifest for the first time with dramatic clinical events, such as stroke or myocardial infarction. In recent years, it is becoming clearer that sudden clinical events do not necessarily correlate with the degree of luminal obstruction caused by lesions, but rather with plaque composition. In particular, the degree of plaque inflammation is important in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and is considered a good marker of high-risk/vulnerable plaques. The presence of inflammatory infiltrate and plaque neovascularization are both histological hallmarks of atherosclerotic plaque inflammation. Therefore, plaque angiogenesis represents an attractive target to try and identify asymptomatic high-risk lesions. Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a technique that has been used extensively in the past to study the vascularity of tumors and its changes following therapeutic intervention. Recently, delayed and dynamic contrast enhanced (CE) MRI have been proposed as non-invasive tools to study the extent of plaque neovascularization in animals and patients with atherosclerosis. In this review, we will provide a brief introduction on DCE-MRI acquisition and analysis techniques. We will follow this with a description of contrast enhanced MR methods for the detection and quantification of neovasculature in atherosclerosis, with an emphasis on DCE-MRI. Finally, we will examine the current limitations and challenges faced by DCE-MRI and briefly discuss its future applications in the context of atherosclerosis.

20352038
HDL as a contrast agent for medical imaging.
Contrast-enhanced MRI of atherosclerosis can provide valuable additional information on a patient's disease state. As a result of the interactions of HDL with atherosclerotic plaque and the flexibility of its reconstitution, it is a versatile candidate for the delivery of contrast-generating materials to this pathogenic lesion. We herein discuss the reports of HDL modified with gadolinium to act as an MRI contrast agent for atherosclerosis. Furthermore, HDL has been modified with fluorophores and nanocrystals, allowing it to act as a contrast agent for fluorescent imaging techniques and for computed tomography. Such modified HDL has been found to be macrophage specific, and, therefore, can provide macrophage density information via noninvasive MRI. As such, modified HDL is currently a valuable contrast agent for probing preclinical atherosclerosis. Future developments may allow the application of this particle to further diseases and pathological or physiological processes in both preclinical models as well as in patients.

20139362
Magnetic resonance molecular imaging of thrombosis in an arachidonic acid mouse model using an activated platelet targeted probe.
Atherosclerotic plaque rupture leads to acute thrombus formation and may trigger serious clinical events such as myocardial infarction or stroke. Therefore, it would be valuable to identify atherothrombosis and vulnerable plaques before the onset of such clinical events. We sought to determine whether the noninvasive in vivo visualization of activated platelets was effective when using a target-specific MRI contrast agent to identify thrombi, hallmarks of vulnerable or high-risk atherosclerotic plaques. Inflammatory thrombi were induced in mice via topical application of arachidonic acid on the carotid. Thrombus formation was imaged with intravital fluorescence microscopy and molecular MRI. To accomplish the latter, a paramagnetic contrast agent (P975) that targets the glycoprotein alpha(IIb)beta(3), expressed on activated platelets, was investigated. The specificity of P975 for activated platelets was studied in vitro. In vivo, high spatial-resolution MRI was performed at baseline and longitudinally over 2 hours after injecting P975 or a nonspecific agent. The contralateral carotid, a sham surgery group, and a competitive inhibition experiment served as controls. P975 showed a good affinity for activated platelets, with an IC(50) (concentration of dose that produces 50% inhibition) value of 2.6 micromol/L. In thrombosed animals, P975 produced an immediate and sustained increase in MRI signal, whereas none of the control groups revealed any significant increase in MRI signal 2 hours after injection. More important, the competitive inhibition experiment with an alpha(IIb)beta(3) antagonist suppressed the MRI signal enhancement, which is indicative for the specificity of P975 for the activated platelets. P975 allowed in vivo target-specific noninvasive MRI of activated platelets.

20039335
Multifunctional imaging nanoprobes.
Multifunctional imaging nanoprobes have proven to be of great value in the research of pathological processes, as well as the assessment of the delivery, fate, and therapeutic potential of encapsulated drugs. Moreover, such probes may potentially support therapy schemes by the exploitation of their own physical properties, e.g., through thermal ablation. This review will present four classes of nanoparticulate imaging probes used in this area: multifunctional probes (1) that can be tracked with at least three different and complementary imaging techniques, (2) that carry a drug and have bimodal imaging properties, (3) that are employed for nucleic acid delivery and imaging, and (4) imaging probes with capabilities that can be used for thermal ablation. We will highlight several examples where the suitable combination of different (bio)materials like polymers, inorganic nanocrystals, fluorophores, proteins/peptides, and lipids can be tailored to manufacture multifunctional probes to accomplish nanomaterials of each of the aforementioned classes. Moreover, it will be demonstrated how multimodality imaging approaches improve our understanding of in vivo nanoparticle behavior and efficacy at different levels, ranging from the subcellular level to the whole body.

19946750
Comparison of 3D-diffusion-prepared segmented steady-state free precession and 2D fast spin echo imaging of femoral artery atherosclerosis.
Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is a promising modality for the in vivo detection and characterization of atherosclerotic lesions in peripheral arteries. 2D imaging techniques for evaluation of peripheral artery disease (PAD) suffer from poor spatial coverage and have long scan times. The purpose of this study was to compare a diffusion prepared dark blood 3D steady state free precession (3D-DP-SSFP) sequence for evaluating atherosclerotic plaque burden in inguinal and thigh segments of the femoral artery and comparing the results obtained with 2D turbo spin echo (2D-TSE) techniques. A further goal of the study was to examine the inter observer reproducibility of MR plaque burden measures using the 3D DP-SSFP technique. Results of the study indicated higher signal to noise ratios for the 3D-DP-SSFP technique and higher CNR (better vessel-wall delineation) compared to the 2D-TSE technique. Furthermore, a good correlation between 3D-DP-SSFP and 2D-TSE techniques for the inguinal segment but poorer correlation for the thigh segment was observed. Inter-observer reproducibility for the 3D plaque burden measures was excellent. 3D-DP-SSFP may be a useful and reproducible technique for evaluating atherosclerosis in peripheral arteries.

19900496
Modified natural nanoparticles as contrast agents for medical imaging.
The development of novel and effective contrast agents is one of the drivers of the ongoing improvement in medical imaging. Many of the new agents reported are nanoparticle-based. There are a variety of natural nanoparticles known, e.g. lipoproteins, viruses or ferritin. Natural nanoparticles have advantages as delivery platforms such as biodegradability. In addition, our understanding of natural nanoparticles is quite advanced, allowing their adaptation as contrast agents. They can be labeled with small molecules or ions such as Gd(3+) to act as contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging, (18)F to act as positron emission tomography contrast agents or fluorophores to act as contrast agents for fluorescence techniques. Additionally, inorganic nanoparticles such as iron oxide, gold nanoparticles or quantum dots can be incorporated to add further contrast functionality. Furthermore, these natural nanoparticle contrast agents can be re-routed from their natural targets via the attachment of targeting molecules. In this review, we discuss the various modified natural nanoparticles that have been exploited as contrast agents.

19815819
High-density lipoprotein-based contrast agents for multimodal imaging of atherosclerosis.
Lipoproteins, natural nanoparticles, have a well-recognized biological role and are highly suitable as a platform for delivering imaging agents. The ease with which both the exterior and interior of the particles can be modified permits the creation of multifunctional nanoparticles for imaging as well as the delivery of therapeutics. Importantly, their endogenous nature may make them biocompatible and biodegradable and allows them to avoid the recognition of the reticuloendothelial system. In particular, high-density lipoproteins (HDL) are of interest, because of their small size they can easily cross the endothelium and penetrate the underlying tissue. We summarize here the progress in establishing HDL as a vector for delivering a variety of diagnostically active materials to vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques in mouse models of atherosclerosis. By loading various types of image-enhancing compounds into either the core or surface of HDL, they can be visualized by different imaging modalities (MRI, CT, optical). By rerouting of HDL away from plaque macrophages, imaging of biological processes in diseases besides atherosclerosis may also be achieved.

19808576
Relationships among regional arterial inflammation, calcification, risk factors, and biomarkers: a prospective fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography/computed tomography imaging study.
Fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography (FDG PET) imaging of atherosclerosis has been used to quantify plaque inflammation and to measure the effect of plaque-stabilizing drugs. We explored how atherosclerotic plaque inflammation varies across arterial territories and how it relates to arterial calcification. We also tested the hypotheses that the degree of local arterial inflammation measured by PET is correlated with the extent of systemic inflammation and presence of risk factors for vascular disease. Forty-one subjects underwent vascular PET/computed tomography imaging with FDG. All had either vascular disease or multiple risk factors. Forty subjects underwent carotid imaging, 27 subjects underwent aortic, 24 subjects iliac, and 13 subjects femoral imaging. Thirty-three subjects had a panel of biomarkers analyzed. We found strong associations between FDG uptake in neighboring arteries (left versus right carotid, r=0.91, P<0.001; ascending aorta versus aortic arch, r=0.88, P<0.001). Calcification and inflammation rarely overlapped within arteries (carotid artery FDG uptake versus calcium score, r=-0.42, P=0.03). Carotid artery FDG uptake was greater in those with a history of coronary artery disease (target-to- <0.01) and in males versus females (target-to- <0.05). Similar findings were also noted in the aorta and iliac arteries. Subjects with the highest levels of FDG uptake also had the greatest concentrations of inflammatory biomarkers (descending aorta target-to- =0.53, P=0.01; carotid target-to- =0.50, P=0.01). Nonsignificant positive trends were seen between FDG uptake and levels of interleukin-18, fibrinogen, and C-reactive protein. Finally, we found that the atheroprotective biomarker adiponectin was negatively correlated with the degree of arterial inflammation in the descending aorta (r=-0.49, P=0.03). This study shows that FDG PET imaging can increase our knowledge of how atherosclerotic plaque inflammation relates to calcification, serum biomarkers, and vascular risk factors. Plaque inflammation and calcification rarely overlap, supporting the theory that calcification represents a late, burnt-out stage of atherosclerosis. Inflammation in one arterial territory is associated with inflammation elsewhere, and the degree of local arterial inflammation is reflected in the blood levels of several circulating biomarkers. We suggest that FDG PET imaging could be used as a surrogate marker of both atherosclerotic disease activity and drug effectiveness. Prospective, event-driven studies are now underway to determine the role of this technique in clinical risk prediction.

19783295
Iron oxide core oil-in-water emulsions as a multifunctional nanoparticle platform for tumor targeting and imaging.
Nanoemulsions are increasingly investigated for the delivery of hydrophobic drugs to improve their bioavailability or make their administration possible. In the current study, oil-in-water emulsions with three different mean diameters (30, 60, and 95 nm) were developed as a new multimodality nanoparticle platform for tumor targeting and imaging. To that aim, hydrophobically coated iron oxide particles were included in the soybean oil core of the nanoemulsions to enable their detection with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), while the conjugation of a near infrared fluorophore allowed optical imaging. The accumulation of this novel nanocomposite in subcutaneous human tumors in nude mice was demonstrated with MRI and fluorescence imaging in vivo, and with Perl's staining of histological tumor sections ex vivo.

19761992
In vivo detection of embryonic stem cell-derived cardiovascular progenitor cells using Cy3-labeled Gadofluorine M in murine myocardium.
The aim of the current study is to test the ability to label and detect murine embryonic stem cell-derived cardiovascular progenitor cells (ES-CPC) with cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) using the novel contrast agent Gadofluorine M-Cy3 (GdFM-Cy3). Cell therapy shows great promise for the treatment of cardiovascular disease. An important limitation to previous clinical studies is the inability to accurately identify transplanted cells. GdFM-Cy3 is a lipophilic paramagnetic contrast agent that contains a perfluorinated side chain and an amphiphilic character that allows for micelle formation in an aqueous solution. Previous studies reported that it is easily taken up and stored within the cytosol of mesenchymal stem cells, thereby allowing for paramagnetic cell labeling. Investigators in our laboratory have recently developed techniques for the robust generation of ES-CPC. We reasoned that GdFM-Cy3 would be a promising agent for the in vivo detection of these cells after cardiac cell transplantation. ES-CPC were labeled with GdFM-Cy3 by incubation. In vitro studies were performed to assess the impact of GdFM-Cy3 on cell function and survival. A total of 500,000 GdFM-Cy3-labeled ES-CPC or control ES-CPC were injected into the myocardium of mice with and without myocardial infarction. Mice were imaged (9.4-T) before and over a 2-week time interval after stem cell transplantation. Mice were then euthanized, and their hearts were sectioned for fluorescence microscopy. In vitro studies demonstrated that GdFM-Cy3 was easily transfectable, nontoxic, stayed within cells after labeling, and could be visualized using CMR and fluorescence microscopy. In vivo studies confirmed the efficacy of the agent for the detection of cells transplanted into the hearts of mice after myocardial infarction. A correspondence between CMR and histology was observed. The results of the current study suggest that it is possible to identify and potentially track GdFM-Cy3-labeled ES-CPC in murine infarct models via CMR.

19467659
Multimodality imaging of atherosclerotic plaque activity and composition using FDG-PET/CT and MRI in carotid and femoral arteries.
To evaluate the relationship between atherosclerotic plaque inflammation, as assessed by FDG-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT), and plaque morphology and composition, as assessed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), in the carotid and femoral arteries. Sixteen patients underwent FDG-PET/CT and MRI (T2-weighted (T2W) and proton density weighted (PDW)) of the carotid and femoral arteries. For every image slice, two observers determined the corresponding regions of the FDG-PET/CT and MRI image sets by matching CT and T2W axial images. Each plaque was then classified into one of three groups according to the CT appearance and T2W/PDW signal: (1) collagen, (2) lipid-necrotic core and (3) calcium. Arterial FDG uptake was measured for each plaque and normalized to vein FDG activity to produce a blood-normalized artery activity called the target to background ratio (TBR). The vessel wall thickness (VWT), the vessel wall area and the total vessel wall area were measured from the T2W MR images. The TBR value was higher in the lipid-necrotic core group compared to the collagen and calcium groups, (p<0.001). The lipid-necrotic core group demonstrated a significant TBR variation according to the median of the VWT (TBR=1.26+/-0.25 vs. 1.50+/-0.12). There was no correlation with other morphological MR parameters. This study demonstrates the complementary value of non-invasive FDG-PET/CT and MR imaging for the evaluation of atherosclerotic plaque composition and activity. Lipid-rich plaques are more inflamed than either calcified or collagen-rich plaques.

19443582
Quantification of inflammation within rabbit atherosclerotic plaques using the macrophage-specific CT contrast agent N1177: a comparison with 18F-FDG PET/CT and histology.
Macrophages play a key role in atherosclerotic plaque rupture. The iodine-based contrast agent N1177 accumulates in macrophages, allowing for their detection with CT. In this study, we tested whether the intensity of enhancement detected with CT in the aortic wall of rabbits injected with N1177 correlated with inflammatory activity evaluated with (18)F-FDG PET/CT and macrophage density on histology. Atherosclerotic plaques were induced in the aorta of New Zealand White rabbits (n = 7) by a repeated balloon injury (4 wk apart) and 4 mo of hyperlipemic diet. Noninjured rabbits, fed a chow diet, were used as controls (n = 3). A CT scan of the aorta (n = 10) was acquired in each rabbit before, during, and at 2 h after intravenous injection of N1177 (250 mg of iodine/kg). One week later, the same rabbits underwent PET/CT 3 h after injection of (18)F-FDG (37 MBq/kg [1 mCi/kg]). CT enhancement was calculated as the difference in aortic wall densities between images obtained before and images obtained at 2 h after injection of N1177. Mean standardized uptake values were measured on PET axial slices of the aorta in regions of interest encompassing the vessel wall. Macrophage density was measured by immunohistology (anti-RAM-11 antibody) on corresponding aortic cross-sections. N1177-enhanced CT measured stronger enhancement in the aortic wall of atherosclerotic rabbits than in control rabbits (10.0 +/- 5.2 vs. 2.0 +/- 2.1 Hounsfield units, respectively; P < 0.05). After the injection of (18)F-FDG, PET detected higher standardized uptake values in the aortic wall of atherosclerotic rabbits than in control rabbits (0.61 +/- 0.12 vs. 0.21 +/- 0.02; P < 0.05). The intensity of enhancement in the aortic wall measured with CT after injection of N1177 correlated with (18)F-FDG uptake on PET/CT (r = 0.61, P < 0.001) and macrophage density on immunohistology (r = 0.63, P < 0.001). The intensity of enhancement detected with CT in the aortic wall of rabbits injected with N1177 correlates with intense uptake of (18)F-FDG measured with PET and with macrophage density on histology, suggesting a role for N1177 in noninvasive identification of high-risk atherosclerotic plaques with CT.

19442953
Macrophage-specific lipid-based nanoparticles improve cardiac magnetic resonance detection and characterization of human atherosclerosis.
We sought to determine whether gadolinium (Gd)-containing lipid-based nanoparticles (NPs) targeting the macrophage scavenger receptor-B (CD36) improve cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) detection and characterization of human atherosclerosis. Gd-containing lipid-based NPs targeting macrophages have improved MR detection of murine atherosclerosis. Gadolinium-containing untargeted NPs, anti-CD36 NPs, and nonspecific Fc-NPs were created. Macrophages were incubated with fluorescent targeted and nontargeted NPs to determine uptake via confocal microscopy and inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS) quantified Gd uptake. Human aortic specimens were harvested at autopsy. With a 1.5-T scanner, T1, T2, and PDW 3-dimensional scans were performed along with post-contrast scans after 24 h incubation. The T1 and cluster analyses were performed and compared with immunohistopathology. The NPs had a mean diameter of 125 nm and 14,900 Gd-ions, and relaxivity was 37 mmol/l(-1)s(-1) at 1.5-T and 37 degrees C. Confocal microscopy and ICP-MS demonstrated significant in vitro macrophage uptake of targeted NPs, whereas non-targeted NPs had minimal uptake. On T1 imaging, targeted NPs increased contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) by 52.5%, which was significantly greater than Fc-NPs (CNR increased 17.2%) and nontargeted NPs (CNR increased 18.7%) (p = 0.001). Confocal fluorescent microscopy showed that NPs target resident macrophages, whereas the untargeted NPs and Fc-NPs are found diffusely throughout the plaque. Targeted NPs had a greater signal intensity increase in the fibrous cap compared with non-targeted NPs. Macrophage-specific (CD36) NPs bind human macrophages and improve CMR detection and characterization of human aortic atherosclerosis. Thus, macrophage-specific NPs could help identify high-risk human plaque before the development of an atherothrombotic event.

19435319
Nanoparticulate assemblies of amphiphiles and diagnostically active materials for multimodality imaging.
Modern medicine has greatly benefited from recent dramatic improvements in imaging techniques. The observation of physiological events through interactions manipulated at the molecular level offers unique insight into the function (and dysfunction) of the living organism. The tremendous advances in the development of nanoparticulate molecular imaging agents over the past decade have made it possible to noninvasively image the specificity, pharmacokinetic profiles, biodistribution, and therapeutic efficacy of many novel compounds. Several types of nanoparticles have demonstrated utility for biomedical purposes, including inorganic nanocrystals, such as iron oxide, gold, and quantum dots. Moreover, natural nanoparticles, such as viruses, lipoproteins, or apoferritin, as well as hybrid nanostructures composed of inorganic and natural nanoparticles, have been applied broadly. However, among the most investigated nanoparticle platforms for biomedical purposes are lipidic aggregates, such as liposomal nanoparticles, micelles, and microemulsions. Their relative ease of preparation and functionalization, as well as the ready synthetic ability to combine multiple amphiphilic moieties, are the most important reasons for their popularity. Lipid-based nanoparticle platforms allow the inclusion of a variety of imaging agents, ranging from fluorescent molecules to chelated metals and nanocrystals. In recent years, we have created a variety of multifunctional lipid-based nanoparticles for molecular imaging; many are capable of being used with more than one imaging technique (that is, with multimodal imaging ability). These nanoparticles differ in size, morphology, and specificity for biological markers. In this Account, we discuss the development and characterization of five different particles: liposomes, micelles, nanocrystal micelles, lipid-coated silica, and nanocrystal high-density lipoprotein (HDL). We also demonstrate their application for multimodal molecular imaging, with the main focus on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), optical techniques, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The functionalization of the nanoparticles and the modulation of their pharmacokinetics are discussed. Their application for molecular imaging of key processes in cancer and cardiovascular disease are shown. Finally, we discuss a recent development in which the endogenous nanoparticle HDL was modified to carry different diagnostically active nanocrystal cores to enable multimodal imaging of macrophages in experimental atherosclerosis. The multimodal characteristics of the different contrast agent platforms have proven to be extremely valuable for validation purposes and for understanding mechanisms of particle-target interaction at different levels, ranging from the entire organism down to cellular organelles.

19393089
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance parameters of atherosclerotic plaque burden improve discrimination of prior major adverse cardiovascular events.
Patients with prior major cardiovascular or cerebrovascular events (MACE) are more likely to have future recurrent events independent of traditional cardiovascular disease risk factors. The purpose of this study was to determine if patients with traditional risk factors and prior MACE had increased cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) plaque burden measures compared to patients with risk factors but no prior events. Black blood carotid and thoracic aorta images were obtained from 195 patients using a rapid extended coverage turbo spin echo sequence. CMR measures of plaque burden were obtained by tracing lumen and outer vessel wall contours. Patients with prior MACE had significantly higher MR plaque burden (wall thickness, wall area and normalized wall index) in carotids and thoracic aorta compared to those without prior MACE (Wall thickness carotids: 1.03 +/- 0.03 vs. 0.93+/- 0.03, p = 0.001; SD wall thickness carotids: 0.137 +/- 0.0008 vs. 0.102 +/- 0.0004, p < 0.001; wall thickness aorta: 1.63 +/- 0.10 vs. 1.50 +/- 0.04, p = 0.009; SD wall thickness aorta: 0.186 +/- 0.035 vs. 0.139 +/- 0.012, p = 0.009 respectively). Plaque burden (wall thickness) and plaque eccentricity (standard deviation of wall thickness) of carotid arteries were associated with prior MACE after adjustment for age, sex, and traditional risk factors. Area under ROC curve (AUC) for discriminating prior MACE improved by adding plaque eccentricity to models incorporating age, sex, and traditional CVD risk factors as model inputs (AUC = 0.79, p = 0.05). A greater plaque burden and plaque eccentricity is prevalent among patients with prior MACE.

19378935
Comparison of synthetic high density lipoprotein (HDL) contrast agents for MR imaging of atherosclerosis.
Determining arterial macrophage expression is an important goal in the molecular imaging of atherosclerosis. Here, we compare the efficacy of two synthetic, high density lipoprotein (HDL) based contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of macrophage burden. Each form of HDL was labeled with gadolinium and rhodamine to allow MRI and fluorescence microscopy. Either the 37 or 18 amino acid peptide replaced the apolipoprotein A-I in these agents, which were termed 37pA-Gd or 18A-Gd. The diameters of 37pA-Gd and 18A-Gd are 7.6 and 8.0 nm, respectively, while the longitudinal relaxivities are 9.8 and 10.0 (mM s)(-1). 37pA has better lipid binding properties. In vitro tests with J774A.1 macrophages proved the particles possessed the functionality of HDL by eliciting cholesterol efflux and were taken up in a receptor-like fashion by the cells. Both agents produced enhancements in atherosclerotic plaques of apolipoprotein E knockout mice of approximately 90% (n = 7 per agent) and are macrophage specific as evidenced by confocal microscopy on aortic sections. The half-lives of 37pA-Gd and 18A-Gd are 2.6 and 2.1 h, respectively. Despite the more favorable lipid interactions of 37pA, both agents gave similar, excellent contrast for the detection of atherosclerotic macrophages using MRI.

19361222
High-relaxivity gadolinium-modified high-density lipoproteins as magnetic resonance imaging contrast agents.
There is an ongoing desire to produce high-relaxivity, Gd-based magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agents. These may allow for lower doses to be used, which is especially important in view of the current safety concerns surrounding Gd in patients. Here we report the synthesis of a high-relaxivity MRI contrast agent, by incorporating Gd-chelating lipids that coordinate two water molecules into high-density lipoprotein (q = 2 HDL). We compared the properties of q = 2 HDL with those of an analogous HDL particle labeled with Gd-chelating lipids that coordinate only one water molecule (q = 1 HDL). We found that the q = 2 HDL possessed an elevated r(1) of 41 mM(-1) s(-1) compared to 9 mM(-1) s(-1) for q = 1 HDL at 20 MHz, but the q = 2 HDL exhibited high R(2)* values at high fields, precluding imaging above 128 MHz. While carrying out this investigation we observed that enlarged, disrupted particles were formed when the synthesis was carried out above the lipid critical micelle concentration (cmc), indicating the importance of synthesis below the cmc when modifying lipoproteins in this manner. The high relaxivity of q = 2 HDL means it will be an efficacious contrast agent for future MR imaging studies.

19174763
Cross-sectional, prospective study of MRI reproducibility in the assessment of plaque burden of the carotid arteries and aorta.
The reliability of imaging techniques to assess early atherosclerosis remains unclear. We did a cross-sectional, prospective study to test reproducibility of MRI when imaging arteries, to assess risk of cardiovascular disease and correlations with age and sex. Between January 2003 and December 2006 we performed black-blood MRI of both common carotid arteries and the thoracic descending aorta in patients with cardiovascular risk factors who were referred from clinics in New York, NY, USA. Mean wall area, wall thickness, lumen area, total vessel area, and ratio of the mean wall area to the mean total vessel area (WA/TVA) were manually measured. Reproducibility within and between readers was tested on subsets of images from randomly chosen patients. MRI was performed on 300 patients. Intrareader reproducibility, assessed in images from 20 patients, was high for all parameters (intraclass correlation coefficients >0.8), except WA/TVA ratio in the descending aorta. The inter-reader reproducibility, assessed in images from 187 patients, was acceptable (intraclass correlation coefficients >0.7) for the mean wall, lumen, and total vessel areas. Values for all MRI parameters in all vessels increased with increasing age for both sexes (all P <0.0005) but were always significantly higher in men than in women, except for aortic mean wall thickness and WA/TVA ratio in the carotid arteries. Mean wall area values correlated well between the carotid arteries and aorta, reflecting the systemic nature of atherosclerosis. Our findings support MRI as a reproducible measurement of plaque burden and demonstrate the systemic distribution of atherosclerosis.

19105654
Well-defined, multifunctional nanostructures of a paramagnetic lipid and a lipopeptide for macrophage imaging.
In the field of nanomedicine there is a great demand for technologies that allow the creation of self-assembled structures of which the size and morphology can be accurately controlled. In the current study, we report a nanoparticle platform that is composed of a paramagnetic lipid and a fluorescently labeled lipopeptide. By judiciously controlling the ratio of the aforementioned amphiphilic molecules, a variety of well-defined nanosized supramolecular structures with different sizes and morphologies could be created. The hydrodynamic radii of the different structures were determined by dynamic light scattering. Cryo-TEM revealed the aggregate morphology to vary from small micellar structures to plate-like and even full grown ribbons of which the aspect ratios varied from a diameter of 5-8 nm to structures with a width of up to 25 nm and infinite length. Interestingly, nuclear magnetic resonance dispersion profiling revealed excellent properties for MRI and also showed that the relaxivity of the structures was tunable and morphology dependent. Finally, macrophage cells were treated with two selected nanoparticles and were shown to be avidly taken up. In conclusion we demonstrate a methodology to create structures that (1) are paramagnetic to enable their detection with MRI, (2) exhibit fluorescent properties, (3) can be tuned to defined sizes and shapes, and (4) are efficiently taken up by macrophage cells in vitro.

19072768
Incorporation of an apoE-derived lipopeptide in high-density lipoprotein MRI contrast agents for enhanced imaging of macrophages in atherosclerosis.
Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is becoming a pivotal diagnostic method to identify and characterize vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques. We previously reported a reconstituted high-density lipoprotein (rHDL) nanoparticle platform enriched with Gd-based amphiphiles as a plaque-specific MR imaging contrast agent. Further modification can be accomplished by inserting targeting moieties into this platform to potentially allow for improved intraplaque macrophage uptake. Since studies have indicated that intraplaque macrophage density is directly correlated to plaque vulnerability, modification of the rHDL platform may allow for better detection of vulnerable plaques. In the current study we incorporated a carboxyfluoresceine-labeled apolipoprotein E-derived lipopeptide, P2fA2, into rHDL. The in vitro macrophage uptake and in vivo MR efficacy were demonstrated using murine J774A.1 macrophages and the apolipoprotein E knock-out (apoE(-/-)) mouse model of atherosclerosis. The in vitro studies indicated enhanced association of murine macrophages to P2fA2 enriched rHDL (rHDL-P2A2) nanoparticles, relative to rHDL, using optical techniques and MR imaging. The in vivo studies showed a more pronounced and significantly higher signal enhancement of the atherosclerotic wall 24 h after the 50 micromol Gd/kg injection of rHDL-P2A2 relative to administration of rHDL. The normalized enhancement ratio for atherosclerotic wall of rHDL-P2A2 contrast agent injection was 90%, while that of rHDL was 53% 24 h post-injection. Confocal laser scanning microscopy revealed that rHDL-P2A2 nanoparticles co-localized primarily with intraplaque macrophages. The results of the current study confirm the hypothesis that intraplaque macrophage uptake of rHDL may be enhanced by the incorporation of the P2fA2 peptide into the modified HDL particle.

19057023
Nanotechnology in medical imaging: probe design and applications.
Nanoparticles have become more and more prevalent in reports of novel contrast agents, especially for molecular imaging, the detection of cellular processes. The advantages of nanoparticles include their potency to generate contrast, the ease of integrating multiple properties, lengthy circulation times, and the possibility to include high payloads. As the chemistry of nanoparticles has improved over the past years, more sophisticated examples of nano-sized contrast agents have been reported, such as paramagnetic, macrophage targeted quantum dots or alpha(v)beta(3)-targeted, MRI visible microemulsions that also carry a drug to suppress angiogenesis. The use of these particles is producing greater knowledge of disease processes and the effects of therapy. Along with their excellent properties, nanoparticles may produce significant toxicity, which must be minimized for (clinical) application. In this review we discuss the different factors that are considered when designing a nanoparticle probe and highlight some of the most advanced examples.

18979182
In vivo non-invasive serial monitoring of FDG-PET progression and regression in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis.
We investigated the ability of fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG PET) imaging to serially monitor macrophage content in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis was induced in rabbits (n = 8) by a combination of atherogenic diet and balloon denudation of the aorta. At the end of nine months, the rabbits were randomized to a further six months of the same atherogenic diet (progression group) or normal diet (regression group). In vivo uptake of FDG by the thoracic aorta was measured using aortic uptake-to-blood radioactivity ratios at the start and end of the randomized period. A significant increase in FDG uptake of the progression group after continued cholesterol feeding (aortic uptake-to-blood radioactivity: 0.57 +/- 0.02 to 0.68 +/- 0.02, P = 0.001), and a corresponding fall in FDG uptake of the regression group after returning to a normal chow diet (aortic uptake-to-blood radioactivity ratios: 0.67 +/- 0.02 to 0.53 +/- 0.02, P < 0.0001). FDG PET can quantify in vivo macrophage content and serially monitor changes in FDG activity in this rabbit model.

18939808
Nanocrystal core high-density lipoproteins: a multimodality contrast agent platform.
High density lipoprotein (HDL) is an important natural nanoparticle that may be modified for biomedical imaging purposes. Here we developed a novel technique to create unique multimodality HDL mimicking nanoparticles by incorporation of gold, iron oxide, or quantum dot nanocrystals for computed tomography, magnetic resonance, and fluorescence imaging, respectively. By including additional labels in the corona of the particles, they were made multifunctional. The characteristics of these nanoparticles, as well as their in vitro and in vivo behavior, revealed that they closely mimic native HDL.

18712752
An ApoA-I mimetic peptide high-density-lipoprotein-based MRI contrast agent for atherosclerotic plaque composition detection.
Cardiovascular disease is one of the prime causes of mortality throughout the world and there is a need for targeted and effective contrast agents to allow noninvasive imaging of the cholesterol-rich atherosclerotic plaques in arteries. A new, fully synthetic, high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-mimicking MRI contrast agent is developed, which enhances macrophage-rich areas of plaque in a mouse model of atherosclerosis by 94%. Confirmation of the targeting of this nanoparticulate agent is achieved using confocal microscopy by tracking a fluorescent lipid incorporated into the nanoparticle.

18641599
Multimodality nanotracers for cardiovascular applications.
Targeted imaging and therapeutics is becoming a field of prime importance in the study and treatment of cardiovascular disease; it promises to enable early diagnosis, promote improved understanding of pathology, and offer a way to improve therapeutic efficacy. Agents, particularly for cardiovascular disease, have been reported to permit the in vivo imaging, by multiple modalities, of macrophages, vascular targets such as vascular cell adhesion molecule 1, and markers for angiogenesis such as alpha(v)beta(3) integrin. In this Article, we first discuss the general concept of multimodality nanoparticles and then focus in greater depth on their clinical application for molecular imaging and therapy. Lastly, several examples of cardiovascular applications are discussed, including combined imaging and therapy approaches.

18641598
Prologue: relevance of molecular imaging in clinical medicine.


18581415
Serial in vivo positive contrast MRI of iron oxide-labeled embryonic stem cell-derived cardiac precursor cells in a mouse model of myocardial infarction.
Myocardial regeneration with stem-cell transplantation is a possible treatment option to reverse deleterious effects that occur after myocardial infarction. Since little is known about stem cell survival after transplantation, developing techniques for "tracking" cells would be desirable. Iron-oxide-labeled stem cells have been used for in vivo tracking using MRI but produce negative contrast images that are difficult to interpret. The aim of the current study was to test a positive contrast MR technique using reduced z-gradient rephasing (GRASP) to aid in dynamically tracking stem cells in an in vivo model of mouse myocardial infraction. Ferumoxides and protamine sulfate were complexed and used to magnetically label embryonic stem cell-derived cardiac-precursor-cells (ES-CPCs). A total of 500,000 ES-CPCs were injected in the border zone of infarcted mice and MR imaging was performed on a 9.4T scanner using T(2)*-GRE sequences (negative contrast) and positive contrast GRASP technique before, 24 hours, and 1 week after ES-CPC implantation. Following imaging, mice were sacrificed for histology and Perl's staining was used to confirm iron within myocardium. Good correlation was observed between signal loss seen on conventional T(2)* images, bright areas on GRASP, and the presence of iron on histology. This demonstrated the feasibility of in vivo stem cell imaging with positive contrast MRI.

18541740
Targeted molecular probes for imaging atherosclerotic lesions with magnetic resonance using antibodies that recognize oxidation-specific epitopes.
Oxidized low-density lipoprotein plays a key role in the initiation, progression, and destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques and is present in macrophages and the lipid pool. The aim of this study was to assess the feasibility of magnetic resonance imaging of atherosclerotic lesions in mice using micelles containing gadolinium and murine (MDA2 and E06) or human (IK17) antibodies that bind unique oxidation-specific epitopes. MDA2 micelles, E06 micelles, IK17 micelles, nonspecific IgG micelles, and untargeted micelles (no antibody) were prepared and characterized with respect to pharmacokinetics and biodistribution in wild-type and atherosclerotic apolipoprotein E-deficient (apoE(-/-)) mice. Magnetic resonance imaging was performed at 9.4 T over a 96-hour time interval after the administration of 0.075-mmol Gd/kg micelles. MDA2, E06, and IK17 micelles exhibited a longer plasma half-life than IgG or untargeted micelles in apoE(-/-) but not wild-type mice. In apoE(-/-) mice, MDA2 and IK17 micelles showed maximal arterial wall uptake at 72 hours and E06 micelles at 96 hours, manifested by 125% to 231% enhancement in magnetic resonance signal compared with adjacent muscle. Confocal microscopy revealed that MDA2, IK17, and E06 micelles accumulated within atherosclerotic lesions and specifically within macrophages. Intravenous injection of free MDA2 before imaging with MDA2 micelles resulted in significantly diminished magnetic resonance signal enhancement. IgG micelles and untargeted micelles showed minimal enhancement in apoE(-/-) mice. There was no significant signal enhancement with all micelles in wild-type mice. Magnetic resonance imaging with micelles containing gadolinium and oxidation-specific antibodies demonstrates specific targeting and excellent image quality of oxidation-rich atherosclerotic lesions.

18504763
Evaluation of neovessels in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits using an albumin-binding intravascular contrast agent and MRI.
To test whether B-22956/1, a novel intravascular contrast agent with a high affinity to serum albumin (Bracco Imaging SpA.), allowed quantifying neovessel and macrophage density in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits using MRI. A T1-weighted MRI of the aorta was acquired in 10 rabbits (7 atherosclerotic and 3 control rabbits) before and up to 2 h after intravenous injection of 100 mumol/kg of Gd-DTPA or 75 mumol/kg of B-22956/1. Plaque enhancement was measured at different time points. Immunohistochemistry was performed using anti-CD 31 antibodies and anti-RAM 11 antibodies to correlate to neovessel and macrophage density, respectively. MRI showed a significant plaque enhancement 2 h after B-22956/1 versus Gd-DTPA in the atherosclerotic group (39.75% versus 9.5%; P < 0.0001. Early atherosclerotic plaques (n = 146) enhancement positively correlates with neovessel density on corresponding histological sections (r = 0.42; P < 0.01). Enhancement of atherosclerotic plaques 2 h after injection of B-22956/1 correlated with macrophage density (r = 0.71; P < 0.01). Enhancement of atherosclerotic plaques with MRI correlated with neovessel density at early time points after the injection of B-22956/1 and with macrophage density, at later time points. Hence, B-22956/1-enhanced MRI represents a promising imaging technique for the identification of "high-risk" plaques.

18483100
Atherosclerosis inflammation imaging with 18F-FDG PET: carotid, iliac, and femoral uptake reproducibility, quantification methods, and recommendations.
Atherosclerosis imaging with 18F-FDG PET is useful for tracking inflammation within plaque and monitoring the response to drug therapy. Short-term reproducibility of this technique in peripheral artery disease has not been assessed, and the optimal method of 18F-FDG quantification is still debated. We imaged 20 patients with vascular disease using 18F-FDG PET twice, 14 d apart, and used these data to assess reproducibility measures and compare 2 methods of 18F-FDG uptake measurement. We also reviewed the literature on quantification methods to determine the optimal measures of arterial 18F-FDG uptake for future studies. Twenty patients with vascular disease underwent PET/CT of the iliac, femoral, and carotid arteries 90 min after 18F-FDG administration. In 19 patients, repeat testing was performed at 2 wk. Coregistration and attenuation correction were performed with CT. Vessel 18F-FDG uptake was measured as both the mean and maximum blood-normalized standardized uptake value (SUV), known as the target-to-background ratio (TBR). We assessed interscan, interobserver, and intraobserver agreement. Nineteen patients completed both imaging sessions. The carotid and peripheral arteries all have excellent short-term reproducibility of the 18F-FDG signal, with intraclass correlation coefficients all greater than 0.8 for all measures of reproducibility. Both mean and maximum TBR measurements for quantifying 18F-FDG uptake are equally reproducible. 18F-FDG uptake was significantly higher in the carotid arteries than in both iliac and femoral vessels (P < 0.001 for both). We found that both mean and maximum TBR in the carotid, iliac, and femoral arteries were highly reproducible. We suggest the mean TBR be used for tracking systemic arterial therapies, whereas the maximum TBR is optimal for detecting and monitoring local, plaque-based therapy.

18467641
Detection of neovessels in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits using dynamic contrast enhanced MRI and 18F-FDG PET.
The association of inflammatory cells and neovessels in atherosclerosis is considered a histological hallmark of high-risk active lesions. Therefore, the development and validation of noninvasive imaging techniques that allow for the detection of inflammation and neoangiogenesis in atherosclerosis would be of major clinical interest. Our aim was to test 2 techniques, black blood dynamic contrast enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) and 18-fluorine-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) PET, to quantify inflammation expressed as plaque neovessels content in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Atherosclerotic plaques were induced in the aorta of 10 rabbits by a combination of 2 endothelial abrasions and 4 months hyperlipidemic diet. Six rabbits underwent MRI during the injection of Gd-DTPA, whereas 4 rabbits were imaged after injection of 18F-FDG with PET. We found a positive correlation between neovessels count in atherosclerotic plaques and (1) Gd-DTPA uptake parameters evaluated by DCE-MRI (r=0.89, P=0.016) and (2) 18F-FDG uptake evaluated by PET (r=0.5, P=0.103 after clustered robust, Huber-White, standard errors analysis). DCE-MRI and 18F-FDG PET may allow for the evaluation of inflammation in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits. These noninvasive imaging modalities could be proposed as clinical tools in the evaluation of lesion prognosis and monitoring of anti-angiogenic therapies.

18383304
Fractionated Feridex and positive contrast: in vivo MR imaging of atherosclerosis.
Macrophages have been identified as a critical factor in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Ultrasmall iron oxide particles (USPIOs) have been used to passively target intraplaque macrophages. For dextran-based USPIOs, uptake into macrophages may be modulated by particle size. The aim of the current study was to test the efficacy of fractionated Feridex with respect to macrophage uptake in atherosclerotic rabbits. Fractionation of Feridex resulted in a 15-nm USPIO that exhibited a blood half-life of 15.9 h and liver retention of 6.4%. Blood clearance and liver retention of Feridex was 0.46 h and 60%, following administration of 4.8 mg Fe/kg Feridex. Atherosclerotic rabbits were administered 0.5 or 4.8 mg Fe/kg dosages of either fractionated Feridex or Feridex. MRI was performed at 1.5T over a 24-h time period postinjection. Perls and RAM-11 staining was performed to identify iron deposition. MRI showed a dose-dependent signal loss using conventional gradient echo (GRE) sequences following administration of fractionated Feridex. Even at low dose, significant signal loss was observed that correlated with histology. No signal attenuation or iron deposition was observed in the vessel wall of rabbits administered Feridex. Results of this study suggest that it may be possible to optimize USPIOs for intraplaque macrophage detection.

18332609
Statin therapy alone and in combination with an acyl-CoA:cholesterol O-acyltransferase inhibitor on experimental atherosclerosis.
The ability to modify the enzymatic processes involved in promoting atherosclerotic plaque disruption and to serially monitor atherosclerotic evolution could provide novel information in the management of patients with atherosclerosis. We studied the effects of a statin (atorvastatin) and its combination with an acyl-CoA:cholesterol O-acyltransferase (ACAT) inhibitor (avasimibe) on atherosclerotic regression and plaque stability as measured by matrix metalloproteinase 1 and 3 (MMP-1 and MMP-3) levels. Watanabe Heritable Hyperlipidemic (WHHL) rabbits treated with atorvastatin alone experienced an attenuated increase in atherosclerotic burden versus controls as determined by MR imaging. The mean vessel wall area (VWA) prior to drug therapy was 5.57 +/- 0.01 mm2. The VWA increased to 6.71 +/- 0.03 and 7.16 +/- 0.03 mm2, respectively, in atorvastatin-treated and control groups (p < 0.0001 for both). The combination of atorvastatin and avasimibe induced a significant regression of the previously established atherosclerotic lesions, with the VWA decreasing to 4.54 +/- 0.04 mm2 (p = 0.009). Atorvastatin alone induced a nonsignificant reduction in the percent staining of MMP-1 in atherosclerotic lesions, but the combination treatment with avasimibe led to a significant reduction versus controls (p = 0.005). However, a reduction in MMP-3 staining was significant for rabbits treated with both atorvastatin alone (p = 0.007) and in combination with avasimibe (p = 0.04) versus controls. In this animal model, the addition of avasimibe to atorvastatin has beneficial effects on both atherosclerotic plaque regression and stabilization.

18288186
Imaging of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.
Atherosclerosis is characterized by thickening of the walls of the arteries, a process that occurs slowly and 'silently' over decades. This prolonged course of disease provides a window of opportunity for diagnosis before symptoms occur. But, until recently, only advanced atherosclerotic disease could be observed. Now, developments in imaging technology offer many enticing prospects, including detecting atherosclerosis early, grouping individuals by the probability that they will develop symptoms of atherosclerosis, assessing the results of treatment and improving the current understanding of the biology of atherosclerosis.

18258820
Evaluation of matrix metalloproteinases in atherosclerosis using a novel noninvasive imaging approach.
Despite great advances in our knowledge, atherosclerosis continues to kill more people than any other disease in the Western world. This is because our means of identifying truly vulnerable patients is limited. Prediction of atherosclerotic plaque rupture may be addressed by MRI of activated matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a family of enzymes that have been implicated in the vulnerability of plaques prone to rupture. This study evaluated the ability of the novel gadolinium-based MRI contrast agent P947 to target MMPs in atherosclerotic plaques. The affinity of P947 toward activated MMPs was demonstrated in vitro. The affinity and specificity of P947 toward matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-rich plaques was evaluated both in vivo using ApoE-/- mice and ex vivo in hyperlipidemic rabbits. Gadolinium content quantification and MRI showed a preferential accumulation of P947 in atherosclerotic lesions compared with the nontargeted reference compound, Gd-DOTA. The ex vivo assay on rabbit plaques revealed a higher uptake of P947. Moreover, using human carotid artery endarterectomy specimens, P947 facilitated discrimination between histologically defined MMP-rich and MMP-poor plaques. An in vivo MRI investigation in mice revealed that P947 greatly improved the ability to visualize and delineate atherosclerotic plaques. P947 may be a useful tool for the detection and characterization of the MMP-rich atherosclerotic plaques.

18025995
Magnetic resonance molecular imaging contrast agents and their application in atherosclerosis.
Heart disease is the most prevalent cause of mortality in the Western world and is most frequently caused by rupture of lesions in the arteries, which are formed by atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is a progressive disease, and therefore, there is a strong motivation to be able to image the stages of this disease in vivo. The pathogenesis of this disease is now well established, and a number of markers such as macrophages, vascular adhesion molecules, fibrin, and the alphanubeta3-integrin have been identified that are of particular interest for imaging. Furthermore, the differentiation between the stable and unstable plaque with imaging is a central goal of the field. Contrast can be generated in magnetic resonance imaging through the application of several types of agents such as T1, T2, chemical exchange saturation transfer or 19F-based imaging agents. Subsequent to the discussion of the above topics, we will describe some examples of molecular imaging agents that successfully detect specific markers in atherosclerotic plaques that are of interest in several stages of this disease.

17729343
Magnetic resonance imaging of vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques: current imaging strategies and molecular imaging probes.
The vulnerability or destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques has been directly linked to plaque composition. Imaging modalities, such as magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, that allow for evaluation of plaque composition at a cellular and molecular level, could further improve the detection of vulnerable plaque and may allow for monitoring the efficacy of antiatherosclerotic therapies. In this review we focus on MR imaging strategies for the detection and evaluation of atherosclerotic plaques and their composition. We highlight recent advancements in the development of MR pulse sequences, computer image analysis, and the use of commercially available MR contrast agents, such as gadopentic acid (Gd-DTPA), for plaque characterization. We also discuss molecular imaging strategies that are currently being used to design specific imaging probes targeted to biochemical and cellular markers of atherosclerotic plaque vulnerability.

17719477
(18)Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography imaging of atherosclerotic plaque inflammation is highly reproducible: implications for atherosclerosis therapy trials.
This study tested the near-term reproducibility of (18)fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) imaging of atherosclerosis. It is known that FDG-PET can measure inflammation within the aorta, carotid, and vertebral arteries with histologic validation in humans and animal models of disease. By tracking changes in inflammation over time, PET could be used as a surrogate marker of antiatheroma drug efficacy. However, the short-term variability and reproducibility of the technique are unknown. We imaged the carotid arteries and aorta in 11 subjects with FDG-PET/computed tomography twice, 14 days apart. We assessed interobserver and intraobserver agreement and interscan variability. Interscan plaque FDG variability over 2 weeks was very low; intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) ranged between 0.79 and 0.92. Interobserver agreement was high across all territories imaged except aortic arch (ICC values from 0.90 to 0.97, arch 0.71). Intraobserver agreement was high, with ICC values between 0.93 and 0.98. Spontaneous change in plaque FDG uptake is low over 2 weeks, with favorable inter- and intraobserver agreement. Power calculations suggest that drug studies using FDG-PET imaging would require few subjects compared with other imaging modalities. This study strengthens the case for FDG-PET as a noninvasive plaque imaging technique.

17716176
Magnetic and fluorescent nanoparticles for multimodality imaging.
The development of nanoparticulate contrast agents is providing an increasing contribution to the field of diagnostic and molecular imaging. Such agents provide several advantages over traditional compounds. First, they may contain a high payload of the contrast-generating material, which greatly improves their detectability. Second, multiple properties may be easily integrated within one nanoparticle to allow its detection with several imaging techniques or to include therapeutic qualities. Finally, the surface of such nanoparticles may be modified to improve circulation half-lives or to attach targeting groups. Magnetic resonance imaging and optical techniques are highly complementary imaging methods. Combining these techniques would therefore have significant advantages and may be realized through the use of nanoparticulate contrast agents. This review gives a survey of the different types of fluorescent and magnetic nanoparticles that have been employed for both magnetic resonance and optical imaging studies.

17451174
Non-invasive MRI of mouse models of atherosclerosis.
Early detection and characterization of atherosclerotic lesions susceptible to sudden rupture and thrombosis may decrease morbidity and mortality. Plaque development has been extensively studied using MRI in animal models of rapidly progressing atherosclerosis. These transgenic mice develop atherosclerotic plaques in the aortic root by 10 weeks of age and throughout the vasculature thereafter. Transplantation of lesion-containing segments of the thoracic aorta into wild-type mice results in nearly total reversal of atherosclerosis, making it possible to study both progression and regression of plaques in this model. MRI permits the non-invasive accurate assessment of atherosclerotic plaque burden and the differentiation between the lipid and fibrous content of individual plaques, thus providing a non-invasive approach to serially monitor the evolution of individual plaques in the mouse models. Emergence of novel contrast agents that target a diverse set of molecules within the plaque are now helping to elucidate the changes at the cellular and molecular levels during plaque progression and regression.

17417649
Noninvasive detection of macrophages using a nanoparticulate contrast agent for computed tomography.
Sudden fibrous cap disruption of 'high-risk' atherosclerotic plaques can trigger the formation of an occlusive thrombus in coronary arteries, causing acute coronary syndromes. High-risk atherosclerotic plaques are characterized by their specific cellular and biological content (in particular, a high density of macrophages), rather than by their impact on the vessel lumen. Early identification of high-risk plaques may be useful for preventing ischemic events. One major hurdle in detecting high-risk atherosclerotic plaques in coronary arteries is the lack of an imaging modality that allows for the identification of atherosclerotic plaque composition with high spatial and temporal resolutions. Here we show that macrophages in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits can be detected with a clinical X-ray computed tomography (CT) scanner after the intravenous injection of a contrast agent formed of iodinated nanoparticles dispersed with surfactant. This contrast agent may become an important adjunct to the clinical evaluation of coronary arteries with CT.

17215360
Detecting and assessing macrophages in vivo to evaluate atherosclerosis noninvasively using molecular MRI.
We investigated the ability of targeted immunomicelles to detect and assess macrophages in atherosclerotic plaque using MRI in vivo. There is a large clinical need for a noninvasive tool to assess atherosclerosis from a molecular and cellular standpoint. Macrophages play a central role in atherosclerosis and are associated with plaques vulnerable to rupture. Therefore, macrophage scavenger receptor (MSR) was chosen as a target for molecular MRI. MSR-targeted immunomicelles, micelles, and gadolinium-diethyltriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) were tested in ApoE-/- and WT mice by using in vivo MRI. Confocal laser-scanning microscopy colocalization, macrophage immunostaining and MRI correlation, competitive inhibition, and various other analyses were performed. In vivo MRI revealed that at 24 h postinjection, immunomicelles provided a 79% increase in signal intensity of atherosclerotic aortas in ApoE-/- mice compared with only 34% using untargeted micelles and no enhancement using gadolinium-DTPA. Confocal laser-scanning microscopy revealed colocalization between fluorescent immunomicelles and macrophages in plaques. There was a strong correlation between macrophage content in atherosclerotic plaques and the matched in vivo MRI results as measured by the percent normalized enhancement ratio. Monoclonal antibodies to MSR were able to significantly hinder immunomicelles from providing contrast enhancement of atherosclerotic vessels in vivo. Immunomicelles provided excellent validated in vivo enhancement of atherosclerotic plaques. The enhancement seen is related to the macrophage content of the atherosclerotic vessel areas imaged. Immunomicelles may aid in the detection of high macrophage content associated with plaques vulnerable to rupture.

17680014
Serial magnetic resonance imaging correlates with neurological outcome in an experimental model of spinal cord ischemia.
Paraplegia complicating surgical thoracoabdominal aneurysm (TAA) repair remains an unpredictable and poorly understood phenomenon. The ability to identify patients at increased risk of delayed paraplegia before the process becomes irreversible could allow early interventions to attenuate this risk. In a rabbit model of infra-renal spinal cord ischemia, serial T2 weighted (T2W) magnetic resonance (MR) imaging was performed 2- and 8 h after the ischemic insult with changes correlated with clinical outcome. Using the axial T2W images, signal intensity measurements of the lateral horns of the spinal cord were acquired, both above (that is, thoracolumbar cord) and below (that is, lumbar cord) the renal arteries. This ratio (lumbar/thoracolumbar cord signal intensity) was evaluated and compared between groups. No changes were seen in the signal intensity of rabbits that remained neurologically intact. Rabbits with delayed paralysis showed a significant (P<0.01) decrease in signal intensity ratio at 2 h (1.13+/-0.03), while a significant (P<0.01) increase was noted in those rabbits with immediate persistent paralysis (1.43+/-0.04). There was a significant (P<0.01) increase in the signal intensity ratios at 2 h in the delayed paralysis group (1.55+/-0.14), with a further significant (P<0.01) increase at 8 h in the immediate persistent paralysis group (1.76+/-0.07). Findings on MR imaging can differentiate clinical outcomes in this experimental model of spinal cord ischemia. While further studies are required, MR could be useful in predicting which patients are at risk for delayed paraplegia after TAA repair.

