20636686
Impact of maternal posttraumatic stress disorder and depression following exposure to the September 11 attacks on preschool children's behavior.
To evaluate whether conjoined maternal posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression are associated with increased behavioral problems among terrorism-exposed preschool children (N = 116; 18-54 months), this study compared clinically significant child behavioral problem rates among the preschool children of mothers with PTSD and depression, depression alone, and neither disorder. Behavioral problems were independently rated by mothers and preschool teachers. Maternal depression and PTSD, relative to maternal depression alone, and to neither disorder, were associated with substantially increased child problems. Notably, maternal depression and PTSD were associated with increased emotional reactivity (relative risk [RR] = 5.9 by mother's and 3.4 by teacher's reports) and aggressive behavior problems (RR = 11.0 by mother's and RR = 5.9 by teacher's reports). This was corroborated by teacher ratings. Implications for intervening with terrorism-exposed preschool children are discussed.

18945918
Relationship between type of trauma exposure and posttraumatic stress disorder among urban children and adolescents.
This study examines the association between trauma exposure and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) among 157 help-seeking children (aged 8-17). Structured clinical interviews are carried out, and linear and logistic regression analyses are conducted to examine the relationship between PTSD and type of trauma exposure controlling for age, gender, and ethnicity. Confrontation with traumatic news, witnessing domestic violence, physical abuse, and sexual abuse are each significantly associated with PTSD. Witnessing a crime, being the victim of a crime, and exposure to accidents, fire, or disaster are not associated with PTSD. These findings underscore the association between interpersonal violence and childhood PTSD.

18552630
The relationship between PTSD arousal symptoms and depression among mothers exposed to the World Trade Center attacks.
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is associated with greater risk of developing comorbid depression. However, little is known about the relationship between specific PTSD symptom clusters and comorbid depression. Approximately 4 years after the World Trade Center (WTC) attacks, we examined the association between PTSD symptom clusters and depression severity among 64 mothers directly exposed to the WTC attacks. Severity scores were computed for each PTSD symptom cluster by summing symptom frequency. Partial correlations with depression severity were calculated separately for PTSD symptom clusters, controlling for demographic variables, time elapsed since the attacks, WTC attack exposure, meeting PTSD criterion A, and the other cluster scores. Higher arousal symptom cluster scores were significantly correlated with persistent depression, but the re-experiencing and avoidance symptom clusters were not. Subsequent analyses isolating shared symptoms of PTSD and depression from those unique to PTSD suggest a complex interrelationship among symptoms of arousal, numbing, and depression.

17347378
Association of direct exposure to terrorism, media exposure to terrorism, and other trauma with emotional and behavioral problems in preschool children.
This study examined the differential impact of various types of trauma exposure on emotional and behavioral problems in preschool children. Participants were 95 mothers of 1- to 4-year-old children in Israel. Results suggested a differential pattern of associations between the types of trauma exposure (i.e., direct exposure to terrorism, media exposure to terrorism, and other trauma) and children's internalizing and externalizing problems. This line of research is important for the identification of risk factors and the development of effective prevention and intervention strategies to promote resilience in preschool children exposed to specific type(s) of trauma.

