21396640
The detection of premalignant colon polyps during colonoscopy is stable throughout the workday.
BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that colonoscopic polyp detection decreases as the workday progresses. This may reflect time-dependent factors such as colonoscopist fatigue and decreased colon cleanliness, which can be addressed through adaptations in colonoscopy practice. OBJECTIVE: To test for time-of-day differences in adenomatous polyp (AP) and sessile serrated polyp (SSP) detection in a practice that uses split-dose bowel preparation and moderated daily colonoscopist procedure loads. DESIGN: Retrospective chart review. SETTING: Community-based, group gastroenterology practice. PATIENTS: This study involved 2439 patients undergoing surveillance or screening colonoscopy. INTERVENTION: Colonoscopy. MAIN OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: Detection rate of all premalignant polyps (PMPs), and of APs and SSPs, individually. RESULTS: A total of 1183 PMPs were identified in 1486 eligible patients (mean PMP/colonoscopy = 0.80; PMP detection rate = 47%). In univariate and multivariate analyses, PMP detection as well as detection of APs or SSPs individually did not vary significantly in relation to the hour of the day. In a binary comparison of morning (am) versus afternoon (pm) procedures, the total polyp detection rate was 67% and 66%, respectively. For PMPs, APs, SSPs, and hyperplastic polyps (HPs), the am and pm detection rates were 46% and 47%, 41% and 44%, 8% and 8%, and 27% and 24%, respectively. Bowel preparation quality was independent of time of day and was rated excellent or good in 86% to 87% of cases. LIMITATIONS: Retrospective, nonrandomized study. CONCLUSION: Stable PMP, AP, SSP, and HP detection rates throughout the workday occur under certain practice conditions, including the use of split-dose bowel preparation and/or moderated daily colonoscopist procedure loads.

20717045
Is gastroduodenal biopsy safe in patients receiving aspirin and clopidogrel?: a prospective, randomized study involving 630 biopsies.
To assess prospectively the bleeding risk attributable to gastroduodenal biopsy in subjects taking antiplatelet medications. No prospective data exist regarding the bleeding risk attributable to endoscopic biopsy in patients taking antiplatelet agents. A majority of Western endoscopists withdraw antiplatelet agents before upper endoscopy, despite expert guidelines to the contrary. We performed a prospective, single-blind, randomized study in healthy volunteers participating in a larger study regarding the effect of antiplatelet agents on gastroduodenal mucosal healing. Multiple gastroduodenal biopsies were performed during 2 esophagogastroduodenoscopy in subjects dosed with aspirin enteric-coated 81 mg once daily or clopidogrel 75 mg once daily. Data for endoscopic bleeding, clinical bleeding, blood vessel size, and depth of biopsy in histology specimens were collected. Four hundred and five antral biopsies and 225 duodenal biopsies were performed during 90 esophagogastroduodenoscopy in 45 subjects receiving aspirin or clopidogrel. Median maximum blood vessel diameter per biopsy was 31.9 ? (range: 9.2 to 133.8). About 50.8% of biopsy specimens breached the muscularis mucosa. In the clopidogrel group, no bleeding events were noted after 350 biopsies [upper confidence limit (UCL) for probability of bleeding=0.0085]. In the aspirin group, there were no clinical events (UCL=0.0106) and one minor endoscopic bleeding event (UCL=0.0169). Consistent with expert guidelines, the absolute risk attributable to gastroduodenal biopsy in adults taking antiplatelet agents seems to be low. Half of routine biopsies enter submucosa. The largest blood vessels avulsed during biopsy correspond to midsized and large arterioles and venules.

19585070
Routine management of stricture after gastric bypass and predictors of subsequent weight loss.
Gastrojejunal anastomotic stricture is the most commonly occurring short-term complication after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Endoscopic balloon dilation is the first-line treatment for stricture. However, an optimal dilation protocol has not been identified. This study aimed to document routine management of stricture after laparoscopic gastric bypass and its impact on postoperative weight loss. Charts of patients who underwent gastric bypass from 2000 to 2006 were reviewed using a standardized abstraction form. Patients with stricture were matched with control subjects based on age +/-5 years, gender, and preoperative body mass index (BMI +/- 5). Patients with at least 6 months of follow-up assessment were included in the study. Of the 113 patients included in the study, 20% were male, 26% black, 19% Hispanic, and 51% white. Their mean age was 42 +/- 10 years (range, 22-66 years). The mean preoperative BMI was 47.0 +/- 5.4 kg/m(2) for the case group and 46.6 +/- 5.5 kg/m(2) for the control group (p = 0.3). After adjustment for patient characteristics, using a larger balloon was associated with reduced odds of stricture recurrence (odds ratio [OR], 0.32; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.12-0.85; p = 0.02). All the patients were without signs or symptoms of stricture at the last follow-up visit (20 +/- 17 months). Weight loss was similar between the two groups. The percentage of estimated weight loss (%EWL) at 12 months postoperatively was 66% for the study participants and 67% for the control subjects (p = 0.5). Baseline alcohol use and higher preoperative BMI were associated with a higher BMI 6 months postoperatively (p = 0.004 and p < 0.001, respectively). Initial dilation with a larger balloon is safe and may prevent stricture recurrence. Further study of modifiable risk factors for reduced weight loss after surgery, such as alcohol use, may improve patient outcomes.

18922404
Endoscopic sedation: equipment and personnel.
Endoscopic sedation is changing, in response to economic pressures, regulatory requirements, and new technology. Each endoscopy unit must tailor its personnel and equipment practices to its particular case mix, sedation preferences, and to its external environment. This article discusses sedation-related considerations regarding procedure room design, equipment for drug administration, equipment for patient monitoring, equipment for managing emergencies, and staff selection, training, and responsibilities.

18844620
Chromoendoscopy-targeted biopsies are superior to standard colonoscopic surveillance for detecting dysplasia in inflammatory bowel disease patients: a prospective endoscopic trial.
Patients with extensive, longstanding chronic ulcerative or Crohn's colitis face greater risks of developing colorectal cancer. Current standard surveillance relies on detecting dysplasia using random sampling at colonoscopy but may fail to detect dysplasia in many patients. Dye spraying techniques have been reported to aid in detecting otherwise subtle mucosal abnormalities in the setting of colitis. We prospectively compared dye-spray technique using methylene blue to standard colonoscopic surveillance in detecting dysplasia. One hundred fifteen patients were referred to the Chromoendoscopy Study Group and prospectively screened for the study. One hundred two (64 M, 38 F) (79 UC 23 CC) patients meeting the inclusion criteria were enrolled. Following a standard bowel preparation, each patient was examined using standard office endoscopic equipment by three methods: (a) standard surveillance colonoscopy with four random biopsies every 10 cm (for a total of at least 32 samples); (b) a targeted biopsy protocol; and finally (c) methylene blue (0.01%) dye spray was segmentally applied throughout the colon and any pit-pattern abnormality or lesion rendered visible by the dye spray was targeted and biopsied. Each patient had a single examination, which included two passes of the colonoscope. Specimens were reviewed in a blinded fashion by a single gastrointestinal pathologist. The three methods were then compared with each patient serving as his or her own control. Targeted biopsies with dye spray revealed significantly more dysplasia (16 patients with low grade and 1 patient with high grade) than random biopsies (3 patients with low-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.001) and more than targeted nondye spray (8 patients with low-grade and 1 patient with high-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.057). Targeted biopsies with and without dye spray detected dysplasia in 20 patients compared with 3 using Method (a) (P= 0.0002, two-tailed exact McNemar's Test). There were no adverse events. Colonoscopic surveillance of chronic colitis patients using methylene blue dye-spray targeted biopsies results in improved dysplasia yield compared to conventional random and targeted biopsy methods. Accordingly, this technique warrants incorporation into clinical practice in this setting and consideration as a standard of care for these patients. The value of multiple random biopsies as a surveillance technique should be revisited.

18224442
Primary prevention of adverse gastroduodenal effects from short-term use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs by omeprazole 20 mg in healthy subjects: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
The effectiveness of low-dose omeprazole as primary prevention of gastrointestinal adverse events due to episodic use of non-selective NSAIDs was evaluated. Healthy adults aged 50-75 who did not take chronic NSAIDs were randomized to a 6.5-day treatment of naproxen 500 mg twice daily plus omeprazole 20 mg daily or naproxen 500 mg twice daily plus placebo. Seventy subjects were enrolled (mean age 58.6 years, proportion >60 = 41.4%). Subjects receiving naproxen plus omeprazole developed fewer gastroduodenal ulcers compared to subjects receiving naproxen plus placebo (11.8% vs. 46.9%, P = 0.002). Likewise, naproxen plus omeprazole was associated with a decreased risk of ulceration and/or >5 erosions (38.2% vs. 81.3%, P < or = 0.001), and a smaller change in dyspepsia score. Considering their relatively low cost, ready availability, and favorable safety profile, low-dose PPI co-prescription in healthy adults requiring short-term therapy with non-selective NSAIDs may be reasonable.

17681185
AGA Institute review of endoscopic sedation.


17397402
Propofol use under the direction of trained gastroenterologists: an analysis of the medicolegal implications.


20626383
Clinical trial: 2-L polyethylene glycol-based lavage solutions for colonoscopy preparation - a randomized, single-blind study of two formulations.
The 2-L polyethylene glycol (PEG) lavage solutions provide efficacy similar to that of standard 4-L PEG formulations in spite of the reduced volume. The comparative efficacy and tolerability of two formulations of 2-L PEG solution remain unknown. To assess the efficacy, safety and tolerability of PEG + Bis compared with PEG + Asc, and to study the effect of bowel cleansing quality on adenoma detection rates. Patients were randomized to receive either 2-L PEG with ascorbic acid (PEG + Asc) or 2-L PEG plus bisacodyl 10 mg (PEG + Bis). The primary endpoint was overall colon cleansing score, assessed by blinded investigators using a validated four-point scale. Secondary endpoints included adenoma detection rate, patient tolerability and compliance and adverse events. Fifty-two patients received PEG + Asc and 55 patients received PEG + Bis. Overall colon cleansing scores (+/-s.d.) were 1.40 +/- 0.69 and 1.75 +/- 0.70 (P < 0.003) in the PEG + Asc and PEG + Bis groups, respectively. Excellent and good ratings were recorded in 69% and 23% receiving PEG + Asc compared to 38% and 51% (P = 0.01) of patients receiving PEG + Bis. More adenomas were detected in colonoscopies performed with PEG + Asc (39%) than in those performed with PEG + Bis (20%) (P = 0.04). Patient tolerability and safety were similar with both preparations. The use of PEG + Asc resulted in better colon cleansing and higher adenoma detection rates compared with PEG + Bis.

19309390
NSAID-induced antral ulcers are associated with distinct changes in mucosal gene expression.
The basis for individual variation in gastroduodenal vulnerability to NSAIDs is not well understood. To assess whether a gene expression signature is associated with susceptibility to gastroduodenal ulcerations. Twenty-five Helicobacter pylori negative adults were treated for 7 days with naproxen 500 mg b.d. Subjects underwent baseline and post-treatment endoscopy, during which biopsies were taken from antrum and duodenum. RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis were performed, followed by PCR of 23 genes relevant to mucosal injury and repair. Fold changes in gene expression were compared between subjects who developed ulcers and those who did not. Compared with subjects who did not develop ulcers (n = 18), subjects who developed antral ulcers (n = 7) had significantly greater mucosal up-regulation of interleukin-8 [Fold change = 33.5 (S.E.M. = 18.5) vs. -7.7 (3.2)] and of cyclo-oxygenase-2 [2.3 (1.7) vs. -10.8 (2.2)]. Conversely, non-ulcer subjects had significantly greater up-regulation of toll-like receptor-4, cyclo-oxygenase-1 and hepatocyte growth factor [14.0 (2.2) vs. -0.8 (1.0), 9.8 (2.4) vs. 0.0 (0.7) and 8.2 (2.6) vs. -2.2 (0.3) respectively]. NSAID-induced antral ulcers are associated with a specific pattern of gastroduodenal mucosal gene expression. These patterns may provide an insight into the molecular basis of individual susceptibility to mucosal injury.

19183162
A randomized, placebo-controlled study of the effects of naproxen, aspirin, celecoxib or clopidogrel on gastroduodenal mucosal healing.
Many individuals with gastroduodenal ulcers require on-going, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) or anti-platelet therapy. To evaluate the effects of these agents on gastroduodenal mucosal healing. Helicobacter pylori-negative volunteers were randomized to receive naproxen, celecoxib, aspirin, clopidogrel or placebo. Antral and duodenal lesions were created endoscopically with a biopsy forceps. After 7 days of medication dosing, each lesion was scored [from 0 (low) to 8 (high)] using a validated methodology. The primary endpoint was the mean injury score. The secondary endpoint was the percentage of subjects with > or = 1 unhealed lesion. In all, 108 subjects completed the study. Naproxen impaired antral lesion healing more than placebo, clopidogrel, aspirin or celecoxib (mean injury score of 4.3 vs. 3.0, 2.7, 3.2, and 3.2, respectively, P < 0.05). Naproxen impaired duodenal lesion healing more than placebo, clopidogrel or aspirin (mean injury score of 4.0 vs. 2.4, 2.6, and 2.2, respectively, P < 0.05). More subjects taking naproxen than placebo or clopidogrel had > or =1 unhealed antral lesions (72.2% vs. 36.0% and 32.0%, respectively, P < 0.05) and unhealed duodenal lesions (61.1% vs. 16.0% and 28.0%, respectively, P < 0.05). Naproxen may impair gastroduodenal healing more than aspirin or celecoxib in H. pylori negative subjects. Clopidogrel did not impair mucosal healing.

