19346141
Differences in response to fetal hemoglobin induction therapy in beta-thalassemia and sickle cell disease.
Inducers of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) have shown considerable promise in the treatment of sickle cell disease (SCD). However, the same agents have shown less clinical activity in beta-thalassemia (beta-Thal). To understand the basis of these differences in clinical effectiveness, we compared the effects of butyrate and hemin on the expression of the different globin genes in progenitors-derived erythroid cells from patients with beta-Thal intermedia and SCD. Exposure to butyrate resulted in an augmentation of gamma-globin mRNA levels in both SCD and beta-Thal. Interestingly, butyrate exposure increased alpha-globin expression in beta-Thal, while alpha-globin mRNA levels decreased in SCD in response to butyrate. As a result, the favorable effects of the butyrate-induced increase in gamma-globin expression on alpha:beta-like globin mRNA imbalance in beta-Thal were reduced as a result of the associated increase in alpha-globin expression. Hemin had similar but less profound effects on all three globin genes in both categories of patients. Although the majority of patients with beta-Thal did not correct their globin imbalance in response to butyrate or hemin induction of HbF in a minority of patients resulted in marked reduction in globin imbalance. Thus, we believe that the poor clinical response in a majority of patients with beta-Thal to inducers of gamma-globin expression may be a reflection of unfavorable effects of these agents on the other globin genes.

18029204
Epigenetic analysis of the human alpha- and beta-globin gene clusters.
K562 erythroleukemia cells have been widely used as a model for the study of globin gene regulation. A number of agents have been shown to activate or suppress globin gene expression in these cells. However, the molecular effects of these agents on the epigenetic configuration of the alpha- and gamma-globin genes that encode HbF are not known. In this report, we investigated the relationship between globin expression and histone acetylation of the human alpha- and beta-globin clusters in the fetal erythroid environment of K562 cells. Our studies suggest that acetylation of histone H3 may be important in regulating developmental stage-specific expression of the different beta-like globin genes while acetylation of both histones H3 and H4 may be important for the regulation of tissue-specific expression of these genes. In contrast, acetylation of both histones H3 and H4 at the alpha-like globin promoters appears to be important for both developmental stage- and tissue-specific expression. Interestingly, butyrate-induced activation of alpha-globin gene expression in K562 cells is associated with significant increase in histone acetylation levels while TPA-induced inhibition is associated with decreased histone acetylation at its promoters. In contrast, changes in histone acetylation and DNA methylation do not appear to be important in the regulation of gamma-globin gene expression by the same agents. These data suggest that the butyrate-mediated induction of the fetal gamma-globin genes in K562 cells is not a direct result of its histone deacetylase inhibitor activity of butyrate on the chromatin of the gamma-globin promoters, while the induction of the alpha-globin genes could be a result of a direct effect of butyrate on chromatin at its promoters. This is another example of the important differences in the molecular mechanisms of regulation of the genes of the alpha- and beta-like globin clusters.

17670914
Synergistic antiangiogenic effects of stathmin inhibition and taxol exposure.
Stathmin is one of the key regulators of the microtubule cytoskeleton and the mitotic spindle in eukaryotic cells. It is expressed at high levels in a wide variety of human cancers and may provide an attractive target for cancer therapy. We had previously shown that stathmin inhibition results in the abrogation of the malignant phenotype. The microtubule-interfering drug, taxol, has both antitumorigenic and antiangiogenic properties. We had also shown that the antitumor activities of taxol and stathmin inhibition are synergistic. We hypothesized that taxol and stathmin inhibition may also have synergistic antiangiogenic activities. A replication-deficient bicistronic adenoviral vector that coexpresses green fluorescent protein and an anti-stathmin ribozyme was used to target stathmin mRNA. Exposure of endothelial cells to anti-stathmin adenovirus alone resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of proliferation, migration, and differentiation into capillary-like structures. This inhibition was markedly enhanced by exposure of transduced endothelial cells to very low concentrations of taxol, which resulted in a virtually complete loss of proliferation, migration, and differentiation of endothelial cells. In contrast, exposure of nontransduced endothelial cells to taxol alone resulted in a modest inhibition of proliferation, migration, and differentiation. Our detailed analysis showed that the antiangiogenic effects of the combination of stathmin inhibition and taxol exposure are synergistic. Our studies also showed that the mechanism of this synergistic interaction is likely to be mediated through the stabilization of microtubules. Thus, this novel combination may provide an attractive therapeutic strategy that combines a synergistic antitumor activity with a synergistic antiangiogenic activity.

17638855
Role of epigenetic modifications in normal globin gene regulation and butyrate-mediated induction of fetal hemoglobin.
Butyrate is a prototype of histone deacetylase inhibitors that is believed to reactivate silent genes by inducing epigenetic modifications. Although butyrate was shown to induce fetal hemoglobin (HbF) production in patients with hemoglobin disorders, the mechanism of this induction has not been fully elucidated. Our studies of the epigenetic configuration of the beta-globin cluster suggest that DNA methylation and histone H3 acetylation are important for the regulation of developmental stage-specific expression of the beta-like globin genes, whereas acetylation of both histones H3 and H4 seem to be important for the regulation of tissue-specific expression. These studies suggest that DNA methylation may be important for the silencing of the beta-like globin genes in nonerythroid hematopoietic cells but may not be necessary for their silencing in nonhematopoietic cells. Furthermore, our studies demonstrate that butyrate exposure results in a true reversal of the normal developmental switch from gamma- to beta-globin expression. This is associated with increased histone acetylation and decreased DNA methylation of the gamma-globin genes, with opposite changes in the beta-globin gene. These studies provide strong support for the role of epigenetic modifications in the normal developmental and tissue-specific regulation of globin gene expression and in the butyrate-mediated pharmacologic induction of HbF production.

17404610
Sickle cell disease: old discoveries, new concepts, and future promise.
The discovery of the molecular basis of sickle cell disease was an important landmark in molecular medicine. The modern tools of molecular and cellular biology have refined our understanding of its pathophysiology and facilitated the development of new therapies. In this review, we discuss some of the important advances in this field and the impediments that limit the impact of these advances.

