21536742
Pretransplant CSF-1 therapy expands recipient macrophages and ameliorates GVHD after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation.
Acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) results from the attack of host tissues by donor allogeneic T cells and is the most serious limitation of allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (allo-HCT). Host antigen-presenting cells are thought to control the priming of alloreactive T cells and the induction of acute GVHD after allo-HCT. However, whereas the role of host DC in GVHD has been established, the contribution of host macrophages to GVHD has not been clearly addressed. We show that, in contrast to DC, reducing of the host macrophage pool in recipient mice increased donor T cell expansion and aggravated GVHD mortality after allo-HCT. We also show that host macrophages that persist after allo-HCT engulf donor allogeneic T cells and inhibit their proliferation. Conversely, administration of the cytokine CSF-1 before transplant expanded the host macrophage pool, reduced donor T cell expansion, and improved GVHD morbidity and mortality after allo-HCT. This study establishes the unexpected key role of host macrophages in inhibiting GVHD and identifies CSF-1 as a potential prophylactic therapy to limit acute GVHD after allo-HCT in the clinic.

21157343
Complement regulation of T-cell alloimmunity.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to summarize recent findings implicating complement as an important regulator of T-cell immune responses. We then provide perspective for how these newly described mechanisms apply to allograft injury and how they could ultimately influence therapy. RECENT FINDINGS: In addition to known effects of serum complement as an effector arm of antibody-initiated injury, T cells and antigen-presenting cells produce complement proteins and up-regulate complement receptors following cognate interactions. The locally released and activated, immune cell-derived complement signals predominantly through C3a and C5a binding to their receptors expressed on both partners to induce immune cell activation and differentiation. Complement deficiency or blockade limits T-cell-mediated autoimmunity and transplant rejection, whereas removal of the complement regulatory protein decay accelerating factor can enhance T-cell immunity and accelerate graft rejection. SUMMARY: Emerging data indicate that immune cell-derived complement physiologically regulates immune cell survival and proliferation, modulating the strength and phenotype of adaptive T-cell immune responses involved in transplant rejection. The recognition of the diversity through which complement participates in allograft injury supports the need for continued design and testing of complement inhibitors in human transplant recipients.

20588285
A complementary approach to treating antibody-mediated transplant rejection.
Current treatment for antibody-mediated kidney transplant rejection is inadequate. Tillou and colleagues administered recombinant C1 inhibitor to block complement activation to prevent antibody-initiated injury in sensitized baboon recipients of kidney allografts. These early but encouraging results support further testing of the safety and efficacy of complement inhibition as part of a comprehensive strategy to treat this disease, both in animal models and ultimately in humans.

20584999
Immune cell-derived c3 is required for autoimmune diabetes induced by multiple low doses of streptozotocin.
The complement system contributes to autoimmune injury, but its involvement in promoting the development of autoimmune diabetes is unknown. In this study, our goal was to ascertain the role of complement C3 in autoimmune diabetes. Susceptibility to diabetes development after multiple low-dose streptozotocin treatment in wild-type (WT) and C3-deficient mice was analyzed. Bone marrow chimeras, luminex, and quantitative reverse transcription PCR assays were performed to evaluate the phenotypic and immunologic impact of C3 in the development of this diabetes model. Coincident with the induced elevations in blood glucose levels, we documented alternative pathway complement component gene expression within the islets of the diabetic WT mice. When we repeated the experiments with C3-deficient mice, we observed complete resistance to disease, as assessed by the absence of histologic insulitis and the absence of T-cell reactivity to islet antigens. Studies of WT chimeras bearing C3-deficient bone marrow cells showed that bone marrow cell-derived C3, and not serum C3, is involved in the induction of diabetes in this model. The data reveal a key role for immune cell-derived C3 in the pathogenesis of murine multiple low-dose streptozotocin-induced diabetes and support the concept that immune cell mediated diabetes is in part complement-dependent.

20501950
Gazing into a crystal ball to predict kidney transplant outcome.
Kidney transplantation is the optimal therapy for end-stage kidney disease but requires lifelong immunosuppression. Despite improvements in immunosuppression regimens that have reduced rates of acute transplant rejection, long-term allograft survival remains suboptimal. More than 50% of transplanted kidneys from deceased donors fail within 10 years. In order to improve long-term outcomes, physicians need to better understand mechanisms underlying transplant rejection and tolerance in humans. They also need biomarkers that differentiate patients likely to maintain excellent and stable allograft function from recipients at risk of losing their transplants. By studying kidney transplant recipients at high risk for graft loss and rare, spontaneously tolerant kidney transplant recipients, researchers reporting in 3 papers in this issue of the JCI shed new light on these topics.

20016462
Novel aspects of complement in kidney injury.
Complement activation is integral to the development and progression of multiple forms of kidney disease. The liver is the principal source of serum complement, but various kidney cell types and bone marrow-derived immune cells can produce a full array of complement proteins. Locally produced and activated complement yields cleavage products that function as vital intermediaries, amplifying inflammation in ischemia-reperfusion injury and transplant rejection, among other pathological states. Additional new studies indicate that during cognate T-cell-antigen presenting cell interactions, both cell types produce alternative pathway complement components. The resultant activation products have an essential role in T-cell activation, expansion, and differentiation, which in turn has a profound impact on the development of immune-mediated kidney disease. The recognition of an expanded role for kidney cell-derived and immune cell-produced complement as pathogenic to the kidney supports the need for future studies to test the efficacy of complement inhibitors in the prevention and/or treatment of selected kidney diseases.

19935367
T-cell immune monitoring in organ transplantation.
Chronic allograft injury remains the leading cause of graft loss despite improvements in immunosuppression, clinical risk stratification, and state-of-the-art antibody testing. Emerging results indicate that T-cell immune monitoring by cytokine enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot, as part of a comprehensive risk assessment platform, has the potential to guide decision making and improve outcomes after transplantation.

19218437
Donor Toll-like receptor 4 contributes to ischemia and reperfusion injury following human kidney transplantation.
While studies in animal models have linked Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 signaling to kidney injury induced by ischemia and reperfusion, the relevance of TLR4 activation to allograft injury in human kidney transplants is unknown. Here we show that TLR4 is constitutively expressed within all donor kidneys but is significantly higher in deceased-, compared with living-donor organs. Tubules from deceased- but not living-donor kidneys also stained positively for high-mobility group box-1 (HMGB1), a known endogenous TLR4 ligand. In vitro stimulation of human tubular cells with HMGB1, in a TLR4-dependent system, confirmed that HMGB1 can stimulate proinflammatory responses through TLR4. To assess the functional significance of TLR4 in human kidney transplantation, we determined whether TLR4 mutations that confer diminished affinity for HMGB1 influence intragraft gene-expression profiles and immediate graft function. Compared with kidneys expressing WT alleles, kidneys with a TLR4 loss-of-function allele contained less TNFalpha, MCP-1, and more heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1), and exhibited a higher rate of immediate graft function. These results represent previously undetected evidence that donor TLR4 contributes to graft inflammation and sterile injury following cold preservation and transplantation in humans. Targeting TLR4 signaling may have value in preventing or treating postischemic acute kidney injury after transplantation.

18802060
Donor deficiency of decay-accelerating factor accelerates murine T cell-mediated cardiac allograft rejection.
Decay-accelerating factor (DAF) is a cell surface regulator that accelerates the dissociation of C3/C5 convertases and thereby prevents the amplification of complement activation on self cells. In the context of transplantation, DAF has been thought to primarily regulate antibody-mediated allograft injury, which is in part serum complement-dependent. Based on our previously delineated link between DAF and CD4 T cell responses, we evaluated the effects of donor Daf1 (the murine homolog of human DAF) deficiency on CD8 T cell-mediated cardiac allograft rejection. MHC-disparate Daf1(-/-) allografts were rejected with accelerated kinetics compared with wild-type grafts. The accelerated rejection predominantly tracked with DAF's absence on bone marrow-derived cells in the graft and required allograft production of C3. Transplantation of Daf1(-/-) hearts into wild-type allogeneic hosts augmented the strength of the anti-donor (direct pathway) T cell response, in part through complement-dependent proliferative and pro-survival effects on alloreactive CD8 T cells. The accelerated allograft rejection of Daf1(-/-) hearts occurred in recipients lacking anti-donor Abs. The results reveal that donor DAF expression, by controlling local complement activation on interacting T cell APC partners, regulates the strength of the direct alloreactive CD8(+) T cell response. The findings provide new insights into links between innate and adaptive immunity that could be exploited to limit T cell-mediated injury to an allograft following transplantation.

18685339
T-cell immune monitoring in organ transplantation.
Chronic injury and late allograft loss remain major causes of morbidity in clinical transplantation. Biomarkers that can reliably assess the risk of posttransplant complications are required to direct and individualize therapy aimed at prolonging graft survival and improving patient health. The purpose of this review is to provide a framework for understanding how to use biomarkers in the context of clinical transplantation and to summarize current data on available noninvasive cellular-based immune monitoring methods to predict transplant outcome. New microarray and gene profiling data reveal peripheral blood cell gene expression patterns that identify operational tolerance, raising the possibility that the measurements can be used to direct immunosuppression withdrawal. Additional data support the use of selective urine gene products and soluble CD30 measurements in serum as reliable biomarkers of acute graft injury. Finally, recent studies demonstrate that measurement of T-cell alloimmunity by cytokine enzyme-linked immunospot is a promising, supplementary pretransplant risk assessment tool. Recently published studies in organ transplantation suggest that results derived from assays focused on markers of T-cell immunity can segregate transplant candidates or recipients into high and low-risk subgroups for posttransplant graft injury. Larger prospective studies are needed, however, before any proposed biomarker can be incorporated into the transplant physicians' armamentarium to guide individualized therapeutic decision-making.

17634429
Frontiers in nephrology: tolerance.


20840475
25-OH-vitamin D deficiency and cellular alloimmunity as measured by panel of reactive T cell testing in dialysis patients.
Primed antidonor alloreactive T cells are detrimental to transplant outcome, but factors that impact the strength of this immune response prior to transplantation are unknown. We tested peripheral blood mononuclear cells from dialysis patients, against panels of allogeneic, primary B-cell lines in a newly standardized IFN? ELISPOT panel of reactive T cell (PRT) assay. Results were correlated with known alloantibody-sensitizing events and other clinical parameters. As 25-OH-vitamin D deficiency is associated with enhanced cellular immunity, is common in dialysis patients and is correctable, we assessed the relationship between serum 25-OH-vitamin D and the PRT. Using independent test and validation cohorts we found that low serum levels of 25-OH-vitamin D (<26 ng/mL) correlated with high-PRT values (in the upper 50th percentile, OR 0.02, p = 0.01) independent of age, sex, race, previous transplant, transfusion, pregnancy, time on dialysis, panel of reactive antibody, iPTH, and treatment with 1,25-OH-vitamin D. The data provide a potential mechanism for the possible relationship between vitamin D deficiency and poor posttransplant outcome, and support studies to test the impact of 25-OH-vitamin D repletion on alloimmunity and allograft injury in kidney transplant candidates.

20199505
Evolving paradigms that determine the fate of an allograft.
Despite the many advances in both immunological knowledge and the practical application of clinical immunosuppression, the holy grail of indefinite graft survival with immune tolerance in clinical solid organ transplantation remains a distant dream. The tremendous progress made in understanding the molecular and cellular basis of allograft rejection has not been translated into durable modalities that have advanced clinical care and outcomes. Indeed, currently used drugs and treatment protocols, largely directed at inhibiting alloreactive T cells, have not optimally improved allograft survival or function. A shift in emphasis, focusing on under appreciated immune pathways must now be considered to make further improvement. We highlight three areas of recent interest, complement, NK cells and lymphatics, which reinforce the concept that the transplant community must direct attention on how the immune system as a whole responds to a transplant. The current challenge is to integrate molecular, cellular and anatomic concepts to achieve the equivalent of a unified field theory of the immune response to organ transplants.

19563342
Primed CD8(+) T-cell responses to allogeneic endothelial cells are controlled by local complement activation.
CD8 T cells primed by transplantation recognize allogeneic class I MHC molecules expressed on graft vascular endothelium and contribute to allograft injury. We previously showed that immune cell-derived complement activation fragments are integral to T cell activation/expansion. Herein we tested the impact of local complement production/activation on T cell/endothelial cell (EC) interactions. We found that proinflammatory cytokines upregulated alternative pathway complement production by ECs, yielding C5a. We further found that ECs deficient in the cell surface C3/C5 convertase regulator decay accelerating factor (DAF, CD55) induced greater CD8 T-cell proliferation and more IFNgamma(+) and perforin(+) effector cells than wild-type (WT) ECs. Allogeneic C3(-/-) EC induced little or no CD8 responses. Abrogation of responses following C5a receptor (C5aR) blockade, or augmentation following addition of recombinant C5a demonstrated that the effects were mediated through T-cell-expressed-C5aR interactions. Analyses of in vivo CD8 cell responses to transplanted heart grafts deficient in EC DAF showed similar augmentation. The findings reveal that EC-derived complement triggers secondary CD8 T-cell differentiation and expansion and argue that targeting complement and/or C5aR could limit T-cell-mediated graft injury.

