20529522
Intraoperative management of robotic-assisted versus open radical prostatectomy.
Minimally invasive surgery has been shown to decrease postoperative morbidity and length of stay for several laparoscopic procedures. We sought to retrospectively compare intraoperative surgical and anesthetic parameters, post-anesthetic care unit (PACU) length of stay, and hospital length of stay of patients who underwent robotic-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy (RAP) versus open radical retropubic prostatectomy (ORP). A retrospective investigation was performed using a urologic surgery database and an anesthesia electronic medical record. We queried information regarding 106 ORP patients from 2002 through 2007 and 575 RAP patients from 2007 through 2008. Patients in the RAP group compared with ORP patients had reductions in surgical time, anesthesia time, estimated blood loss, crystalloid administration, and PACU and hospital length of stays. Compared with ORP procedures, intraoperative respiratory rates, peak inspiratory pressures, and arterial pressures in RAP procedures were higher; tidal volumes and heart rates were decreased; but end-tidal carbon dioxide concentrations were not different. In the RAP group, intraoperative complications included severe bradycardia, corneal abrasions, and 2 patients required reintubation. Surgically, no rectal perforations were noted, and no operative mortalities occurred. Our data demonstrate the safety and efficacy of RAP due to a combination of surgical and anesthetic factors.

19468845
Watch your back.


17869986
Changing patterns of postoperative nausea and vomiting prophylaxis drug use in an academic anesthesia practice.
To characterize the evolution of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) prophylactic drug use. Retrospective data extraction and analysis of electronic anesthesia records. Anesthesia department of an urban academic medical center. 144,134 anesthetics given by 57 attending anesthesiologists were studied. Administered doses of droperidol, ondansetron, dexamethasone, and metoclopramide were tabulated for each year for each practitioner. Ondansetron use in the periods before and after the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) warning concerning droperidol was 8% and 35%, respectively. Use of PONV prophylaxis increased for all included patient and anesthetic factors. Among those who used droperidol before the revised FDA warning, 61% stopped using it altogether. Afterwards, 75% (27-100%) of droperidol use was in combination with another agent. We found a significant and sustained decrease in droperidol use after the FDA-mandated labeling revision. We also found a significant increase in ondansetron use--an increase that exceeded the amount needed to substitute for the decreased droperidol use. The changes may be related to multiple factors, including the FDA warning, a trend toward more PONV prophylaxis, and the increasing predominance of serotonin antagonists for this indication.

18848442
A survey of anesthesiologists' and nurses' attitudes toward the implementation of an Anesthesia Information Management System on a labor and delivery floor.
An anesthesia information management system (AIMS) is most frequently used in the operating room, but not on labor and delivery (L&D). The purpose of this study is to describe the implementation of an AIMS on L&D and the attitudes of practitioners (anesthesiologists and nurses) toward the system. The anesthesiology survey focused on satisfaction with the L&D AIMS, comparison of the L&D AIMS with a handwritten anesthesia record, and comparison of the L&D AIMS with the operating room AIMS. The nursing survey focused on nursing satisfaction with the L&D AIMS and comparison of the L&D AIMS with a handwritten anesthesia record. Most anesthesiologists (76%) were satisfied with the L&D AIMS and 73% would not want to revert back to the paper record. However, most anesthesiologists felt the operating room AIMS was either superior or equal to the L&D AIMS. Although few nurses (4%) preferred the anesthesiologists revert back to the handwritten record overall, the nurses were neutral in their assessment of the AIMS. Most of the criticism related to the location of the system; 56% believed it was not in a convenient location and 74% thought the AIMS equipment "got in their way". Overall, the anesthesiologists and nurses are satisfied with the L&D AIMS and would not want to switch back to a handwritten record. We conclude that AIMS should not be limited to the operating room setting and can successfully be used in L&D.

