21621571
Focus.


21563203
Carcinogen-induced hepatic tumors in KLF6+/- mice recapitulate aggressive human hepatocellular carcinoma, associated with p53 pathway deregulation.
Inactivation of KLF6 is common in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) associated with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, thereby abrogating its normal anti-proliferative activity in liver cells. The aim of the study was to evaluate the impact of KLF6 depletion on human HCC and experimental hepatocarcinogenesis in vivo. In patients with surgically resected HCC, reduced tumor expression of KLF6 was associated with decreased survival. Consistent with its role as a tumor suppressor, KLF6 +/- mice developed significantly more tumors in response to the chemical carcinogen DEN than wild type animals. Gene expression signatures in both surrounding tissue and tumors of KLF6+/- mice closely recapitulated those associated with aggressive human HCCs. Expression microarray profiling also revealed an increase in mdm2 mRNA in tumors from KLF6 +/- compared to KLF6 +/+ mice, which was validated by real-time qPCR and Western blot in both human HCC and DEN-induced murine tumors. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation and co-transfection assays established the P2 intronic promoter of mdm2 as a bona fide transcriptional target repressed by KLF6. Whereas KLF6 over-expression in HCC cell lines and primary hepatocytes led to reduced MDM2 levels and increased p53 protein and transcriptional activity, reduction in KLF6 by siRNA led to increased MDM2 and reduced p53. Conclusions: Our findings indicate that KLF6 deficiency contributes significantly to the carcinogenic milieu in human and murine HCC, and uncover a novel tumor suppressor activity of KLF6 in HCC, by linking its transcriptional repression of MDM2 to stabilizing p53. (HEPATOLOGY 2011.).

21497738
Mechanisms of hepatic fibrogenesis.
Multiple etiologies of liver disease lead to liver fibrosis through integrated signaling networks that regulate the deposition of extracellular matrix. This cascade of responses drives the activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) into a myofibroblast-like phenotype that is contractile, proliferative and fibrogenic. Collagen and other extracellular matrix (ECM) components are deposited as the liver generates a wound-healing response to encapsulate injury. Sustained fibrogenesis leads to cirrhosis, characterized by a distortion of the liver parenchyma and vascular architecture. Uncovering the intricate mechanisms that underlie liver fibrogenesis forms the basis for efforts to develop targeted therapies to reverse the fibrotic response and improve the outcomes of patients with chronic liver disease.

21396971
Focus.


21284665
Dendritic cells in alcoholic liver injury and fibrosis.
Alcohol consumption impairs the development of innate and adaptive immune responses, however the exact mechanism by which alcohol leads to immune defects remains to be established. Dendritic cells (DCs) form a heterogeneous population of hematopoietic cells that are present in all tissues including the liver. DC are initially described playing a key role in the induction of innate and adaptive immune response against specific antigens. In our presentation, we discussed few new aspects of DC development, critical assessment of DC in non-lymphoid organs and the impact of alcohol consumption on DC function. Understanding the mechanism by which DC modulate liver function after alcohol consumption may help uncover novel therapeutic strategies for the treatment of these conditions.

21232564
Focus.


21167890
Platelets arrive at the scene of fibrosis……studies.


21074733
Fibrosis in the liver: acute protection and chronic disease.
The understanding of the cellular and molecular mechanisms of the fibrotic wound-healing response of the liver has made dramatic progress in the past 20 years. Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), which after liver injury proliferate and transdifferentiate to myofibroblasts, have emerged as the primary source of the fibrotic response, even though other fibrogenic cells may also contribute to the production of extracellular matrix (ECM). Advances in the understanding of HSC regulation include apoptotic signaling, angiogenic signaling, and responses to oxidative stress. The ECM has emerged not only as a structural scaffold, but also as a dynamic and interactive matrix regulating stellate cell activation. Additionally, the innate immune system and immune signaling, as well as a broadening understanding of the transcriptional regulation including microRNAs and epigenetic events offer potential therapeutic targets. Unraveling genetic determinants related to mechanisms of hepatic fibrogenesis promise individualized therapy or prevention. Hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis have emerged as treatable and potentially reversible consequence of chronic liver disease.

21073339
Pathogenesis of liver fibrosis.
Liver fibrosis is a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide due to chronic viral hepatitis and, more recently, from fatty liver disease associated with obesity. Hepatic stellate cell activation represents a critical event in fibrosis because these cells become the primary source of extracellular matrix in liver upon injury. Use of cell-culture and animal models has expanded our understanding of the mechanisms underlying stellate cell activation and has shed new light on genetic regulation, the contribution of immune signaling, and the potential reversibility of the disease. As pathways of fibrogenesis are increasingly clarified, the key challenge will be translating new advances into the development of antifibrotic therapies for patients with chronic liver disease.

20964825
Toll-like receptor 4 signaling in liver injury and hepatic fibrogenesis.
ABSTRACT: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are a family of transmembrane pattern recognition receptors (PRR) that play a key role in innate and adaptive immunity by recognizing structural components unique to bacteria, fungi and viruses. TLR4 is the most studied of the TLRs, and its primary exogenous ligand is lipopolysaccharide, a component of Gram-negative bacterial walls. In the absence of exogenous microbes, endogenous ligands including damage-associated molecular pattern molecules from damaged matrix and injured cells can also activate TLR4 signaling. In humans, single nucleotide polymorphisms of the TLR4 gene have an effect on its signal transduction and on associated risks of specific diseases, including cirrhosis. In liver, TLR4 is expressed by all parenchymal and non-parenchymal cell types, and contributes to tissue damage caused by a variety of etiologies. Intact TLR4 signaling was identified in hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), the major fibrogenic cell type in injured liver, and mediates key responses including an inflammatory phenotype, fibrogenesis and anti-apoptotic properties. Further clarification of the function and endogenous ligands of TLR4 signaling in HSCs and other liver cells could uncover novel mechanisms of fibrogenesis and facilitate the development of therapeutic strategies.

20585339
Evolving challenges in hepatic fibrosis.
Continued elucidation of the mechanisms of hepatic fibrosis has yielded a comprehensive and nuanced portrait of fibrosis progression and regression. The paradigm of hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation remains the foundation for defining events in hepatic fibrosis and has been complemented by progress in a number of new areas. Cellular sources of extracellular matrix beyond HSCs have been identified. In addition, the role of chemokine, adipokine, neuroendocrine, angiogenic and NAPDH oxidase signaling in the pathogenesis of hepatic fibrosis has been uncovered, as has the contribution of extracellular matrix stiffness to fibrogenesis. There is also increased awareness of the contribution of innate immunity and greater understanding of the complexity of gene regulation in HSCs and myofibroblasts. Finally, both apoptosis and senescence have been recognized as orchestrated programs that eliminate fibrogenic cells during resolution of liver fibrosis. Ironically, the progress that has been made has highlighted the growing disparity between advances in the experimental setting and their translation into new diagnostic tools and treatments. As a result, focus is shifting towards overcoming key translational challenges in order to accelerate the development of new therapies for patients with chronic liver disease.

20563750
Loss of matrix metalloproteinase-2 amplifies murine toxin-induced liver fibrosis by upregulating collagen I expression.
Matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), a type IV collagenase secreted by activated hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), is upregulated in chronic liver disease and is considered a profibrotic mediator due to its proliferative effect on cultured HSCs and ability to degrade normal liver matrix. Although associative studies and cell culture findings suggest that MMP-2 promotes hepatic fibrogenesis, no in vivo model has definitively established a pathologic role for MMP-2 in the development and progression of liver fibrosis. We therefore examined the impact of MMP-2 deficiency on liver fibrosis development during chronic CCl(4) liver injury and explored the effect of MMP-2 deficiency and overexpression on collagen I expression. Following chronic CCl(4) administration, liver fibrosis was analyzed using Sirius Red staining with quantitative morphometry and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in MMP-2-/- mice and age-matched MMP-2+/+ controls. These studies were complemented by analyses of cultured human stellate cells. MMP-2-/- mice demonstrated an almost twofold increase in fibrosis which was not secondary to significant differences in hepatocellular injury, HSC activation or type I collagenase activity; however, type I collagen messenger RNA (mRNA) expression was increased threefold in the MMP-2-/- group by real-time PCR. Furthermore, targeted reduction of MMP-2 in cultured HSCs using RNA interference significantly increased collagen I mRNA and protein, while overexpression of MMP-2 resulted in decreased collagen I mRNA. These findings suggest that increased MMP-2 during the progression of liver fibrosis may be an important mechanism for inhibiting type I collagen synthesis by activated HSCs, thereby providing a protective rather than pathologic role.

20430021
Klf6/copeb is required for hepatic outgrowth in zebrafish and for hepatocyte specification in mouse ES cells.
Krüppel-like factor 6 (Klf6; copeb in zebrafish) is a zinc-finger transcription factor and tumor suppressor gene. Klf6(-)(/)(-) mice have defects in hematopoiesis and angiogenesis and do not form a liver. However, the vascular abnormalities in Klf6(-/-) mice obfuscate its role in liver development since these two processes are linked in mammals. We utilized zebrafish and mouse ES cells to investigate the role of copeb in endoderm specification and hepatogenesis separate from its function in angiogenesis. During zebrafish development, copeb expression is enriched in digestive organs. Morpholino knockdown of copeb blocks expansion of the liver, pancreas and intestine, but does not affect their specification, differentiation or the vascularization of the liver. Decreased hepatocyte proliferation in copeb morphants is accompanied by upregulation of the cell cycle inhibitor, cdkn1a, a Copeb transcriptional target. A cell autonomous role for Klf6 in endoderm and hepatic development was investigated by manipulating Klf6 expression in mouse ES cells driven to differentiate along the hepatic lineage. Expression of the endoderm markers Hnf3beta, Gata4, Sox17, and CxCr4 is not induced in Klf6(-/-) cells but is upregulated in ES cells over-expressing Klf6. Collectively, these findings indicate that copeb/Klf6 is essential for the development of endoderm-derived organs.

20159605
Obesity, inflammatory signaling, and hepatocellular carcinoma-an enlarging link.
There is growing evidence that obesity increases the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In a recent issue of Cell, Park et al. show that IL-6 and TNF signaling through activation of STAT3 are critical for obesity-promoted HCC development, underscoring the important role of inflammatory pathways in hepatocarcinogenesis.

20143336
Downregulation of hepatic stellate cell activation by retinol and palmitate mediated by adipose differentiation-related protein (ADRP).
Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) store retinoids and triacylglycerols in cytoplasmic lipid droplets. Two prominent features of HSC activation in liver fibrosis are loss of lipid droplets along with increase of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), but the link between these responses and HSC activation remains elusive. In non-adipose cells, adipose differentiation-related protein (ADRP) coats lipid droplets and regulates their formation and lipolysis; however its function in HSCs is unknown. Here, we observed, in human liver sections or primary HSC culture, ADRP localization to lipid droplets of HSCs, and reduced staining coincident with loss of lipid droplets in liver fibrosis and in culture-activated HSCs, consistent with HSC activation. In the LX-2 human immortalized HSCs, with scant lipid droplets and features of activated HSCs, we found that the upregulation of ADRP mRNA by palmitate is potentiated by retinol, accompanied by increased ADRP protein, generation of retinyl palmitate, and lipid droplet formation. ADRP induction also led to decreased expression of alpha-SMA mRNA and its protein, while ADRP knockdown with small interfering RNA (siRNA) normalized alpha-SMA expression. Furthermore, ADRP induction by retinol and palmitate resulted in decreased expression of collagen I and matrix metalloproteinase-2 mRNA, fibrogenic genes associated with activated HSCs, while increasing matrix metalloproteinase-1 mRNA; ADRP knockdown with siRNA reversed these changes. Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 was not affected. Thus, ADRP upregulation mediated by retinol and palmitate promotes downregulation of HSC activation and is functionally linked to the expression of fibrogenic genes.

20116377
Tumor suppressor activity of KLF6 mediated by downregulation of the PTTG1 oncogene.
The tumor suppressor Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) is frequently inactivated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To unearth downstream transcriptional targets of KLF6, cDNA microarray analysis of whole liver was compared between KLF6+/+ and KLF6+/- mice. Pituitary tumor transforming gene 1 (PTTG1), an oncogene, was the most up-regulated transcript in KLF6+/- liver. In human HCCs, KLF6 mRNA was significantly decreased, associated with increased PTTG1. In HepG2, KLF6 transcriptionally repressed PTTG1 by direct promoter interaction. Whereas KLF6 downregulation by siRNA increased HepG2 proliferation, siRNA to PTTG1 was anti-proliferative. PTTG1 downregulation represents a novel tumor suppressor pathway of KLF6.

20022962
A DDX5 S480A polymorphism is associated with increased transcription of fibrogenic genes in hepatic stellate cells.
We recently identified a missense single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in DDX5 (rs1140409, p.S480A) that enhances the risk of developing cirrhosis. DDX5 is an ATP-dependent RNA helicase and transcriptional modulator. We hypothesized that the activity of DDX5 in regulating fibrogenic gene transcription in hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) is altered by the S480A SNP. To test this, we employed two approaches: 1) transient overexpression of DDX5 cDNA or siRNA knockdown of endogenous DDX5, with replacement by either DDX5 wild type (WT) or SNP cDNA, or 2) stable expression of exogenous DDX5 WT and SNP in HSC lines. WT DDX5 mRNA in HSCs was inversely correlated with gene expression for alpha2(I) collagen, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1, and transforming growth factor-beta1. Stable DDX5 SNP-expressing cells had higher basal and transforming growth factor-beta1-stimulated expression and enhanced promoter activities of fibrogenic genes. DDX5 variant-expressing cells also had higher Smad3 and AP-1-responsive reporter activities. In a one-hybrid GAL4 system, co-expression of the DDX5 SNP variant with chimeras of GAL4 DNA binding domain linked to JunD or Sp1 displayed higher transactivation of a GAL4-responsive reporter than that of DDX5 WT. Increased fibrogenic gene expression in DDX5 SNP-expressing cells was associated with reduced recruitment of DDX5 homodimers to responsive promoters, but there was no difference in the recruitment of the co-repressor HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1). These data suggest that DDX5 is a repressor of fibrogenic genes in HSCs through interaction with transcriptional complexes. The enhanced fibrogenic activity of the DDX5 risk variant is linked to a reduced repressive function toward these target genes.

19908945
Kupffer cell activation by ambient air particulate matter exposure may exacerbate non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
Owing to increased obesity, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is now the most prevalent liver disease in the United States. NAFLD is considered a component of metabolic syndrome, a cluster of disorders that also includes diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, arteriosclerosis, and hypertension. Exposure to ambient air particulate matter with aerodynamic diameters < 2.5 microm (PM(2.5)) is a risk factor for arteriosclerosis and lung disease, but its effect on NAFLD is unknown. PM(2.5) induces pulmonary dysfunction via Toll-like receptor (TLR) activation on alveolar macrophages. TLR activation of Kupffer cells, resident hepatic macrophages, and subsequent pro-inflammatory cytokine production have been shown to play a key role in NAFLD progression. We hypothesized that PM(2.5) exposure is a significant risk factor for the progression of NAFLD. Thus, following exposure of male C57BL/6 mice fed high fat chow (HFC) to concentrated air particulate matter (CAPs) or filtered air for 6 weeks, progression of NAFLD was evaluated by standardized histological assessment of hepatic inflammation and fibrosis. In mice fed HFC, the hepatic inflammatory grade (3.00 +/- 0.00 vs. 1.50 +/- 0.71, P < 0.001) and fibrosis stage (1.00 +/- 0.00 vs. 0.60 +/- 0.52, P = 0.023) were both significantly higher in mice exposed to CAPs versus filtered air, respectively. Increased numbers of Kupffer cells contained PM in CAPs-exposed mice scores of (2.00 +/- 0.94 vs. 0.20 +/- 0.42, respectively, P < 0.001). PM exposure increased IL-6 secretion up to seven-fold in a dose-dependent manner by isolated wild-type but not TLR4(-/-) Kupffer cells (P < 0.050). In conclusion, ambient PM(2.5) exposure may be a significant risk factor for NAFLD progression.

19665249
Ras pathway activation in hepatocellular carcinoma and anti-tumoral effect of combined sorafenib and rapamycin in vivo.
The success of sorafenib in the treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has focused interest on the role of Ras signaling in this malignancy. We investigated the molecular alterations of the Ras pathway in HCC and the antineoplastic effects of sorafenib in combination with rapamycin, an inhibitor of mTOR pathway, in experimental models. Gene expression (qRT-PCR, oligonucleotide microarray), DNA copy number changes (SNP-array), methylation of tumor suppressor genes (methylation-specific PCR) and protein activation (immunohistochemistry) were analysed in 351 samples. Anti-tumoral effects of combined therapy targeting the Ras and mTOR pathways were evaluated in cell lines and HCC xenografts. Different mechanisms accounted for Ras pathway activation in HCC. H-ras was up-regulated during different steps of hepatocarcinogenesis. B-raf was overexpressed in advanced tumors and its expression was associated with genomic amplification. Partial methylation of RASSF1A and NORE1A was detected in 89% and 44% of tumors respectively, and complete methylation was found in 11 and 4% of HCCs. Activation of the pathway (pERK immunostaining) was identified in 10.3% of HCC. Blockade of Ras and mTOR pathways with sorafenib and rapamycin reduced cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in cell lines. In vivo, the combination of both compounds enhanced tumor necrosis and ulceration when compared with sorafenib alone. Ras activation results from several molecular alterations, such as methylation of tumor suppressors and amplification of oncogenes (B-raf). Sorafenib blocks signaling and synergizes with rapamycin in vivo, preventing tumor progression. These data provide the rationale for testing this combination in clinical studies.

19396960
Hepatic fibrosis.
This review will summarize the most significant work that contributed to the understanding of liver fibrosis progression and resolution, which in turn has yielded new areas of therapeutic targeting. Liver fibrosis is the result of an imbalance between production and dissolution of extracellular matrix. Stellate cells, portal myofibroblasts, and bone marrow derived cells converge in a complex interaction with hepatocytes and immune cells to provoke scarring in response to liver injury. Uncovering the specific effects of growth factors on these cells, defining the interaction of different cell population during liver fibrosis and characterizing the genetic determinants of fibrosis progression will enable the discovery of new therapeutic approaches. The outcome of improved understanding of liver fibrosis process, especially the regulation and activation of stellate cells, is reflected in the development of new therapeutic strategies, which are validated in animal models.

19101139
Functional role of the KLF6 tumour suppressor gene in gastric cancer.
Gastric cancer is the second most common cancer and a leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. The Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) tumour suppressor gene had been previously shown to be inactivated in a number of human cancers through loss of heterozygosity (LOH), somatic mutation, decreased expression and increased alternative splicing into a dominant negative oncogenic splice variant, KLF6-SV1. In the present study, 37 gastric cancer samples were analysed for the presence of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the KLF6 locus and somatic mutation. In total, 18 of 34 (53%) of the gastric cancer samples analysed demonstrated KLF6 locus specific loss. Four missense mutations, such as T179I, R198G, R71Q and S180L, were detected. Interestingly, two of these mutations R71Q and S180L have been identified independently by several groups in various malignancies including prostate, colorectal and gastric cancers. In addition, decreased wild-type KLF6 (wtKLF6) expression was associated with loss of the KLF6 locus and was present in 48% of primary gastric tumour samples analysed. Functional studies confirmed that wtKLF6 suppressed proliferation of gastric cancer cells via transcriptional regulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 and the oncogene c-myc. Functional characterisation of the common tumour-derived mutants demonstrated that the mutant proteins fail to suppress proliferation and function as dominant negative regulators of wtKLF6 function. Furthermore, stable overexpression of the R71Q and S180L tumour-derived mutants in the gastric cancer cell line, Hs746T, resulted in an increased tumourigenicity in vivo. Combined, these findings suggest an important role for the KLF6 tumour suppressor gene in gastric cancer development and progression and identify several highly cancer-relevant signalling pathways regulated by the KLF6 tumour suppressor gene.

19098841
Commentary: Gastroenterology and hepatology: an evolving marriage, not an imminent divorce.


19090740
Advances in antifibrotic therapy.
Sustained progress in defining the molecular pathophysiology of hepatic fibrosis has led to a comprehensive framework for developing antifibrotic therapies. Indeed, the single greatest limitation in bringing new drugs to the clinical setting is a lack of clarity regarding clinical trial and treatment end points, not a lack of promising agents. A range of treatments, including those developed for other indications, as well as those specifically developed for hepatic fibrosis, are nearing or in clinical trials. Most are focused on attacking features of either hepatic injury and/or activated stellate cells and myofibroblasts, which are the primary sources of extracellular matrix (scar) proteins. Thus, features of injury and stellate cell activation provide a useful template for classifying these emerging agents and point to a new class of therapies for patients with fibrosing liver disease.

18984462
Preface. Hepatic fibrosis: pathogenesis, diagnosis, and emerging therapies.


18929564
Pivotal role of mTOR signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma.
The advent of targeted therapies in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has underscored the importance of pathway characterization to identify novel molecular targets for treatment. We evaluated mTOR signaling in human HCC, as well as the antitumoral effect of a dual-level blockade of the mTOR pathway. The mTOR pathway was assessed using integrated data from mutation analysis (direct sequencing), DNA copy number changes (SNP-array), messenger RNA levels (quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction and gene expression microarray), and protein activation (immunostaining) in 351 human samples [HCC (n = 314) and nontumoral tissue (n = 37)]. Effects of dual blockade of mTOR signaling using a rapamycin analogue (everolimus) and an epidermal/vascular endothelial growth factor receptor inhibitor (AEE788) were evaluated in liver cancer cell lines and in a xenograft model. Aberrant mTOR signaling (p-RPS6) was present in half of the cases, associated with insulin-like growth factor pathway activation, epidermal growth factor up-regulation, and PTEN dysregulation. PTEN and PI3KCA-B mutations were rare events. Chromosomal gains in RICTOR (25% of patients) and positive p-RPS6 staining correlated with recurrence. RICTOR-specific siRNA down-regulation reduced tumor cell viability in vitro. Blockage of mTOR signaling with everolimus in vitro and in a xenograft model decelerated tumor growth and increased survival. This effect was enhanced in vivo after epidermal growth factor blockade. MTOR signaling has a critical role in the pathogenesis of HCC, with evidence for the role of RICTOR in hepato-oncogenesis. MTOR blockade with everolimus is effective in vivo. These findings establish a rationale for targeting the mTOR pathway in clinical trials in HCC.

18662740
Hepatic fibrosis -- overview.
The study of hepatic fibrosis, or scarring in response to chronic liver injury, has witnessed tremendous progress in the past two decades. Clarification of the cellular sources of scar, and emergence of hepatic stellate cells not only as a fibrogenic cell type, but also as a critical immunomodulatory and homeostatic regulator are among the most salient advances. Activation of hepatic stellate cells remains a central event in fibrosis, complemented by evidence of additional sources of matrix-producing cells including bone marrow, portal fibroblasts, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition from both hepatocytes and cholangiocytes. A growing range of cytokines and their receptors and inflammatory cell subsets have further expanded our knowledge about this dynamic process. Collectively, these findings have laid the foundation for continued elucidation of underlying mechanisms, and more importantly for the implementation of rationally based approaches to limit fibrosis, accelerate repair and enhance liver regeneration in patients with chronic liver disease.

18596922
KLF6-SV1 overexpression accelerates human and mouse prostate cancer progression and metastasis.
Metastatic prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the leading causes of death from cancer in men. The molecular mechanisms underlying the transition from localized tumor to hormone-refractory metastatic PCa remain largely unknown, and their identification is key for predicting prognosis and targeted therapy. Here we demonstrated that increased expression of a splice variant of the Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) tumor suppressor gene, known as KLF6-SV1, in tumors from men after prostatectomy predicted markedly poorer survival and disease recurrence profiles. Analysis of tumor samples revealed that KLF6-SV1 levels were specifically upregulated in hormone-refractory metastatic PCa. In 2 complementary mouse models of metastatic PCa, KLF6-SV1-overexpressing PCa cells were shown by in vivo and ex vivo bioluminescent imaging to metastasize more rapidly and to disseminate to lymph nodes, bone, and brain more often. Interestingly, while KLF6-SV1 overexpression increased metastasis, it did not affect localized tumor growth. KLF6-SV1 inhibition using RNAi induced spontaneous apoptosis in cultured PCa cell lines and suppressed tumor growth in mice. Together, these findings demonstrate that KLF6-SV1 expression levels in PCa tumors at the time of diagnosis can predict the metastatic behavior of the tumor; thus, KLF-SV1 may represent a novel therapeutic target.

18471545
Mechanisms of hepatic fibrogenesis.
Substantial improvements in the treatment of chronic liver disease have accelerated interest in uncovering the mechanisms underlying hepatic fibrosis and its resolution. Activation of resident hepatic stellate cells into proliferative, contractile, and fibrogenic cells in liver injury remains a dominant theme driving the field. However, several new areas of rapid progress in the past 5-10 years also have taken root, including: (1) identification of different fibrogenic populations apart from resident stellate cells, for example, portal fibroblasts, fibrocytes, and bone-marrow-derived cells, as well as cells derived from epithelial mesenchymal transition; (2) emergence of stellate cells as finely regulated determinants of hepatic inflammation and immunity; (3) elucidation of multiple pathways controlling gene expression during stellate cell activation including transcriptional, post-transcriptional, and epigenetic mechanisms; (4) recognition of disease-specific pathways of fibrogenesis; (5) re-emergence of hepatic macrophages as determinants of matrix degradation in fibrosis resolution and the importance of matrix cross-linking and scar maturation in determining reversibility; and (6) hints that hepatic stellate cells may contribute to hepatic stem cell behavior, cancer, and regeneration. Clinical and translational implications of these advances have become clear, and have begun to impact significantly on the management and outlook of patients with chronic liver disease.

18471523
Ras promotes growth by alternative splicing-mediated inactivation of the KLF6 tumor suppressor in hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most prevalent cancer worldwide and the third most lethal. Dysregulation of alternative splicing underlies a number of human diseases, yet its contribution to liver cancer has not been explored fully. The Krüppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) gene is a zinc finger transcription factor that inhibits cellular growth in part by transcriptional activation of p21. KLF6 function is abrogated in human cancers owing to increased alternative splicing that yields a dominant-negative isoform, KLF6 splice variant 1 (SV1), which antagonizes full-length KLF6-mediated growth suppression. The molecular basis for stimulation of KLF6 splicing is unknown. In human HCC samples and cell lines, we functionally link oncogenic Ras signaling to increased alternative splicing of KLF6 through signaling by phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and Akt, mediated by the splice regulatory protein ASF/SF2. In 67 human HCCs, there is a significant correlation between activated Ras signaling and increased KLF6 alternative splicing. In cultured cells, Ras signaling increases the expression of KLF6 SV1, relative to full-length KLF6, thereby enhancing proliferation. Abrogation of oncogenic Ras signaling by small interfering RNA (siRNA) or a farnesyl-transferase inhibitor decreases KLF6 SV1 and suppresses growth. Growth inhibition by farnesyl-transferase inhibitor in transformed cell lines is overcome by ectopic expression of KLF6 SV1. Down-regulation of the splice factor ASF/SF2 by siRNA increases KLF6 SV1 messenger RNA levels. KLF6 alternative splicing is not coupled to its transcriptional regulation. Our findings expand the role of Ras in human HCC by identifying a novel mechanism of tumor-suppressor inactivation through increased alternative splicing mediated by an oncogenic signaling cascade.

18316020
Cannabinoids provoke alcoholic steatosis through a conspiracy of neighbors.
Cannabinoid signaling by CB1 receptors drives fibrogenesis and fat accumulation in liver. A report in this issue of Cell Metabolism (Jeong et al., 2008) now links hepatic stellate cells, a resident liver fibrogenic cell type, to the generation of steatosis through production of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) after ethanol feeding, leading to paracrine stimulation of hepatocyte CB1 receptors.

18314222
Experimental models of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a common and deadly cancer whose pathogenesis is incompletely understood. Comparative genomic studies from human HCC samples have classified HCCs into different molecular subgroups; yet, the unifying feature of this tumor is its propensity to arise upon a background of inflammation and fibrosis. This review seeks to analyze the available experimental models in HCC research and to correlate data from human populations with them in order to consolidate our efforts to date, as it is increasingly clear that different models will be required to mimic different subclasses of the neoplasm. These models will be instrumental in the evaluation of compounds targeting specific molecular pathways in future preclinical studies.

18195085
Hepatic stellate cells: protean, multifunctional, and enigmatic cells of the liver.
The hepatic stellate cell has surprised and engaged physiologists, pathologists, and hepatologists for over 130 years, yet clear evidence of its role in hepatic injury and fibrosis only emerged following the refinement of methods for its isolation and characterization. The paradigm in liver injury of activation of quiescent vitamin A-rich stellate cells into proliferative, contractile, and fibrogenic myofibroblasts has launched an era of astonishing progress in understanding the mechanistic basis of hepatic fibrosis progression and regression. But this simple paradigm has now yielded to a remarkably broad appreciation of the cell's functions not only in liver injury, but also in hepatic development, regeneration, xenobiotic responses, intermediary metabolism, and immunoregulation. Among the most exciting prospects is that stellate cells are essential for hepatic progenitor cell amplification and differentiation. Equally intriguing is the remarkable plasticity of stellate cells, not only in their variable intermediate filament phenotype, but also in their functions. Stellate cells can be viewed as the nexus in a complex sinusoidal milieu that requires tightly regulated autocrine and paracrine cross-talk, rapid responses to evolving extracellular matrix content, and exquisite responsiveness to the metabolic needs imposed by liver growth and repair. Moreover, roles vital to systemic homeostasis include their storage and mobilization of retinoids, their emerging capacity for antigen presentation and induction of tolerance, as well as their emerging relationship to bone marrow-derived cells. As interest in this cell type intensifies, more surprises and mysteries are sure to unfold that will ultimately benefit our understanding of liver physiology and the diagnosis and treatment of liver disease.

17979077
Hepatic fibrogenesis.
Hepatic fibrogenesis represents a wound-healing response of liver to a variety of insults, ultimately leading to decompensated cirrhosis in many patients and accounting for extensive morbidity and mortality worldwide. The net accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) in liver injury arises from increased synthesis by activated hepatic stellate cells and other hepatic fibrogenic cell types, as well as from bone marrow and circulating fibrocytes. Concurrently, degradation of ECM by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) fails to keep pace with increased synthesis, in part due to sustained expression of MMP inhibitors (e.g., tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases). A growing list of circulating, paracrine, and autocrine mediators have been identified that amplify the fibrogenic response of liver. Combined with accelerating knowledge about signaling pathways and genetic determinants, major advances are anticipated in new diagnostics and therapies that will transform the care of patients with chronic liver diseases in the coming years.

17621627
KLF6 allelic loss is associated with tumor recurrence and markedly decreased survival in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
The Krüppel-like transcription factor (KLF6) gene is a tumor suppressor gene (TSG) reported to be dysregulated and inactivated through loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and/or somatic mutation in a number of major human cancers. The aim of the present study was to examine KLF6 gene status and expression in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). A collection of 81 well-characterized oral and oropharyngeal HNSCC samples were analyzed for evidence of KLF6 LOH and mutation and differences in expression patterns between normal and cancerous tissues and these findings were correlated with clinicopathological variables. We also tested the effect of KLF6 inhibition in HNSCC cell lines on proliferation and p21 expression. LOH was found in approximately 30% of cases and was strongly correlated with cancer progression, tumor recurrence and decreased patient survival. Overall, median survival of patients with LOH was less than half (19 vs. 41 months, p=0.036, stratified on stage) than those without loss. Risk of death for patients with LOH was 8 times greater independent of tumor size, nodal status, tobacco smoking or treatment modality (HR 7.89, 95% CI: 1.9-32.4). Subsequent analyses revealed KLF6 mutations in only 2 of 20 samples, but altered subcellular protein localization in 64% of tumors. Targeted stable reduction of KLF6 in HNSCC cell lines increased cellular proliferation while decreasing p21 expression. Taken together, these findings suggest that KLF6 LOH represents a clinically-relevant biomarker predicting patient survival and tumor recurrence and that dysregulation of KLF6 function plays an important role in HNSCC progression.

17514651
Functional inactivation of the KLF6 tumor suppressor gene by loss of heterozygosity and increased alternative splicing in glioblastoma.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary brain tumor and possesses a high incidence of 10p loss. The KLF6 (Kruppel-like transcription factor) tumor suppressor gene on 10p15 is inactivated by loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and/or somatic mutation in a number of human cancers and forced expression of KLF6 in GBM lines inhibits their growth and transformation. In addition, increased expression of its alternatively spliced, cytoplasmic isoform KLF6-SV1 has now been shown to play a role in cancer pathogenesis. On the basis of these findings we examined the role of KLF6 and KLF6-SV1 in the development and progression of GBM. LOH analysis of 17 primary GBM patient samples using KLF6-specific microsatellite markers revealed that 88.2% (15/17) had LOH of the KLF6 locus. Interestingly, no KLF6 somatic mutations were identified. RNA analysis revealed concomitant decreases in all primary GBM tumors (n = 11) by approximately 80% in KLF6 expression (p < 0.001) coupled with increased KLF6-SV1 expression (p < 0.001) when compared to normal astrocytes. To determine the biological relevance of these findings, we examined the effect of KLF6 expression and KLF6-SV1 knockdown in A235 and CRL2020 cell lines. Reconstitution of KLF6 decreased cell proliferation by almost 50%, whereas targeted KLF6 reduction increased cell proliferation 2.5-4.5 fold. Conversely, targeted KLF6-SV1 reduction decreased cell proliferation by 50%. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that KLF6 allelic imbalance and decreased KLF6 and increased KLF6-SV1 expression are common findings in primary GBM tumors, and these changes have antagonistic effects on the regulation of cellular proliferation in GBM cell lines.

17476207
Reversibility of hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis--is it all hype?


17295177
Genomics and signaling pathways in hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a leading cause of death among cirrhotic patients and has become a major health problem in developed countries. There is an elemental understanding of the genes and signaling pathways involved in the initiation and progression of this neoplasm. The current hypothesis of the HCC cell origin includes both somatic cells (hepatocytes) and stem cells/progenitor cells. Unlike that in other malignancies such as breast, brain, or hematopoietic cancers, the implication of cancer stem cells in HCC pathogenesis is not yet supported by consistent data. Analysis of somatic genetic alterations and gene expression profiles in HCC samples has provided relevant information on the genes involved in hepatocarcinogenesis, pinpointing a seminal molecular classification of the disease. Nonetheless, a comprehensive genomic analysis of HCC samples using high-resolution platforms in precisely annotated HCCs is clearly needed. Recent data have identified different signaling pathways in liver carcinogenesis (e.g., Wnt-betaCatenin, Hedgehog, tyrosine kinase receptor-related pathways), providing an important potential source of novel molecular targets for new therapies. This review summarizes the most relevant information regarding structural and functional alterations in HCC and describes some of the key signaling pathways implicated in hepatocarcinogenesis.

17196295
Downregulation of KLF6 is an early event in hepatocarcinogenesis, and stimulates proliferation while reducing differentiation.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has the most rapidly rising cancer incidence in the US and Europe. The KLF6 tumor suppressor is frequently inactivated in HCC by loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) and/or mutation. Here we have analyzed 33 HBV- and 40 HCV-related HCCs for mRNA expression of wildtype KLF6 (wtKLF6) as well as the KLF6 variant 1 (SV1), a truncated, growth-promoting variant that antagonizes wtKLF6 function. The HCV-related tumors analyzed represented the full histologic spectrum from cirrhosis and dysplasia to metastatic cancer. Expression of KLF6 mRNA is decreased in 73% of HBV-associated HCCs compared to matched surrounding tissue (ST), with reductions of approximately 80% in one-third of the patients. KLF6 mRNA expression is also reduced in dysplastic nodules from patients with HCV compared to cirrhotic livers (p<0.005), with an additional, marked decrease in the very advanced, metastatic stage (p<0.05). An increased ratio of KLF6SV1/wt KLF6 is present in a subset (6/33, 18%) of the HBV-related HCCs compared to matched ST. Reconstituting KLF6 in HepG2 cells by retroviral infection decreased proliferation and related markers including cyclin D1 and beta-catenin, increased cellular differentiation based on induction of albumin, E-cadherin, and decreased alpha fetoprotein. We conclude that reduced KLF6 expression is common in both HBV- and HCV-related HCCs and occurs at critical stages during cancer progression. Effects of KLF6 are attributable to regulation of genes controlling hepatocyte growth and differentiation.

