20849527
?-protocadherins are enriched and transported in specialized vesicles associated with the secretory pathway in neurons.
Gamma protocadherins (Pcdh-?s) resemble classical cadherins and have the potential to engage in cell-cell interactions with homophilic properties. Emerging evidence suggests non-conventional roles for some protocadherins in neural development. We sought to determine whether Pcdh-? trafficking in neurons is consistent with an intracellular role for these molecules. Here we show that, in contrast to the largely surface localization of classical cadherins, endogenous Pcdh-?s are primarily intracellular in rat neurons in vivo and are equally distributed within organelles of subsynaptic dendritic and axonal compartments. A strikingly higher proportion of Pcdh-?-containing organelles in synaptic compartments was observed at postnatal day 16. To determine the origin of Pcdh-?-trafficking organelles, we isolated organelles with Pcdh-? antibody-coupled magnetic beads from brain organelle suspensions. Vesicles with high levels of COPII and endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC) components were isolated with the Pcdh-? antibody but not with the classical cadherin antibody. In cultured hippocampal neurons, Pcdh-? immunolabeling partially overlapped with calnexin- and COPII-positive puncta in dendrites. Mobile Pcdh-?-GFP profiles dynamically codistributed with a DsRed construct coupled to ER retention signals by live imaging. Pcdh-? expression correlated with accumulations of tubulovesicular and ER-like organelles in dendrites. Our results are consistent with the possibility that Pcdh-?s could have a unique function within the secretory pathway in addition to their documented surface roles.

20406818
Negative role of RIG-I serine 8 phosphorylation in the regulation of interferon-beta production.
RIG-I (retinoic acid-inducible gene I) and TRIM25 (tripartite motif protein 25) have emerged as key regulatory factors to induce interferon (IFN)-mediated innate immune responses to limit viral replication. Upon recognition of viral RNA, TRIM25 E3 ligase binds the first caspase recruitment domain (CARD) of RIG-I and subsequently induces lysine 172 ubiquitination of the second CARD of RIG-I, which is essential for the interaction with downstream MAVS/IPS-1/CARDIF/VISA and, thereby, IFN-beta mRNA production. Although ubiquitination has emerged as a major factor involved in RIG-I activation, the potential contribution of other post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation, to the regulation of RIG-I activity has not been addressed. Here, we report the identification of serine 8 phosphorylation at the first CARD of RIG-I as a negative regulatory mechanism of RIG-I-mediated IFN-beta production. Immunoblot analysis with a phosphospecific antibody showed that RIG-I serine 8 phosphorylation steady-state levels were decreased upon stimulation of cells with IFN-beta or virus infection. Substitution of serine 8 in the CARD RIG-I functional domain with phosphomimetic aspartate or glutamate results in decreased TRIM25 binding, RIG-I ubiquitination, MAVS binding, and downstream signaling. Finally, sequence comparison reveals that only primate species carry serine 8, whereas other animal species carry an asparagine, indicating that serine 8 phosphorylation may represent a primate-specific regulation of RIG-I activation. Collectively, these data suggest that the phosphorylation of RIG-I serine 8 operates as a negative switch of RIG-I activation by suppressing TRIM25 interaction, further underscoring the importance of RIG-I and TRIM25 connection in type I IFN signal transduction.

19562802
Systems approach to explore components and interactions in the presynapse.
The application of proteomic techniques to neuroscientific research provides an opportunity for a greater understanding of nervous system structure and function. As increasing amounts of neuroproteomic data become available, it is necessary to formulate methods to integrate these data in a meaningful way to obtain a more comprehensive picture of neuronal subcompartments. Furthermore, computational methods can be used to make biologically relevant predictions from large proteomic data sets. Here, we applied an integrated proteomics and systems biology approach to characterize the presynaptic (PRE) nerve terminal. For this, we carried out proteomic analyses of presynaptically enriched fractions, and generated a PRE literature-based protein-protein interaction network. We combined these with other proteomic analyses to generate a core list of 117 PRE proteins, and used graph theory-inspired algorithms to predict 92 additional components and a PRE complex containing 17 proteins. Some of these predictions were validated experimentally, indicating that the computational analyses can identify novel proteins and complexes in a subcellular compartment. We conclude that the combination of techniques (proteomics, data integration, and computational analyses) used in this study are useful in obtaining a comprehensive understanding of functional components, especially low-abundance entities and/or interactions in the PRE nerve terminal.

19151997
Mass spectrometric analysis reveals a functionally important PKA phosphorylation site in a Kir3 channel subunit.
Phosphorylation of the Kir3 channel by cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) potentiates activity and strengthens channel-PIP(2) interactions, whereas phosphorylation by protein kinase C (PKC) exerts the opposite effects (Keselman et al., Channels 1:113-123, 2007; Lopes et al., Channels 1:124-134, 2007). Unequivocal identification of phosphorylated residues in ion channel proteins has been difficult, but recent advances in mass spectrometry techniques have allowed precise identification of phosphorylation sites (Park et al., Science 313:976-979, 2006). In this study, we utilized mass spectrometry to identify phosphorylation sites within the Kir3.1 channel subunit. We focused on the Kir3.1 C-terminal cytosolic domain that has been reported to be regulated by several modulators. In vitro phosphorylation by PKA exhibited a convincing signal upon treatment with a phosphoprotein stain. The phosphorylated C terminus was subjected to mass spectrometric analysis using matrix-assisted lased desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectroscopy (MS). Peptides whose mass underwent a shift corresponding to addition of a phosphate group were then subjected to tandem MS (MS/MS) in order to confirm the modification and determine its precise location. Using this approach, we identified S385 as an in vitro phosphorylation site. Mutation of this residue to alanine resulted in a reduced sensitivity of Kir3.1* currents to H89 and Forskolin, confirming an in vivo role for this novel site of the Kir3.1 channel subunit in its regulation by PKA.

19132888
Licorice flavonoids inhibit eotaxin-1 secretion by human fetal lung fibroblasts in vitro.
Glycyrrhiza uralensis (Gan-Cao), commonly called "licorice", is one of the most commonly used herbs in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). In the United States, licorice products are most often consumed as flavoring and sweetening agents in food products. The licorice triterpenoid glycyrrhizin has several biological activities, including anti-inflammatory activity. Other potential anti-inflammatory constituents in G. uralensis have not been fully investigated. Airway eosinophilic inflammation is a major feature of allergic asthma. Eotaxin-1 (eotaxin) is involved in the recruitment of eosinophils to sites of antigen-induced inflammation in asthmatic airways. Because human lung fibroblasts are the major source of eotaxin, inhibition of eosinophil recruitment by suppression of fibroblast eotaxin production is a potentially valuable approach for the pharmacological intervention in asthma. A systematic bioassay-guided purification of G. uralensis yielded five flavonoids: liquiritin, liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenin, 7,4'-dihydroxyflavone, and isoononin. The structures of the compounds were established by (1)H and (13)C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) studies. The potential ability of these isolated pure compounds and glycyrrhizin to inhibit secretion of eotaxin-1 by human fetal lung fibroblasts (HFL-1) was tested. Liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenin, and 7,4'-dihydroxyflavone were more effective than liquiritin, isoononin, and glycyrrhizin in suppressing eotaxin secretion. A concentration-response study showed the IC(50) concentrations of liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenin, and 7,4'-dihydroxyflavone were 4.2, 0.92, and 0.21 microg/mL, respectively, demonstrating that Glycyrrhiza flavonoids inhibit eotaxin-1 secretion in vitro.

18681838
Endosomal lipid accumulation in NPC1 leads to inhibition of PKC, hypophosphorylation of vimentin and Rab9 entrapment.
Within the group of lysosomal storage diseases, NPC1 [NPC (Niemann-Pick type C) 1] disease is a lipidosis characterized by excessive accumulation of free cholesterol as well as gangliosides, glycosphingolipids and fatty acids in the late E/L (endosomal/lysosomal) system (Chen et al., 2005) due to a defect in late endosome lipid egress. We have previously demonstrated that expression of the small GTPase Rab9 in NPC1 cells can rescue the lipid transport block phenotype (Walter et al., 2003), albeit by an undefined mechanism. To investigate further the mechanism by which Rab9 facilitates lipid movement from late endosomes we sought to identify novel Rab9 binding/interacting proteins. In the present study, we report that Rab9 interacts with the intermediate filament phosphoprotein vimentin and this interaction is altered by lipid accumulation in late endosomes, which results in inhibition of PKC (protein kinase C) and hypophosphorylation of vimentin, leading to late endosome dysfunction. Intermediate filament hypophosphorylation, aggregation and entrapment of Rab9 ultimately leads to transport defects and inhibition of lipid egress from late endosomes. These results reveal a previously unappreciated interaction between Rab proteins and intermediate filaments in regulating intracellular lipid transport.

18498745
The CUL7 E3 ubiquitin ligase targets insulin receptor substrate 1 for ubiquitin-dependent degradation.
Recent genetic studies have documented a pivotal growth-regulatory role played by the Cullin 7 (CUL7) E3 ubiquitin ligase complex containing the Fbw8-substrate-targeting subunit, Skp1, and the ROC1 RING finger protein. In this report, we identified insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), a critical mediator of the insulin/insulin-like growth factor 1 signaling, as a proteolytic target of the CUL7 E3 ligase in a manner that depends on mammalian target of rapamycin and the p70 S6 kinase activities. Interestingly, while embryonic fibroblasts of Cul7-/- mice were found to accumulate IRS-1 and exhibit increased activation of IRS-1's downstream Akt and MEK/ERK pathways, these null cells grew poorly and displayed phenotypes reminiscent of those associated with oncogene-induced senescence. Taken together, our findings demonstrate a key role for the CUL7 E3 in targeting IRS-1 for degradation, a process that may contribute to the regulation of cellular senescence.

18218727
High-mobility group box proteins modulate tumor necrosis factor-alpha expression in osteoclastogenesis via a novel deoxyribonucleic acid sequence.
We have previously shown that mice lacking the TSH receptor (TSHR) exhibit osteoporosis due to enhanced osteoclast formation. The fact that this enhancement is not observed in double-null mice of TSHR and TNFalpha suggests that TNFalpha overexpression in osteoclast progenitors (macrophages) may be involved. It is unknown how TNFalpha expression is regulated in osteoclastogenesis. Here, we describe a receptor activator for nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL)-responsive sequence (CCG AGA CAG AGG TGT AGG GCC), spanning from -157 to -137 bp of the 5'-flanking region of the TNFalpha gene, which functions as a cis-acting regulatory element. We further show how RANKL treatment stimulates the high-mobility group box proteins (HMGB) HMGB1 and HMGB2 to bind the RANKL-responsive sequence and up-regulates TNFalpha transcription. Exogenous HMGB elicits the expression of cytokines, including TNFalpha, as well as osteoclast formation. Conversely, TSH inhibits the expression of HMGB and TNFalpha and the formation of osteoclasts. These results suggest that HMGB play a pivotal role in osteoclastogenesis. We also show a direct correlation between the expression of HMGB and TNFalpha and osteoclast formation in TSHR-null mice and TNFalpha-null mice. Taken together, we conclude that HMGB and TNFalpha play critical roles in the regulation of osteoclastogenesis and the remodeling of bone.

17922405
Seminal plasma reduces the effectiveness of topical polyanionic microbicides.
The objective of this study was to test the activity of microbicides against herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) introduced in seminal plasma. We found that seminal plasma interfered with the activity of PRO 2000 and of cellulose sulfate, increasing by 100-fold the concentration of drug required to inhibit 90% of viral plaque formation. Seminal plasma competitively inhibited binding of the microbicides to the HSV-2 envelope. Most of the interference was found in a high molecular-weight fraction; tandem mass spectrometry identified the proteins as fibronectin-1 and lactoferrin. In a murine model, the interference translated in vivo into a loss in protection. We found that 2% PRO 2000 gel protected 100% of mice challenged intravaginally with HSV-2 introduced in PBS, whereas only 55% of mice were protected if virus was introduced in seminal plasma (P=.0007, log rank test). If these findings are reflective of what occurs in humans, modifications to microbicides to ensure that they retain activity in the presence of seminal plasma are indicated.

17428795
Ligand binding and calcium influx induce distinct ectodomain/gamma-secretase-processing pathways of EphB2 receptor.
Binding of EphB receptors to ephrinB ligands on the surface of adjacent cells initiates signaling cascades that regulate angiogenesis, axonal guidance, and neuronal plasticity. These functions require processing of EphB receptors and removal of EphB-ephrinB complexes from the cell surface, but the mechanisms involved are poorly understood. Here we show that the ectodomain of EphB2 receptor is released to extracellular space following cleavage after EphB2 residue 543. The remaining membrane-associated fragment is cleaved by the presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase activity after EphB2 residue 569 releasing an intracellular peptide that contains the cytoplasmic domain of EphB2. This cleavage is inhibited by presenilin 1 familial Alzheimer disease mutations. Processing of EphB2 receptor depends on specific treatments: ephrinB ligand-induced processing requires endocytosis, and the ectodomain cleavage is sensitive to peptide inhibitor N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Leu-leucinal but insensitive to metalloproteinase inhibitor GM6001. The ligand-induced processing takes place in endosomes and involves the rapid degradation of the extracellular EphB2. EphrinB ligand stimulates ubiquitination of EphB2 receptor. Calcium influx- and N-methyl-d-aspartic acid-induced processing of EphB2 is inhibited by GM6001 and ADAM10 inhibitors but not by N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Leu-leucinal. This processing requires no endocytosis and promotes rapid shedding of extracellular EphB2, indicating that it takes place at the plasma membrane. Our data identify novel cleavages and modifications of EphB2 receptor and indicate that specific conditions determine the proteolytic systems and subcellular sites involved in the processing of this receptor.

17028301
Morphine administration alters the profile of hippocampal postsynaptic density-associated proteins: a proteomics study focusing on endocytic proteins.
Numerous studies have shown that drugs of abuse induce changes in protein expression in the brain that are thought to play a role in synaptic plasticity. Drug-induced plasticity can be mediated by changes at the synapse and more specifically at the postsynaptic density (PSD), which receives and transduces synaptic information. To date, the majority of studies examining synaptic protein profiles have focused on identifying the synaptic proteome. Only a handful of studies have examined the changes in synaptic profile by drug administration. We applied a quantitative proteomics analysis technique with the cleavable ICAT reagent to quantitate relative changes in protein levels of the hippocampal PSD in response to morphine administration. We identified a total of 102 proteins in the mouse hippocampal PSD. The majority of these were signaling, trafficking, and cytoskeletal proteins involved in synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory. Among the proteins whose levels were found to be altered by morphine administration, clathrin levels were increased to the largest extent. Immunoblotting and electron microscopy studies showed that this increase was localized to the PSD. Morphine treatment was also found to lead to a local increase in two other components of the endocytic machinery, dynamin and AP-2, suggesting a critical involvement of the endocytic machinery in the modulatory effects of morphine. Because alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors are thought to undergo clathrin-mediated endocytosis, we examined the effect of morphine administration on the association of the AMPA receptor subunit, GluR1, with clathrin. We found a substantial decrease in the levels of GluR1 associated with clathrin. Taken together, these results suggest that, by causing a redistribution of endocytic proteins at the synapse, morphine modulates synaptic plasticity at hippocampal glutamatergic synapses.

