18958566
Parastomal hernia repair using cross-linked porcine dermis: report of a case.
Parastomal hernia is not an uncommon complication after colostomy or ileostomy formation, but it may have serious consequences, such as intestinal obstruction and strangulation. Thus, the surgeon must repair the parastomal hernia using a technique that minimizes the chance of recurrence and complications. This case report describes a novel method of parastomal hernia repair using cross-linked acellular porcine dermal collagen matrix, a new biological material suitable for hernia repair.

18435881
Postoperative pain after laparoscopic ventral hernia repair: a prospective comparison of sutures versus tacks.
Mesh fixation in laparoscopic ventral hernia repair typically involves the use of tacks, transabdominal permanent sutures, or both of these. We compared postoperative pain after repair with either of these 2 methods. Patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair at the Mount Sinai Medical Center were prospectively enrolled in the study. They were sorted into 2 groups (1) those undergoing hernia repairs consisting primarily of transabdominal suture fixation and (2) those undergoing hernia repairs consisting primarily of tack fixation. The patients were not randomized. The technique of surgical repair was based on surgeon preference. A telephone survey was used to follow-up at 1 week, 1 month, and 2 months postoperatively. From 2004 through 2005, 50 patients were enrolled in the study. Twenty-nine had hernia repair primarily with transabdominal sutures, and 21 had repair primarily with tacks. Both groups had similar average age, BMI, hernia defect size, operative time, and postoperative length of stay. Pain scores at 1 week, 1 month, and 2 months were similar. Both groups also had similar times to return to work and need for narcotic pain medication. Patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair with primarily transabdominal sutures or tacks experience similar postoperative pain. The choice of either of these fixation methods during surgery should not be based on risk of postoperative pain.

