18928936
Cyclosporine and infliximab as rescue therapy for each other in patients with steroid-refractory ulcerative colitis.
In patients with severe corticosteroid-refractory ulcerative colitis, cyclosporine or infliximab may be added in an effort to induce remission. If the patient then fails either of these drugs, it is unknown whether success can be achieved by using the other agent. The aim of this study was to assess outcomes of using cyclosporine after failure of infliximab, and vice versa. We retrospectively reviewed the charts of 19 patients with corticosteroid-refractory ulcerative colitis who received either infliximab after failed cyclosporine or cyclosporine after failed infliximab. Acute salvage therapy was defined as having received the alternate drug within 4 weeks of discontinuing the first agent. Ten patients received infliximab after failing cyclosporine; 9 patients received cyclosporine after failing infliximab. Four patients (40%) in the infliximab-salvage group achieved remission, as did 3 (33%) in the cyclosporine-salvage group. Remission lasted a mean of 10.4 months (range, 4.4-17.03 mo) and 28.5 months (range, 5.0-41.5 mo), respectively. Severe adverse events included one patient who developed sepsis and died after receiving infliximab salvage. One patient who received cyclosporine salvage developed herpetic esophagitis, and another patient who received cyclosporine salvage developed pancreatitis and bacteremia. In patients with severe corticosteroid-refractory ulcerative colitis who fail treatment with either cyclosporine or infliximab, remission rates using acute salvage therapy by crossing over to the other drug occur in approximately one third of patients and have limited duration. Serious adverse events occurred in 16%, including 1 death, suggesting that the risks of acute salvage therapy may outweigh the benefits.

18844620
Chromoendoscopy-targeted biopsies are superior to standard colonoscopic surveillance for detecting dysplasia in inflammatory bowel disease patients: a prospective endoscopic trial.
Patients with extensive, longstanding chronic ulcerative or Crohn's colitis face greater risks of developing colorectal cancer. Current standard surveillance relies on detecting dysplasia using random sampling at colonoscopy but may fail to detect dysplasia in many patients. Dye spraying techniques have been reported to aid in detecting otherwise subtle mucosal abnormalities in the setting of colitis. We prospectively compared dye-spray technique using methylene blue to standard colonoscopic surveillance in detecting dysplasia. One hundred fifteen patients were referred to the Chromoendoscopy Study Group and prospectively screened for the study. One hundred two (64 M, 38 F) (79 UC 23 CC) patients meeting the inclusion criteria were enrolled. Following a standard bowel preparation, each patient was examined using standard office endoscopic equipment by three methods: (a) standard surveillance colonoscopy with four random biopsies every 10 cm (for a total of at least 32 samples); (b) a targeted biopsy protocol; and finally (c) methylene blue (0.01%) dye spray was segmentally applied throughout the colon and any pit-pattern abnormality or lesion rendered visible by the dye spray was targeted and biopsied. Each patient had a single examination, which included two passes of the colonoscope. Specimens were reviewed in a blinded fashion by a single gastrointestinal pathologist. The three methods were then compared with each patient serving as his or her own control. Targeted biopsies with dye spray revealed significantly more dysplasia (16 patients with low grade and 1 patient with high grade) than random biopsies (3 patients with low-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.001) and more than targeted nondye spray (8 patients with low-grade and 1 patient with high-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.057). Targeted biopsies with and without dye spray detected dysplasia in 20 patients compared with 3 using Method (a) (P= 0.0002, two-tailed exact McNemar's Test). There were no adverse events. Colonoscopic surveillance of chronic colitis patients using methylene blue dye-spray targeted biopsies results in improved dysplasia yield compared to conventional random and targeted biopsy methods. Accordingly, this technique warrants incorporation into clinical practice in this setting and consideration as a standard of care for these patients. The value of multiple random biopsies as a surveillance technique should be revisited.

18422816
Relapses of inflammatory bowel disease during pregnancy: in-hospital management and birth outcomes.
There are few studies that describe the medical treatment and colitis response rates among patients with a severe relapse of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) during pregnancy, and few studies of the effect of such a relapse on birth outcomes in these patients. To describe the treatment and response rates of severe colitis in pregnancy, and to assess the effects of a severe relapse of colitis during pregnancy on birth outcomes. We performed a case control study of pregnant patients with IBD hospitalized for a disease relapse at two large treatment centers between 1989 and 2001. Details of management of disease relapse and maternal and fetal outcomes were recorded. Eighteen patients (11 ulcerative colitis, 6 Crohn's disease, 1 indeterminate colitis), mean age 28.6 yr (range 19-38) formed the study group; 41 age-matched pregnant IBD patients without disease relapse formed the control group. Study patients were hospitalized at a mean of 15.9-wk gestation (range 8-35) for a mean of 10.4 days (range 3-31). All 18 patients received IV hydrocortisone (mean dose 199 mg/day) and 7 patients (39%) either continued taking or were commenced on immunomodulators: IV cyclosporine (5 patients) and azathioprine/6-MP (3 patients). Fifteen patients (83%) had a clinical response to these medical treatments, 3 patients required colectomy. There were significant differences between study and control groups in gestation period (35.0 wk vs 38.7 wk, respectively, P= 0.0001) and birth weight (2,001 g vs 3,018 g, respectively, P < 0.0001). Treatment with IV hydrocortisone and IV cyclosporine appears effective at inducing remission of colitis but their use must continue to be confined to severely ill patients being treated at specialized centers. Severe relapses of colitis during pregnancy increase the risk of preterm birth and low birth weight.

18177449
Adverse events associated with the use of cyclosporine in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
Intravenous cyclosporine (i.v. CsA) is an effective therapy for patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, data regarding its adverse events in these patients are limited. A retrospective chart review of the initial 111 consecutive patients with IBD treated with i.v. CsA followed by a predetermined duration of oral therapy. One hundred eleven patients (64 UC, 47 CD; mean age 33 yr, range 16-68) received i.v. CsA at 4 mg/kg/day, then oral CsA at 8 mg/kg/day, with dose adjustment based on serum creatinine. The mean treatment duration was 9.3 months (range 1 wk to 34 months). Major adverse events occurred in 17 (15.3%) patients. Nephrotoxicity (serum creatinine > or = 1.4 mg/dL [123 micromol/L] or a rise by at least 33% over baseline not responding to dose adjustment) sufficiently severe to warrant discontinuation of therapy occurred in 6 (5.4%) patients. Serious infection occurred in 7 (6.3%) patients, seizures in 4 (3.6%) patients, anaphylaxis in 1 (0.9%) patient, and death in 2 (1.8%) patients. Minor adverse events (transient effects with complete resolution either spontaneously or with dose adjustment) comprised: paresthesias (51%), hypomagnesemia (42%), hypertension (39%), hypertrichosis (27%), headache (23%), minor nephrotoxicity (defined as above but with restoration of normal serum creatinine with dose adjustment; 19% of patients), abnormal liver function tests (19%), minor infections (15%), hyperkalemia (13%), and gingival swelling (4%). In our initial experience, limited duration CsA therapy was frequently associated with adverse events although the majority of these were minor and responded to dose adjustment. Although not all severe adverse events can be clearly attributed to CsA use alone, its high incidence suggests that vigorous monitoring by experienced clinicians at tertiary care centers may be required.

18043236
Pouch-ouch.
For patients who require colectomy, the ileal pouch anal anastomosis operation has alleviated the need for permanent ileostomy and has improved associated self-esteem issues. The most common complication of this surgery, however, is pouchitis. This review highlights the most recent research in the pathophysiology, risk factors, diagnosis and management of pouchitis, and pouch surveillance for neoplasia in patients who had ulcerative colitis. Markers of inflammation, including fecal lactoferrin and mucosal cytokines, have been reported as useful in differentiating between irritable pouch syndrome and pouchitis. Numerous risk factors for the development of pouchitis have been identified. They include the presence of perinuclear antinuclear cytoplasmic antibodies, steroid use prior to colectomy, dysplasia as the indication for colectomy, the presence of extraintestinal manifestations, and an elevated platelet count. Therapy for acute pouchitis remains a short course of antibiotics. For chronic pouchitis, studies found success with rifaximin, tinidazole, and oral budesonide. Cancer in the residual rectal mucosa, in the ileal mucosa, and in pouch polyps occurs frequently enough to warrant surveillance. Risk factors for the development of pouchitis should be discussed with patients. Less invasive diagnostic strategies have been proposed and antibiotics are still the mainstay of therapy.

20955442
The CHOICE trial: adalimumab demonstrates safety, fistula healing, improved quality of life and increased work productivity in patients with Crohn's disease who failed prior infliximab therapy.
Adalimumab induces and maintains remission in adults with Crohn's disease. To evaluate safety, fistula healing, quality of life and work productivity in adalimumab-treated patients who failed infliximab, including primary nonresponders. After a ?8-week infliximab washout, patients with moderate-to-severe Crohn's disease received open-label adalimumab as induction (160/80 mg at weeks 0/2) and maintenance (40 mg every other week) therapies. At/after 8 weeks, patients with flare/nonresponse could receive weekly therapy. Minimum study duration was 8 weeks, continuing until the commercial availability of adalimumab for Crohn's disease. Of 673 patients enrolled, 17% were infliximab primary nonresponders and 83% were initial responders. Three percent of patients had serious infections (mainly abscesses). Complete fistula healing was achieved by 34/88 (39%) patients with baseline fistulas. Improvements in quality of life and work productivity were sustained from week 4 to week 24 for all patients, as well as the subgroup of primary nonresponders. Blinded clinical trials have shown adalimumab to be both an effective first-line therapy for anti-TNF-naïve patients and an important treatment option for infliximab-refractory or -intolerant patients. This trial presents open-label experience to support further the safety and effectiveness of adalimumab in patients who failed infliximab therapy, including primary nonresponders (NCT00338650).

