20028884
Imaging manifestations of Niemann-Pick disease type B.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this article is to illustrate the various imaging manifestations of Niemann-Pick disease type B using various imaging techniques emphasizing cross-sectional imaging. CONCLUSION: Niemann-Pick disease type B is a multisystem disease that affects the pulmonary, cardiovascular, abdominal, and skeletal systems. Cross-sectional imaging is well suited for detecting and assessing the various manifestations of this disease, which can be highly suggestive of the diagnosis when seen in combination.

19745751
Use of complementary and alternative medicine by patients with lysosomal storage diseases.
To evaluate the extent of complementary and alternative medicine use and perceived effectiveness in patients with lysosomal storage diseases. A 26-item survey was distributed to 495 patients with type 1 Gaucher, Fabry, and type B Niemann-Pick diseases who were seen at the Lysosomal Storage Disease Program at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine. Survey responses were entered into an access database and analyzed using descriptive statistics. Surveys were completed by 167 respondents with an overall response rate of 34%. Complementary and alternative medicines were used by 45% of patients with type 1 Gaucher disease, 41% of patients with Fabry disease, and 47% of patients with type B Niemann-Pick for symptoms related to their disease. Complementary and alternative medicines were used most frequently by adult females (55%), in patients who reported having one or more invasive procedures due to their disease, patients who use one or more conventional medical therapies, or those with depression and/or anxiety. Overall perceived effectiveness of complementary and alternative medicine supplements was low; however, complementary and alternative medicine therapies were perceived as effective. Complementary and alternative medicines are commonly used among patients with lysosomal storage diseases. Assessment of the effectiveness of these approaches in the lysosomal storage diseases is needed, and physicians should be aware of complementary and alternative medicine therapies used by patients to evaluate safety and possible drug interactions.

18479882
Association between temporal orientation and attitudes about BRCA1/2 testing among women of African descent with family histories of breast cancer.
Previous studies have identified specific attitudes (pros and cons) about BRCA testing held by women of African descent that are associated with decisions to participate in testing. These testing attitudes may be determined, in part, by temporal orientation, or how one perceives the significance of events and the consequences of their actions in terms of past, present, and future. The current study explored the relationship between temporal orientation and pros and cons of BRCA testing among 140 women of African descent with a family history suggestive of a genetic mutation predisposing to breast cancer. Participants completed measures of temporal orientation and genetic testing attitudes. Multivariate analyses indicated that future orientation was positively associated with perceived pros of testing. Additional analyses revealed significant associations between temporal orientation and specific item subsets related to the negative and positive impact of testing on family and personal control over one's health. These results support an association between temporal orientation and attitudes about BRCA testing among women of African descent with family histories of breast cancer. Findings support exploration of temporal orientation in future research on BRCA testing decisions among women of African descent and this construct's importance in developing decision aids and tailoring genetic counseling.

17575456
Report of an international survey of molecular genetic testing laboratories.
To collect data on the practices of molecular genetic testing (MGT) laboratories for the development of national and international policies for quality assurance (QA). A web-based survey of MGT laboratory directors (n = 827; response rate 63%) in 18 countries on 3 continents. QA and reporting indices were developed and calculated for each responding laboratory. Laboratory setting varied among and within countries, as did qualifications of the directors. Respondents in every country indicated that their laboratory receives specimens from outside their national borders (64%, n = 529). Pair-wise comparisons of the QA index revealed a significant association with the director having formal training in molecular genetics (p < 0.005), affiliation with a genetics unit (p = 0.003), accreditation of the laboratory (p < 0.005) and participation in proficiency testing (p < 0.005). Research labs had a lower mean report score compared to all other settings (p < 0.05) as did laboratories accessioning <150 samples per year. MGT is provided under widely varying conditions and regulatory frameworks. The data provided here may be a useful guide for policy action at both governmental and professional levels.

