19458104
Imaging of male infertility: pictorial review.
OBJECTIVE: This article will review the workup of infertility in a male. The imaging of common conditions associated with infertility, including varicocele, ejaculatory duct obstruction, seminal vesicle agenesis, and undescended testis, will be shown, as well as other conditions that can be incidentally seen. CONCLUSION: The analysis of infertility in males has become more common in recent years. The practicing radiologist should be familiar with the evaluation of the infertile man and the common radiologic findings and disease processes associated with infertility.

19000049
Spectrum of extra-mammary findings on breast MRI: a pictorial review.


18533395
Ultrasound detection of nonpalpable mammographically occult malignancy.
To evaluate the prevalence of occult malignancy with screening breast ultrasound. All ultrasound-guided core needle breast biopsies performed between January 1, 1999, and June 30, 2001, were retrospectively reviewed. Lesions were identified during screening breast ultrasound in high-risk women with no mammographic or palpable abnormality in either breast, a unilateral mammographic or palpable abnormality in the contralateral breast, or a unilateral mammographic or palpable abnormality in a different quadrant of the same breast. All ultrasound-detected lesions were histologically verified. Six hundred and fifty-two women with a mean age of 49 years underwent 698 biopsies during the study period. Three hundred and forty-nine of these lesions were detected at screening breast ultrasound. Out of 349, 11 (3.2%) had a mammographically and clinically occult malignancy. Nine cancers were found in women with no mammographic or palpable abnormality. Two cancers were found in the same breast as the mammographic or palpable abnormality. None were found in the breast contralateral to a palpable or mammographic abnormality. Screening breast ultrasound of high-risk women has a similar detection rate for occult carcinoma as screening mammography, but has a low positive predictive value in cases where biopsy is performed.

