21256303
Predictors and outcomes of seizures after cardiac surgery: a multivariable analysis of 2,578 patients.
Limited data exist regarding the epidemiology and prognosis of seizures in adults after cardiac surgery. The aim of this study was to define preoperative predictors of seizures and impact on postoperative outcomes. A prospective database of 2,578 consecutive adults who underwent cardiac surgery at a single institution between April 2007 and December 2009 was retrospectively analyzed to determine risk factors for postoperative seizures and prognostic impact. No patient received tranexamic acid or aprotinin. Seizures occurred in 31 patients (1%) at a median of 2 days postoperatively (1 patient had a preoperative diagnosis of seizure disorder). Seizures were classified as generalized tonic-clonic (71%), simple/complex partial (26%), or status epilepticus (3%). Incidence differed according to procedure (coronary bypass 0.1%, isolated valve 1%, valve/coronary bypass 3%, aorta 5%; p <0.001). Patients who experienced seizures had nearly a fivefold higher operative mortality than patients who did not (29% versus 6%, p <0.001). Head computed tomography was performed in 26 patients (84%), of whom ischemic strokes were identified in 14 cases (53%). These were embolic in 9 patients (34%), and watershed in 3 (12%). Hemorrhagic strokes were observed in 2 patients (8%). The occurrence of a new postoperative stroke in seizure patients did not significantly increase the likelihood of in-hospital death. Thirteen patients (41%) were discharged without neurologic deficit. Multivariable logistic regression analysis identified three risk factors for seizure: deep hypothermic circulatory arrest, aortic calcification or atheroma, and critical preoperative state. Seizures in adults after cardiac surgery are strong independent predictors of permanent neurologic deficit and increased operative mortality. Early head computed tomography may be indicated to identify treatable pathology.

17976438
Epidemiology of stroke after cardiac surgery in the current era.
Previous studies of the epidemiology of stroke in patients undergoing cardiac surgery have been based primarily on patients having coronary bypass surgery and therefore have limited applicability to the more heterogenous populations seen in the current era. We examine the epidemiology of stroke after cardiac surgery in a contemporary surgical population. Retrospective analysis was conducted of a prospective database of 5085 adults (coronary bypass 2401, isolated valve 1003, valve/coronary bypass 546, thoracic aorta 517, transplant/assist device 179, adult congenital 124, other 315) who had cardiac surgery at a single institution over a 6-year period (1998-2004). Stroke occurred in 134 (2.6%) patients. Incidence varied according to procedure (coronary bypass 1.7%, isolated valve 1.8%, valve/coronary bypass 4.4%, and ascending aorta 4.6%). Patients who had a stroke had a higher perioperative mortality rate than that of patients who did not (32.8% vs 4.9%; P < .0001) and a longer period of hospitalization (median 30 days vs 7 days; P < .0001). Multivariate logistic analysis identified 10 preoperative predictors of stroke: gender, age, aortic surgery, previous stroke, critical preoperative state, poor ventricular function, diabetes, peripheral vascular disease, unstable angina, and pulmonary hypertension. A logistic model was developed on the basis of these risk factors to predict the likelihood of stroke. We have demonstrated a relatively low incidence of stroke in a diverse contemporary cardiac surgical cohort. By enabling preoperative identification of patients at risk, our logistic model has the potential to improve preoperative patient counseling and selection and could help to define high-risk cohorts for research into stroke prevention.

17270428
Delayed diagnosis of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) in a parturient with preeclampsia after inadvertent dural puncture.
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome is a rare complication generally associated with headache and acute changes in blood pressure. We present a case of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome where diagnosis was delayed because the patient also had preeclampsia and an inadvertent dural puncture, both associated with headache. The clinical challenge and the need for prompt diagnosis and treatment are emphasized.

