21443569
A 15-year prospective follow-up of bipolar affective disorders: comparisons with unipolar nonpsychotic depression.
Outcome studies have previously documented substantial functional disability among individuals with bipolar disorder, although few follow-up studies have examined the prospective course of illness beyond 10 years' duration. A total of 95 patients with mood disorders (46 with bipolar I disorder and 49 with unipolar nonpsychotic depression) were assessed 15 years after index hospitalization. Logistic and linear regression models were used to identify predictors of global functioning, work disability, and social adjustment. At 15-year follow-up, good overall functioning was significantly less common among subjects with bipolar disorder (35%) than unipolar depression (73%) (p<0.001). Work disability was significantly more extensive in bipolar than unipolar disorder subjects (p<0.001). Logistic regression indicated that good outcome 15 years after index hospitalization was significantly predicted by a unipolar rather than bipolar disorder diagnosis and the absence of a depressive episode in the preceding year. Past-year depressive, but not past-year manic, syndromes were associated with poorer global outcome and greater work disability. In addition, subsyndromal depression was significantly associated with poorer global, work, and social outcome among bipolar, but not unipolar disorder subjects. A majority of individuals with bipolar I disorder manifest problems with work and global functioning 15 years after an index hospitalized manic episode Recurrent syndromal and subsyndromal depression disrupts multiple domains of functional outcome more profoundly in bipolar than unipolar mood disorders. The prevalence, and correlates, of impaired long-term outcome parallel those reported in shorter-term functional outcome studies of bipolar disorder.

20712755
Ruling in and ruling out 'caseness' in the bipolar spectrum: implications for initial screening.


20414158
Differential diagnosis of bipolar disorder.


20148865
Development and psychometric evaluation of the Bipolar Functional Status Questionnaire (BFSQ).
Persistently impaired psychosocial functioning has been recognized in many individuals with bipolar disorder. However, existing measures of functional disability have been adapted for use in bipolar disorder based mainly on those developed for use in other conditions. The present study involved the development and validation of a new patient self-report measure specific to bipolar disorder, the Bipolar Functional Status Questionnaire (BFSQ). Relevant constructs were identified, evaluated, and refined through an expert advisory panel in conjunction with patient interviews. Questionnaire items were vetted through iterative patient interviews. Psychometric properties were determined based on patient responses from implementation of the proposed 33-item questionnaire in an 11-site study of 596 patients with bipolar disorder across varied phases of illness. Eight constructs were identified as fundamental to functional status in bipolar disorder: cognitive function, sleep, role functioning, emotional functioning, energy/vitality, social functioning, personal management, and sexual functioning. Psychometric validation supported item reduction to a 24-item unidimensional scale, with high internal consistency (coefficient alpha's = 0.93-0.95), high test-retest reliability (intraclass correlation coefficient = 0.86, 95% confidence interval = 0.82-0.89), strong convergent validity with other functional disability measures (r's > 0.70), and highly significant discriminant validity across illness phases, with large effect sizes (Cohen's d > 0.70). The BFSQ is a psychometrically sound self-report measure that can be used to effectively quantify functional status across different clinical states in patients with bipolar disorder.

19594511
The modern pharmacopoeia: a return to depressive realism?


19538691
Identifying and treating cognitive impairment in bipolar disorder.
The presence of cognitive deficits has become increasingly appreciated across all phases of bipolar disorder. The present review sought to identify domains of cognitive dysfunction, methods of assessment, discrimination of iatrogenic from illness-specific etiologies, and pharmacologic strategies to manage cognitive problems in patients with bipolar disorder. A selective literature review was performed focusing on studies of descriptive phenomenology and pharmacologic intervention (favoring randomized comparisons when existent but open trials or case reports when not) involving cognition in bipolar disorder populations, healthy volunteers, or other clinical populations. Identification was made of (i) practical strategies for clinical assessment and management of cognitive complaints, (ii) limitations of existing intervention studies, and (iii) recommendations for the design and direction of future research. Cognitive deficits involving attention, executive function, and verbal memory are evident across all phases of bipolar disorder. Most existing treatment studies involve nonbipolar populations, prompting caution when extrapolating outcomes to individuals with bipolar disorder. Differentiating medication- from illness-induced cognitive dysfunction requires comprehensive assessment with an appreciation for the cognitive domains most affected by specific medications. No current pharmacotherapies substantially improve cognition in bipolar disorder, although preliminary findings suggest some potential value for adjunctive stimulants such as modafinil and novel experimental agents. Circumscribed cognitive deficits may be both iatrogenic and intrinsic to bipolar disorder. Optimal management hinges on a knowledge of illness-specific cognitive domains as well as of the beneficial or adverse cognitive profiles of common psychotropic medications.

19267703
Age at onset of bipolar disorder and risk for comorbid borderline personality disorder.
The relationship between bipolar disorder and cluster B personality disorders remains phenomenologically complex and controversial. We sought to examine the relationship between early age at onset of bipolar disorder and development of comorbid borderline personality disorder. A total of 100 adults in an academic specialty clinic for bipolar disorder underwent structured diagnostic interviews and clinical assessments to determine lifetime presence of comorbid borderline personality disorder, histories of childhood trauma, and clinical illness characteristics. Logistic regression indicated that increasing age at onset of bipolar disorder was associated with a lower probability of developing comorbid borderline personality disorder (odds ratio = 0.91, 95% confidence interval: 0.83-0.99) while controlling for potential confounding factors, including a history of severe child trauma/abuse. Early onset of bipolar disorder increases the probability of developing comorbid borderline personality disorder, independent of the effects of severe childhood trauma/abuse. In patients with borderline personality disorder, prospective studies of new-onset bipolar disorder may underestimate the prevalence of true comorbidity unless they capture the primary risk window for first-episode mania arising before the end of adolescence.

19210946
Depressive illness burden associated with complex polypharmacy in patients with bipolar disorder: findings from the STEP-BD.
Many patients with bipolar disorder receive multi-drug treatment regimens, but the distinguishing profiles of patients who receive complex pharmacologies have not been established. Prescribing patterns of lithium, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, and antipsychotics were examined for 4,035 subjects with bipolar disorder (DSM-IV) immediately prior to entering the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD). Subjects were recruited for participation across 22 centers in the United States between November 1999 and July 2005. The quality receiver operating characteristic (ROC) method was used to develop composite profiles of patients receiving complex regimens (p < .01 for all iterations). Use of 3 or more medications occurred in 40% of subjects, while 18% received 4 or more agents. Quality ROC analyses revealed that subjects had a 64% risk for receiving a complex regimen (> or = 4 medications) if they had (1) ever taken an atypical antipsychotic, (2) > or = 6 lifetime depressive episodes, (3) attempted suicide, and (4) an annual income > or = $75,000. Complex polypharmacy was least often associated with lithium, divalproex, or carbamazepine and most often associated with atypical antipsychotics or antidepressants. Contrary to expectations, a history of psychosis, age at onset, bipolar I versus II subtype, history of rapid cycling, prior hospitalizations, current illness state, and history of alcohol or substance use disorders did not significantly alter the risk profiles for receiving complex regimens. Complex polypharmacy involving at least 4 medications occurs in approximately 1 in 5 individuals with bipolar disorder. Use of traditional mood stabilizers is associated with fewer cotherapies. Complex regimens are especially common in patients with substantial depressive illness burden and suicidality, for whom simpler drug regimens may fail to produce acceptable levels of response. clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00012558.

19122008
Manic symptoms during depressive episodes in 1,380 patients with bipolar disorder: findings from the STEP-BD.
Little is known about how often bipolar depressive episodes are accompanied by subsyndromal manic symptoms in bipolar I and II disorders. The authors sought to determine the frequency and clinical correlates of manic symptoms during episodes of bipolar depression. From among 4,107 enrollees in the National Institute of Mental Health's Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD), 1,380 individuals met criteria for bipolar I or II depressive syndromes at the time of enrollment and were assessed for concomitant manic symptoms. Illness characteristics were compared in patients with pure bipolar depressed episodes and those with mixed depressive presentations. Two-thirds of the subjects with bipolar depressed episodes had concomitant manic symptoms, most often distractibility, flight of ideas or racing thoughts, and psychomotor agitation. Patients with any mixed features were significantly more likely than those with pure bipolar depressed episodes to have early age at illness onset, rapid cycling in the past year, bipolar I subtype, history of suicide attempts, and more days in the preceding year with irritability or mood elevation. Manic symptoms often accompany bipolar depressive episodes but may easily be overlooked when they appear less prominent than depressive features. Subsyndromal manic symptoms during bipolar I or II depression demarcate a more common, severe, and psychopathologically complex clinical state than pure bipolar depression and merit recognition as a distinct nosologic entity.

18945397
Overdiagnosis of bipolar disorder among substance use disorder inpatients with mood instability.
Among substance use disorder (SUD) patients, mood instability and high-risk behaviors may suggest the presence of bipolar disorder. However, active substance abuse impedes efforts to diagnose bipolar illness validly in patients with mood complaints. The authors retrospectively reviewed records for 85 adults admitted sequentially over a 1-year period (August 1, 2005, to July 31, 2006) to a private inpatient dual-diagnosis unit for substance abuse/dependence and mood disorders. A senior research psychiatrist conducted diagnostic interviews based on DSM-IV criteria to ascertain current and lifetime manic or hypomanic episodes during abstinent periods. Only 33% of subjects with suspected bipolar diagnoses (28/85) met DSM-IV criteria for bipolar I or II disorder. DSM-IV bipolar patients were significantly older (p = .029) and more likely to have made past suicide attempts (p = .027), abused fewer substances (p = .027), and were less likely to abuse cocaine (p < .001) than those failing to meet DSM-IV criteria. Inability to affirm bipolar diagnoses most often resulted from insufficient DSM-IV "B" symptoms associated with mania or hypomania (55% or 45/82), inability to identify abstinent periods for assessing mood symptoms (36%, 29/81), and inadequate durations of manic/hypomanic symptoms for DSM-IV syndromic criteria (12%, 10/84). Patients not meeting DSM-IV criteria were most often presumed to have bipolar disorder solely on the basis of the presence of mood instability, although this feature held little predictive value for DSM-IV bipolar diagnoses. Many patients with active SUDs who are diagnosed in the community with bipolar disorder may not actually meet DSM-IV criteria for bipolar I or II disorder. Caution must be exercised when attempting to diagnose such patients, particularly when mood instability or cocaine use is present.

18533757
Optimizing treatment outcomes in bipolar disorder under ordinary conditions.
The gold standard for establishing the efficacy of a drug is the randomized controlled trial (RCT). In the past decade, there has been an increasing recognition of the important difference between RCTs designed to demonstrate efficacy and treatment studies designed to evaluate the effectiveness of various therapies in actual clinical practice. This distinction is especially true for bipolar disorder, a complex illness whose treatment response is significantly influenced by various moderating baseline factors (e.g., comorbidity, severity, treatment resistance) and mediating factors (e.g., adequacy of dose and treatment duration, use of concomitant medications, treatment adherence). To reduce sources of variance in treatment outcome, RCTs rely on restrictive entry criteria in an attempt to control moderating factors and on highly standardized study procedures in an attempt to control mediating factors. The goal is to reduce the heterogeneity in the patient sample and in treatments administered and thereby to increase the internal validity of the study. Unfortunately, the results of rigorously controlled RCTs with strong internal validity are often not highly generalizable to the real-world setting of actual clinical practice. The aim of this paper is to briefly review key variables that influence treatment outcome of bipolar disorder in real-world clinical settings and to discuss strategies for optimizing treatment outcomes under ordinary conditions.

18402500
What constitutes evidence-based pharmacotherapy for bipolar disorder? Part 2: complex presentations and clinical context.


18162032
What constitutes evidence-based pharmacotherapy for bipolar disorder? Part 1: first-line treatments.


