21358635
Generation of anterior foregut endoderm from human embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells.
Directed differentiation of human embryonic stem (hES) cells and human induced pluripotent stem (hiPS) cells captures in vivo developmental pathways for specifying lineages in vitro, thus avoiding perturbation of the genome with exogenous genetic material. Thus far, derivation of endodermal lineages has focused predominantly on hepatocytes, pancreatic endocrine cells and intestinal cells. The ability to differentiate pluripotent cells into anterior foregut endoderm (AFE) derivatives would expand their utility for cell therapy and basic research to tissues important for immune function, such as the thymus; for metabolism, such as thyroid and parathyroid; and for respiratory function, such as trachea and lung. We find that dual inhibition of transforming growth factor (TGF)-? and bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signaling after specification of definitive endoderm from pluripotent cells results in a highly enriched AFE population that is competent to be patterned along dorsoventral and anteroposterior axes. These findings provide an approach for the generation of AFE derivatives.

21184507
An Endothelial Cell Niche Induces Hepatic Specification Through Dual Repression of Wnt and Notch Signaling.
Complex cross-talk between endoderm and the microenvironment is an absolute requirement to orchestrate hepatic specification and expansion. In the mouse, the septum transversum and cardiac mesoderm, through secreted BMPs and FGFs, respectively, instruct the adjacent ventral endoderm to become hepatic endoderm. Consecutively, endothelial cells promote expansion of the specified hepatic endoderm. Using a mouse reporter embryonic stem (ES) cell line in which hCD4 and hCD25 were targeted to the Foxa2 and Foxa3 loci, we reconstituted an in vitro culture system in which committed endoderm cells co-expressing hCD4-Foxa2 and hCD25-Foxa3 were isolated, and co-cultured with endothelial cells in the presence of BMP4 and bFGF. In this culture setting, we provide mechanistic evidence that endothelial cells function not only to promote hepatic endoderm expansion, but are also required at an earlier step for hepatic specification, at least in part through regulation of the Wnt and Notch pathways. Activation of Wnt and Notch by chemical or genetic approaches increases endoderm cell numbers but inhibits hepatic specification, and conversely, chemical inhibition of both pathways enhances hepatic specification and reduces proliferation. Using identical co-culture conditions, we defined a similar dependence of endoderm harvested from embryos on endothelial cells to support their growth and hepatic specification. Our findings (1) confirm a conserved role of Wnt repression for mouse hepatic specification, (2) uncover a novel role for Notch repression in the hepatic fate decision, and (3) demonstrate that repression of Wnt and Notch signaling in hepatic endoderm is controlled by the endothelial cell niche.

20430021
Klf6/copeb is required for hepatic outgrowth in zebrafish and for hepatocyte specification in mouse ES cells.
Krüppel-like factor 6 (Klf6; copeb in zebrafish) is a zinc-finger transcription factor and tumor suppressor gene. Klf6(-)(/)(-) mice have defects in hematopoiesis and angiogenesis and do not form a liver. However, the vascular abnormalities in Klf6(-/-) mice obfuscate its role in liver development since these two processes are linked in mammals. We utilized zebrafish and mouse ES cells to investigate the role of copeb in endoderm specification and hepatogenesis separate from its function in angiogenesis. During zebrafish development, copeb expression is enriched in digestive organs. Morpholino knockdown of copeb blocks expansion of the liver, pancreas and intestine, but does not affect their specification, differentiation or the vascularization of the liver. Decreased hepatocyte proliferation in copeb morphants is accompanied by upregulation of the cell cycle inhibitor, cdkn1a, a Copeb transcriptional target. A cell autonomous role for Klf6 in endoderm and hepatic development was investigated by manipulating Klf6 expression in mouse ES cells driven to differentiate along the hepatic lineage. Expression of the endoderm markers Hnf3beta, Gata4, Sox17, and CxCr4 is not induced in Klf6(-/-) cells but is upregulated in ES cells over-expressing Klf6. Collectively, these findings indicate that copeb/Klf6 is essential for the development of endoderm-derived organs.

