20179201
Vascular endothelial growth factor-C induces lymphangitic carcinomatosis, an extremely aggressive form of lung metastases.
The lymphatic system is an important pathway for tumor dissemination to the lymph nodes, but to which extent it contributes to the formation of distant metastases remains unknown. We report that induction of lymphangiogenesis by vascular endothelial growth factor-C (VEGF-C) at the secondary site, in the lung, facilitates expansion of already disseminated cancer cells throughout the lung tissue. By using orthotopic spontaneous metastasis models in nude mice, we show that VEGF-C expression by tumor cells altered the pattern of pulmonary metastases from nodular to diffuse and facilitated disease progression. Metastases expressing VEGF-C were tightly associated with the airways, in contrast to the control cells that were scattered in the lung parenchyma, throughout the alveolar region. VEGF-C induced lung lymphangiogenesis and promoted intralymphatic spread of metastases in the lung and formation of tumor emboli in the pulmonary arteries. This pattern of metastasis corresponds to lymphangitic carcinomatosis metastatic phenotype in human cancer patients, an extremely aggressive pattern of pulmonary metastases. In accordance, pulmonary breast cancer metastases from patients which were classified as lymphangitic carcinomatosis showed high levels of VEGF-C expression in cancer cells. These data show that VEGF-C promotes late steps of the metastatic process and identify the VEGF-C/VEGF receptor-3 pathway as the target not only for prevention of metastases, but also for treatment of established metastatic disease.

19961252
Adequate histologic sampling of breast magnetic resonance imaging-guided core needle biopsy.
-The increasing use of contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the breast as a valuable adjunct to mammography and ultrasound in the detection of breast lesions, in association with needle core biopsy taken from the suspicious areas, has major workload implications for histopathology laboratories wherever breast MRI is practiced. -To establish the number of histologic levels necessary for the evaluation of breast MRI-guided needle core biopsy specimens taken from suspicious areas on breast MRI examination. -Retrospective histologic review of a series of breast MRI-guided core needle biopsies, initially examined routinely at 4 levels, in the Pathology Department at Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, New York. -Accurate diagnostic classification was possible after examination of the first level in 95.4% of cases. For a small group of patients (4.4%), 4 levels were considered to provide additional useful information, although this information did not alter the diagnosis. In only a single case (0.2%) was it likely that routine examination of 4 levels could have led to an incidental finding of a very small intraductal papilloma (0.15 cm) present only at the second histologic level. However, this incidental finding would have not changed the patient outcome. -Needle core biopsies for MRI-detected abnormalities should be routinely examined at only 1 level. Further levels may be needed in occasional cases to identify more conclusively an associated pathologic abnormality and may be of particular value when assessing atypical intraductal proliferative epithelial lesions.

19402174
Excision is indicated for intraductal papilloma of the breast diagnosed on core needle biopsy.
Although it has been accepted that intraductal papillomas with atypia or malignancy diagnosed on core needle biopsy require surgical excision, the management of pure intraductal papillomas has been controversial. Because some series reported a small but definite incidence of atypia or malignancy, whereas others claimed that radiologic follow-up was adequate, this study evaluated results of excision of all pure intraductal papillomas diagnosed on core needle biopsy at this institution. By using computerized pathology files from January of 2000 to December of 2004, 200 cases of intraductal papillomas on core needle biopsy were identified. Information regarding excision was available in 104 cases. All specimens were reviewed to confirm both the diagnoses as well as the presence of biopsy site changes in excision specimens, and the findings were correlated with radiologic data. The age of the patients ranged from 25 to 82 years (mean, 55.5). The diagnoses on excision were as follows: intraductal papillomas = 71 cases (68.3%), no residual intraductal papillomas = 16 (15.3%), atypical duct hyperplasia = 8 (7.7%), ductal carcinoma in situ = 6 (5.8%), and invasive carcinoma = 3 (2.9%). In cases with atypia or malignancy, these findings were adjacent to but not in the biopsy site. In cases with atypical duct hyperplasia or ductal carcinoma in situ, a spectrum of histologic changes ranging from florid to atypical duct hyperplasia (14 cases), to ductal carcinoma in situ (6 cases) were present, all involving intraductal papillomas. The upstage rate of pure intraductal papillomas on core needle biopsy to atypia or malignancy on excision was 16.4%. Because of sampling error and the close proximity of atypia or malignancy to the intraductal papillomas (suggesting precancerous potential), excision was recommended of these lesions diagnosed on core needle biopsy. Close radiologic-pathologic correlation was important in the evaluation of these lesions.

19061295
Intraductal carcinoma arising in intraductal papilloma in an axillary lymph node: review of the literature and proposed theories of evolution.
We report a case of an axillary lymph node containing benign glandular lesions, intraductal papilloma with florid and atypical duct hyperplasia, and ductal carcinoma in situ. We propose 2 theories for the development of the intraductal papilloma: from adjacent benign glandular inclusions, or from displaced epithelial cells from a previous intraductal papilloma in the ipsilateral breast. This case identifies yet another etiology for false-positive sentinel lymph nodes morphologically and by immunohistochemistry.

18948766
Occult axillary node metastases in breast cancer are prognostically significant: results in 368 node negative patients with 20-year follow-up.


18022123
Immunohistochemical detection of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
The X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) is the most potent member of the IAP group of structurally related caspase inhibitors. Experimental and clinical evidence implicates XIAP in resistance to cancer therapy and in clinical aggressiveness of certain tumors. We examined the expression of XIAP in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Four-micrometer sections from 59 routinely processed specimens of head and neck SCC were subjected to citrate-based antigen retrieval, followed by incubation with monoclonal anti-XIAP antibody (BD Biosciences, San Jose, Calif) and EnVision Plus reagents (Dako, Carpinteria, Calif). Granular cytoplasmic staining was considered positive; the extent and intensity of staining were recorded. Normal squamous epithelium was either nonstaining (n=22), displayed generally weak basal staining (n=9), or moderate basal staining (n=1). Squamous dysplasia or carcinoma in situ was either nonstaining (10 of 18 cases) or displayed generally weak staining (8 of 18 cases). Varying degrees of XIAP positivity were found in 41 (69.5%) of 59 carcinomas. Most of the nonstaining and weakly staining carcinomas were well or moderately differentiated. In contrast, intense and extensive staining was most frequently found in poorly differentiated carcinomas. In keratinized tumor nests, staining was strongest peripherally and became diminished in central keratinized zones. New parameters of tumor aggressiveness are needed for more effective triaging of patients to appropriately aggressive therapies. The present findings suggest that the potent apoptotic inhibitor XIAP may be such a biomarker in head and neck SCCs, of resistance to apoptosis-inducing therapies, and, possibly, of responsiveness to a new class of XIAP-suppressive drugs presently in clinical trials for other malignancies or in preclinical development.

17987337
Atypical ductal hyperplasia at margin of breast biopsy--is re-excision indicated?
Atypical duct hyperplasia (ADH) observed during core needle biopsy is associated with a high rate of cancer upon excision. Controversy exists regarding the need to re-excise ADH involving a margin. The purpose of this study was to determine the rate of residual pathology in patients that underwent re-excision for ADH involving the margin. In a retrospective review of the pathology database from 1 January 2000 to 1 June 2006, we identified 44 lumpectomy specimens with ADH involving the margin; 24 patients (55%) had a re-excision. Slides were reviewed to verify the diagnosis of ADH near the margin and the presence of residual disease on re-excision associated with the biopsy cavity. Patients had pure ADH (15, 63%), ADH and ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) (7, 29%) or ADH with invasive carcinoma (2, 8%). Residual ADH or cancer was found in 14 of 24 patients (58%). Of 15 patients with pure ADH, 6 (40%) had residual pathology: ADH (2), DCIS (2) and invasive carcinoma (2). In this group, 27% of patients were reassessed as having DCIS or invasive carcinoma. Of the 9 patients with cancer, 8 (89%) had residual disease in the form of ADH (4) or DCIS (4). ADH found at the margin of a lumpectomy specimen is associated with a high rate of residual ADH and cancer. Over one quarter of the patients with an initial diagnosis of ADH were reassessed as having DCIS or invasive carcinoma. Re-excision in all patients with ADH involving the margin is recommended.

17696841
Incidental metastatic microcarcinoma of the thyroid identified after total parathyroidectomy.
Papillary microcarcinoma of the thyroid comprises 10-20% of all thyroid malignancies. Most microcarcinomas are slow growing and have a favorable prognosis. Lymph node metastasis caused by thyroid microcarcinoma is uncommon, and distant metastasis to lung or bone is even rarer. Thyroid microcarcinoma with metastasis to a thymic lymph node was not previously reported. We describe a case of incidental 1 mm micropapillary thyroid cancer identified within a thymic lymph node following total parathyroidectomy for secondary hyperparathyroidism.

18769011
Unusual presentation of sarcoidosis of the breast.
We report a case of sarcoidosis with an unusual radiological appearance. The patient was a 41-year-old asymptomatic woman who presented for a baseline screening mammogram, which revealed an asymmetric, slightly increased density in the upper outer quadrant of her left breast. Ultrasonography failed to demonstrate any mass. Her past medical history was remarkable for sarcoidosis. Stereotactic core biopsy revealed sarcoidosis diffusely infiltrating the breast parenchyma.

