21412429
BMP-12 treatment of adult mesenchymal stem cells in vitro augments tendon-like tissue formation and defect repair in vivo.
We characterized the differentiation of rat bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) into tenocyte-like cells in response to bone morphogenetic protein-12 (BMP-12). BM-MSCs were prepared from Sprague-Dawley rats and cultured as monolayers. Recombinant BMP-12 treatment (10 ng/ml) of BM-MSCs for 12 hours in vitro markedly increased expression of the tenocyte lineage markers scleraxis (Scx) and tenomodulin (Tnmd) over 14 days. Treatment with BMP-12 for a further 12-hour period had no additional effect. Colony formation assays revealed that ~80% of treated cells and their progeny were Scx- and Tnmd-positive. BM-MSCs seeded in collagen scaffolds and similarly treated with a single dose of BMP-12 also expressed high levels of Scx and Tnmd, as well as type I collagen and tenascin-c. Furthermore, when the treated BM-MSC-seeded scaffolds were implanted into surgically created tendon defects in vivo, robust formation of tendon-like tissue was observed after 21 days as evidenced by increased cell number, elongation and alignment along the tensile axis, greater matrix deposition and the elevated expression of tendon markers. These results indicate that brief stimulation with BMP-12 in vitro is sufficient to induce BM-MSC differentiation into tenocytes, and that this phenotype is sustained in vivo. This strategy of pretreating BM-MSCs with BMP-12 prior to in vivo transplantation may be useful in MSC-based tendon reconstruction or tissue engineering.

21108516
Introduction to Molecular and Integrative Physiology of the Musculoskeletal System.


21062299
The crossover of bisphosphonates to cancer therapy.
Bisphosphonates form a class of drugs commonly used to treat disorders of osteoclastic bone resorption, including osteoporosis, Paget's disease of the bone, rheumatoid arthritis, and bone metastases. Although long established as the therapy of choice to treat such disorders, bisphosphonates' potential in treating cancer is garnering interest. Bisphosphonates have been demonstrated to inhibit tumor growth and metastasis, induce apoptosis in tumor cells, and encourage immune reactions against tumor cells. Current applications of bisphosphonates in cancer treatment include their use to treat skeletal metastases and as an adjuvant to endocrine therapy. This review explores bisphosphonates' current clinical utility and potential as a crossover cancer therapy.

20857349
Denosumab for the treatment of osteoporosis.
Being a connective tissue, bone can increase or decrease its mass through the process of remodeling. Using a discovery in the mid-1980s-that tumor necrosis factor (TNF) could dramatically increase formation of osteoclasts (the cells that break down bone)-researchers at Amgen (Thousand Oaks, CA) discovered a TNF-like molecule that regulated bone resorption. Elevations in the expression of this molecule, receptor activator of nuclear factor-?B ligand (RANKL), can cause excessive bone destruction. A blocking antibody to RANKL named denosumab inhibits osteoclast formation and bone degradation. In a large multicenter clinical trial, known as the FREEDOM trial (Fracture Reduction Evaluation of Denosumab in Osteoporosis Every 6 Months), the effects of denosumab were tested in 60- to 90-year-old women over 3 years. Statistically significant reductions in fracture risk at the vertebral column, hip, and nonvertebral sites were associated with increases in bone mineral density (BMD) and reciprocal decreases in markers of bone resorption. However, the FREEDOM trial did not test the most beneficial use of a resorption blocking drug-to target the rapid bone loss that occurs in late perimenopause and early postmenopause. One adverse effect from denosumab is cellulitis, and research in animals suggests that RANKL/RANK interaction is needed for Langerhans cell (LC) survival in the skin. Further mechanistic and clinical studies on the role of RANKL in the skin are needed.

20830538
HIV and bone loss.
The use of antiretroviral therapy has significantly reduced the number of deaths due to HIV/AIDS. However, no current therapy can suppress the virus completely, and as the HIV-infected population continues to live longer new complications are emerging from the persistence of the virus and use of antiretroviral therapy. This review summarizes the clinical evidence linking HIV-associated osteoporosis to direct infection and antiretroviral therapy (ART) use. The purported molecular mechanisms involved in bone loss are also reviewed. Additionally, recommendations regarding the pharmacologic management of HIV/ART-related osteoporosis are given.

20826544
Physiological loading of joints prevents cartilage degradation through CITED2.
Both overuse and disuse of joints up-regulate matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in articular cartilage and cause tissue degradation; however, moderate (physiological) loading maintains cartilage integrity. Here, we test whether CBP/p300-interacting transactivator with ED-rich tail 2 (CITED2), a mechanosensitive transcriptional coregulator, mediates this chondroprotective effect of moderate mechanical loading. In vivo, hind-limb immobilization of Sprague-Dawley rats up-regulates MMP-1 and causes rapid, histologically detectable articular cartilage degradation. One hour of daily passive joint motion prevents these changes and up-regulates articular cartilage CITED2. In vitro, moderate (2.5 MPa, 1 Hz) intermittent hydrostatic pressure (IHP) treatment suppresses basal MMP-1 expression and up-regulates CITED2 in human chondrocytes, whereas high IHP (10 MPa) down-regulates CITED2 and increases MMP-1. Competitive binding and transcription assays demonstrate that CITED2 suppresses MMP-1 expression by competing with MMP transactivator, Ets-1 for its coactivator p300. Furthermore, CITED2 up-regulation in vitro requires the p38? isoform, which is specifically phosphorylated by moderate IHP. Together, these studies identify a novel regulatory pathway involving CITED2 and p38?, which may be critical for the maintenance of articular cartilage integrity under normal physical activity levels.

20809202
The role of FSH and TSH in bone loss and its clinical relevance.
Osteoporosis, a global health problem, is now frequently recognized to be secondary to alterations in the pituitary-bone axis. This review examines the current evidence for how dysregulation of the pituitary-bone axis leads to osteoporotic bone loss. Specifically, perimenopausal bone loss in the context of follicle-stimulating hormone action, and hyperthyroid bone loss in the context of thyroid-stimulating hormone action are explored. From the reviewed scientific findings, recommendations for early diagnosis and better clinical management of bone loss are made.

20448000
Commentary-FSH and bone 2010: evolving evidence.
Bone loss due to menopause, natural or artificial, has been attributed solely to low estrogen. However, in a woman's life, the most precipitous bone loss begins 2 years prior to the last menstrual period, during which time estrogen levels are unperturbed whereas FSH is elevated. Our cell-based and mouse genetic studies have shown that FSH stimulates bone resorption by osteoclasts directly in a pituitary-bone axis, independently of the estrogen effect. On the basis of this and evolving clinical and scientific evidence, we propose that elevated FSH contributes to bone loss across the menopausal transition, particularly during late perimenopause. In the current issue of the European Journal of Endocrinology, Rendina et al. strengthen the view for a primary role of FSH signaling in the regulation of bone mass and bone remodeling in humans by demonstrating that an 'activating' polymorphism AA rs6166 causes low bone mass and high bone turnover.

20439235
New horizons in skeletal physiology and pathophysiology.
To review new discoveries that revisit our current thinking on the genesis of osteoporosis using hypogonadal and thyrotoxic bone loss as examples. We focus on cell biologic, mouse genetic, and human studies that have established a direct action of the interior pituitary hormones follicle-stimulating hormone and thyrotropin on the skeleton and discuss emerging clinical evidence for a novel pituitary-bone axis in humans that bypasses master endocrine organs, namely the ovaries and thyroid gland. The cataloguing of human mutations, the use of genetically modified mice that recapitulate human disease, and the rapid growth of genomic sciences have together had a profound impact on how basic research is translated into clinical practice. The skeleton has become a paradigm for the application of such advances to an extent that hitherto unrecognized physiologic and pathophysiologic findings have emerged. We propose that hypogonadal and thyrotoxic bone loss are not solely due to changes in the level of master hormones, but instead also arise from the direct action of anterior pituitary hormones on the skeleton. We predict a pituitary-bone axis in which pituitary hormones bypass traditional endocrine targets to affect the skeleton directly with remarkable sensitivity. New therapeutic targets thus become a likely possibility.

20421485
ACTH protects against glucocorticoid-induced osteonecrosis of bone.
We report that adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) protects against osteonecrosis of the femoral head induced by depot methylprednisolone acetate (depomedrol). This therapeutic response likely arises from enhanced osteoblastic support and the stimulation of VEGF by ACTH; the latter is largely responsible for maintaining the fine vascular network that surrounds highly remodeling bone. We suggest examining the efficacy of ACTH in preventing human osteonecrosis, a devastating complication of glucocorticoid therapy.

20392242
Complexity in signal transduction.
This review is focused on complexity in cell signaling. Signaling experiments have demonstrated that many different stimuli activate the same signaling pathways yet result in different outcomes. Differences in the cellular machinery between cells explain response variation between cell types, but for a single cell type an appealing explanation is still lacking. The kinetic disconnect between cell signal transduction and a cellular action is highlighted; possible explanations for this disconnect, such as a series of cascading autocrine signaling molecules and new research suggesting that cells experience multiple rounds of reactivation in numerous cell signaling pathways, are reviewed. Additionally, evidence that kinase pathways exhibit frequency and amplitude modulation is examined. From this review, a new model of signal transduction is proposed whereby multiple signal transduction pathways are reactivated over time to orchestrate unique outcomes in physiological processes.

20227393
Prostaglandin E2 modulates components of the Wnt signaling system in bone and prostate cancer cells.
Both Wnt signaling and prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) play pivotal roles in bone development, remodeling, osteoporosis and prostate cancer (PCa) bone metastases. We investigated the effects of PGE(2) on Wnt signaling in osteoblast-lineage cells and Wnt-inhibitor expression in PCa cells. We demonstrate that low dose PGE(2) (0.1 microM) promotes Wnt signaling while higher doses of PGE(2) (1.0-10 microM) inhibit these same parameters in osteoblast-lineage cells. The differential effects of low vs high-dose PGE(2) on pre-osteoblasts may be attributed to dose-dependent modulation of prostaglandin receptor (EP) subtype expression; with lower doses increasing the expression the cAMP-stimulatory EP4 receptor subtype and higher doses increasing the expression of the cAMP-inhibitory EP3 receptor subtype. Moreover, we demonstrate that high expression levels of COX-2 and PGE(2) promote the secretion of Wnt inhibitors from prostate cancer cells. These data demonstrate that there are dose-dependent effects of PGE(2) on Wnt activation in osteoblast-lineage cells and Wnt-inhibitor expression in PCa cells which may have clinical implications in the management.

20171951
Further evidence for direct pro-resorptive actions of FSH.
We confirm that FSH stimulates osteoclast formation, function and survival to enhance bone resorption. It does so via the activation of a pertussis toxin-sensitive G(i)-coupled FSH receptor that we and others have identified on murine and human osteoclast precursors and mature osteoclasts. FSH additionally enhances the production of several osteoclastogenic cytokines, importantly TNFalpha, likely within the bone marrow microenvironment, to augment its pro-resorptive action. FSH levels in humans rise before estrogen falls, and this hormonal change coincides with the most rapid rates of bone loss. On the basis of accumulating evidence, we reaffirm that FSH contributes to the rapid peri-menopausal and early post-menopausal bone loss, which might thus be amenable to FSH blockade.

19968915
Bone loss or lost bone: rationale and recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of early postmenopausal bone loss.
Recent reports suggest that bone loss begins during late perimenopause at a dramatic rate, even before estrogen levels plummet. During the ensuing 5 years, there is evidence of the beginnings of microarchitectural deterioration, which impacts bone strength and ultimately enhances its propensity to fracture. The diagnosis of osteoporosis based on T-scores alone, or through stratification for a high fracture risk by FRAX, excludes these women who are rapidly losing bone. Because all antiosteoporosis therapies, in particular bisphosphonates, reduce bone loss, we propose aggressive, likely short-term therapy with a goal to reduce bone loss, stabilize bone density, and prevent microarchitectural deterioration.

19816170
Role of the pituitary-bone axis in skeletal pathophysiology.
Embedded within textbooks for decades is the hard fact that releasing hormones from the anterior pituitary, namely, follicle-stimulating hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone and adrenocorticotropic hormone, stimulate master hormone secretion from target endocrine organs. We propose a paradigm shift in endocrine physiology, which is that these hormones act by design on bone directly, also now considered an endocrine organ. Complementary investigations using mouse genetic and cell biological approaches reveal that follicle-stimulating hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone act on bone cells directly to regulate bone remodeling and bone mass. Thyroid-stimulating hormone inhibits bone remodeling, whereas follicle-stimulating hormone stimulates it. We also find that the posterior pituitary hormone oxytocin is anabolic to the skeleton. An ambitious extrapolation is that a plurality of pituitary hormones acts in concert as part of a 'pituitary-bone' axis to regulate skeletal integrity in health and disease. When dysregulated master hormone levels during hypogonadism and hyperthyroidism cause altered pituitary hormone secretion through hypothalamic feedback, the latter hormones contribute to the skeletal loss.

19787657
Paradigm shift in the pathophysiology of postmenopausal and thyrotoxic osteoporosis.
Bone loss is an inevitable result of getting older in both sexes. This loss is accelerated in women in the early years following menopause and in both sexes with drugs and diseases, prominently hyperthyroidism. Postmenopausal osteoporosis and hyperthyroid osteoporosis, both of which are widely recognized clinical entities, have been thought to arise from low estrogen levels and high thyroid hormone levels, respectively. However, when estrogen declines, follicle-stimulating hormone, an anterior pituitary hormone, rises. Likewise, when thyroid hormone levels rise in hyperthyroidism, thyroid-stimulating hormone levels fall. We have used a complement of mouse genetic, pharmacological, and cell biological approaches to unravel a direct action of follicle-stimulating hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone on bone remodeling and bone mass. Apart from establishing a novel pituitary-bone axis of physiological significance, our studies challenge the existing 1-hormone, 1-disease paradigm in endocrinology and suggest that a plurality of hormonal disturbances involving pituitary hormones cause postmenopausal and hyperthyroid osteoporoses. New therapeutic targets thus emerge from these studies. Mt Sinai J Med 76:474-483, 2009. (c) 2009 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

19653998
Oxytocin deficiency impairs maternal skeletal remodeling.
We have reported that the posterior pituitary hormone, oxytocin (OT), known for its effects in inducing parturition, lactation and social bonding, is also a skeletal hormone. Here, we demonstrate that OT plays a key role in enabling maternal skeletal mobilization during pregnancy by enhancing the formation of bone resorbing osteoclasts. Osteoclast formation ex vivo is thus diminished in pregnant mothers with genetic OT-deficiency. OT(-/-) pups at day E20 also show a defect in trabecular bone. microCT measurements reveal normal bone volume, but increased trabecular numbers, suggesting that trabeculae in OT(-/-) pups are hypomineralized. We suggest that OT facilitates intergenerational transfer of calcium ions from a pregnant mother to the pups.

19631028
Thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroid hormones, and bone loss.
It has become accepted by virtue of rich anecdotal experience and clinical research that thyrotoxicosis is associated with high-turnover osteoporosis. The bone loss, primarily due to accelerated resorption that is not compensated by a coupled increase in bone formation, has been attributed solely to elevated thyroid hormone levels. Evidence using mice lacking the thyroid hormone receptors alpha and beta establishes a role for thyroid hormones in regulating bone remodeling but does not exclude an independent action of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), levels of which are low in hyperthyroid states, even when thyroid hormones are normal, as after thyroxine supplementation and in subclinical hyperthyroidism. We show that TSH directly suppresses bone remodeling and that TSH receptor null mice have profound bone loss, suggesting that reduced TSH signaling contributes to hyperthyroid osteoporosis. TSH and its receptor could become valuable drug targets in treating bone loss.

19622779
Understanding estrogen action during menopause.


19607804
Identification of CITED2 as a negative regulator of fracture healing.
The transcription regulator CITED2 (CBP/p300-Interacting-Transactivator-with-ED-rich-tail-2) is known to suppress genes mediating angiogenesis and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling. However, it is unclear whether CITED2 has a role in controlling skeletal repair or remodeling. We tested the hypothesis that CITED2 functions in bone fracture healing by suppressing the expression of genes critical to ECM remodeling, angiogenesis and osteogenesis, importantly the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Three hours following mandibular osteotomy or sham surgery of adult rats, osteotomy fronts were harvested and the expression of CITED2 and genes associated with fracture healing was ascertained by quantitative PCR. In parallel, gain-of-function studies examined the effect of overexpressing CITED2 on the expression and activity of several MMPs. In the fractured mandible, CITED2 expression was inversely related to the expression of MMP-2, -3, -9, -13, VEGF, HIF-1alpha, M-CSF, RANK-L, and OPG. Consistent with this, the over-expression of CITED2 in osteoblasts inhibited the expression and activity of MMP-2, -3, -9, and -13. Taken together, the studies suggest that CITED2 is a critical upstream regulator of fracture healing. The suppression of CITED2 early after fracture may allow an optimal initiation of the healing response.

19604463
New insights: elevated follicle-stimulating hormone and bone loss during the menopausal transition.
We hypothesize that a rising follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) level during the menopausal transition, even in the face of a normal estrogen level, contributes to increased bone resorption and profound bone loss that is accompanied by trabecular perforation and diminished bone strength. FSH has been shown to directly stimulate osteoclast formation and bone resorption, and our murine genetic studies indicate that the absence of FSH can, in part, protect against hypogonadal hyperresorption that causes bone loss. Furthermore, carefully conducted human studies, such as the Study of Women Across Nations (SWAN), indicate strong correlations between serum FSH levels and bone loss. Potential therapeutic implications include the development of antagonists to circulating FSH and its osteoclastic receptor.

19584858
Coupling bone degradation to formation.


19482685
Skeletal morphofunctional considerations and the pituitary-thyroid axis.
The past decade has unraveled novel molecular mechanisms not only of skeletal remodeling, which is the process by which the skeleton is restructured throughout adult life, but also the precision by which the skeleton is put together during embryogenesis and later modeled during growth. It is now possible to delete single genes in individual cells and during specified periods of life. This has allowed us to pin down specific molecular events that underlie individual cellular processes, and also importantly, to identify molecular defects underlying disorders of skeletal morphogenesis and remodeling. Particularly novel has been the demonstration of cross-talk, some of which is humoral, between the skeleton and organs as diverse as the brain, pituitary, and even adipose tissue and pancreas. The current review describes these molecular mechanisms in relation to the way thyroid hormones, and the pituitary hormone thyrotropin (TSH), regulate skeletal morphogenesis and remodeling.

19328414
The thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor: impact of thyroid-stimulating hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibodies on multimerization, cleavage, and signaling.
The thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR) has a central role in thyrocyte function and is also one of the major autoantigens for the autoimmune thyroid diseases. We review the post-translational processing, multimerization, and intramolecular cleavage of TSHR, all of which may modulate its signal transduction. The recent characterization of monoclonal antibodies to the TSHR, including stimulating, blocking, and neutral antibodies, have also revealed unique biologic insights into receptor activation and the variety of these TSHR antibodies may help explain the multiple clinical phenotypes seen in autoimmune thyroid diseases. Knowledge of the structure/function relationship of the TSHR is beginning to provide a greater understanding of thyroid physiology and thyroid autoimmunity.

18384751
TNF-induced MAP kinase activation oscillates in time.
Oscillations in the activation of multiple signaling pathways have never been shown before. Our results presented in the previous accompanying paper showed that TNF induces highly dynamic oscillations in mRNA production in approximately 13% of the mouse genome. Here, we further analyze the TNF time-series microarray data and find that multiple signaling components downstream of the TNF receptor undergo oscillations. Prior studies implicate IkappaBalpha and A-20 as the only oscillatory components in the TNF signaling cascade. We find however, that other components, such as TRAF1, displayed oscillations. This suggested the possibility that all signaling output from the TNF receptor may be oscillatory in nature. Indeed, we show that TNF triggers oscillations in the phosphorylation of three MAP kinases, as well as p65. Because Baltimore and colleagues had proposed that NF-kappaB drives the oscillatory nature of the IkappaBalpha/NF-kappaB feedback loop, we studied the effects of an NF-kappaB super-repressor on oscillations in MAPK phosphorylation; we find that the super-repressor altered the amplitude and frequency of MAP kinase phosphorylation, but failed to abolish oscillations. These results attest to a role for NF-kappaB as a modulator, but not the sole determinant of cyclical activation of signal transduction pathways. These results, together with those of the two accompanying papers, constitute a new paradigm through which cells orchestrate signaling molecules to produce highly dynamic physiological processes such as gene transcription and protein secretion. In view of the discovery that multiple phosphorylation pathways display dynamic oscillations, time-resolved, instead of static, measurements of kinase phosphorylation should become the experimental norm.

18384746
TNF-induced gene expression oscillates in time.
With only few exceptions that include Hes-1 p53, and IkappaB, the expression of genes has never been shown to be oscillatory. Here, we show that the inflammatory cytokine TNF triggers oscillations in >5000 genes. We utilize microarrays at 30-min intervals to analyze the pattern of global gene expression in murine macrophages. We find that 15% of genes in the genome underwent a significant >3-fold increase in expression, with 89% of these displaying oscillations at frequencies as low as every 50min. We analyze further two sub-clusters of genes that either began oscillating early or after a lag phase. Through the use of quantitative PCR, we confirm the oscillations and show that the oscillations are continuous. Moreover, we show that these continuous oscillations are not unique to TNF, but that related cytokines such as RANK-L produces oscillations with a unique induction profile. In the two papers accompanying this one, we analyze the mechanism of these oscillations and find that TNF also triggers oscillations in the phosphorylation of MAP kinases, and that these oscillations combine to recruit transcription factors to promoters in a cyclical fashion. The results presented here suggest that gene transcription is a highly dynamic processes, with thousands of genes displaying rapid (<60min) oscillations over time. Considering this dynamism, time-resolved measurements of gene transcription should become the experimental norm.

18384744
TNF-induced oscillations in combinatorial transcription factor binding.
We have shown in two accompanying papers that TNF induces oscillations in (1) approximately 13% of the genome, and (2) the activation of MAP kinase and NF-kappaB signaling pathways. Here we aim to bridge oscillations in signal transduction activation to oscillations in genetic output. Specifically, we sought to study how these oscillations can combine in a ligand-specific manner at the level of the promoter to initiate gene transcription. We utilize the late onset gene CD38 as a model gene since it has previously been shown that TNF, but not the related cytokine RANK-L, induces its expression. We find that TNF-induced oscillations in p65 and p50 recruitment to the CD38 promoter correlated with recruitment of MAPK-induced AP-1 recruitment, as analyzed by quantitative ChIP analysis. Through re-ChIP analysis we show that a unique transcriptional complex is seen on the promoter at 3h post-TNF addition, corresponding to the onset of CD38 transcription, which is not seen in the basal state. Moreover, we show that RANK-L was unable to combinatorially recruit AP-1 and NF-kappaB transcription factors to the CD38 promoter, despite inducing the activation of both signaling pathways. These results, in sum with the two accompanying papers, constitute a new paradigm through which cells dynamically orchestrate signaling molecules to coordinate time-resolved gene transcription by the formation of novel time-specific transcriptional complexes.

18332426
Intermittent recombinant TSH injections prevent ovariectomy-induced bone loss.
We recently described the direct effects of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) on bone and suggested that the bone loss in hyperthyroidism, hitherto attributed solely to elevated thyroid hormone levels, could at least in part arise from accompanying decrements in serum TSH. Recent studies on both mice and human subjects provide compelling evidence that thyroid hormones and TSH have the opposite effects on the skeleton. Here, we show that TSH, when injected intermittently into rodents, even at intervals of 2 weeks, displays a powerful antiresorptive action in vivo. By virtue of this action, together with the possible anabolic effects shown earlier, TSH both prevents bone loss and restores the lost bone after ovariectomy. Importantly, the osteoclast inhibitory action of TSH persists ex vivo even after therapy is stopped for 4 weeks. This profound and lasting antiresorptive action of TSH is mimicked in cells that genetically overexpress the constitutively active ligand-independent TSH receptor (TSHR). In contrast, loss of function of a mutant TSHR (Pro --> Leu at 556) in congenital hypothyroid mice activates osteoclast differentiation, confirming once again our premise that TSHRs have a critical role in regulating bone remodeling.

18083940
Bone loss in thyroid disease: role of low TSH and high thyroid hormone.
More than 10% of postmenopausal women in the United States receive thyroid hormone replacement therapy and up to 20% of these women are over-replaced inducing subclinical hyperthyroidism. Because hyperthyroidism and post menopausal osteoporosis overlap in women of advancing age, it is urgent to understand the effect of thyroid hormone excess on bone. We can now provide results that not thyroid hormones but also TSH itself has an equally important role to play in bone remodeling.

18083939
Proresorptive actions of FSH and bone loss.
We review studies that propose follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) as a physiologic stimulator of osteoclastic bone resorption. We hypothesize that, in addition to low estrogen, a rising FSH contributes to the increased bone resorption and bone loss in hypergonadism. This is of particular relevance to the perimenopausal transition, wherein profound bone loss is accompanied by trabecular perforations in the face of high FSH and normal estrogen levels. Potential therapeutic implications include the development of antagonists to both circulating FSH and its osteoclastic receptor.

18060857
Functional grouping of osteoclast genes revealed through microarray analysis.
We describe for the first time functional clusters of genes that are modulated during the differentiation of osteoclasts. Pathway analysis was applied to gene array data generated from affymetrix chips hybridized to RNA isolated from RAW264.7 cells exposed to RANK-ligand (RANK-L) for 5 days. This analysis revealed major functional gene clusters that were either up- or down-regulated during osteoclastogenesis. Some of the genes within the clusters have known functions, while others do not. We discuss herein the relevance of these functional gene clusters and their modulation to biological processes underlying the formation, function, and fate of osteoclasts.

18056047
Progression of efficacy with ibandronate: a paradigm for the development of new bisphosphonates.
While initial preclinical studies provide an important starting point for dose selection, they may not provide adequate information to identify the optimal dosage for an extended treatment regimen. Determining the best dose for use in an extended dosing regimen requires ongoing development, illustrated best with the bisphosphonate, ibandronate. As mandated for regulatory purposes, the daily oral regimen of ibandronate was proven effective in significantly reducing the rate of new vertebral fractures assessed prospectively, and nonvertebral fractures in a high-risk population, assessed retrospectively. Extended dosing regimens, namely monthly and quarterly intravenous formulations, were developed subsequently to improve the convenience and enhance persistence, while maintaining or increasing efficacy. The continuing and progressive evolution of data led to the understanding that extension of drug-free interval requires higher annual cumulative skeletal exposures (ACE), which were not simply numerical multipliers of the interval and daily dose. For ibandronate, this led to dose selection for the oral monthly 150 mg (ACE 10.8 mg) and intravenous quarterly 3 mg (ACE 12 mg) formulations that proved superior in increasing bone mineral density (BMD) compared with oral daily 2.5 mg (ACE 5.5 mg) ibandronate. Pooling data from clinical trials with high ACE regimens (monthly and quarterly) led to the evolution of statistical evidence for a reduction in clinical and nonvertebral fractures with ibandronate. The ibandronate story should serve as an important future paradigm for bisphosphonate development.

18056031
The second conference on skeletal medicine and biology: special features.


17872390
Cellular and molecular consequences of calcineurin A alpha gene deletion.
Here we briefly review our studies that have unraveled an important role for the calcium- and calmodulin-sensitive enzyme calcineurin (CN) in bone remodeling. We find that the genetic deletion of the calcineurin Aalpha isoform results in osteoporosis, which is recapitulated in humans following calcineurin inhibitor therapy widely used after solid organ transplantation. Mechanistically, however, while both calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporine and tacrolimus initially stimulate osteoclastic bone resorption in humans, the predominant feature in the CNAalpha null mouse is a profound reduction in bone formation. We speculate that the so-called "calcineurin inhibitors" may interact with molecules other than calcineurin. The clinical relevance of these observations is explored.

17681281
Regulation of FSH receptor promoter activation in the osteoclast.
We have shown recently that FSH stimulates osteoclast formation and function by a direct action on a G(i)-coupled FSH receptor (FSHR). Here, we report properties of the mouse FSH receptor promoter in the context of its activation in RAW-C3 osteoclast precursor macrophages. Basal promoter activity was low, but was significantly stimulated by receptor activator for NF-kappaB-ligand (RANK-L), a critical osteoclastogenic and pro-resorptive cytokine. In contrast, FSH dampened FSHR promoter activation, while estrogen had no effect. We surmise that the FSHR expression is regulated distinctly in the osteoclast, and differently from other cells, such as the ovarian follicular and Leydig cells.

17618270
Skeletal remodeling in health and disease.
The use of genetically manipulated mouse models, gene and protein discovery and the cataloguing of genetic mutations have each allowed us to obtain new insights into skeletal morphogenesis and remodeling. These techniques have made it possible to identify molecules that are obligatory for specific cellular functions, and to exploit these molecules for therapeutic purposes. New insights into the pathophysiology of diseases have also enabled us to understand molecular defects in a way that was not possible a decade ago. This review summarizes our current understanding of the carefully orchestrated cross-talk between cells of the bone marrow and between bone cells and the brain through which bone is constantly remodeled during adult life. It also highlights molecular aberrations that cause bone cells to become dysfunctional, as well as therapeutic options and opportunities to counteract skeletal loss.

17400654
Loss of MMP-2 disrupts skeletal and craniofacial development and results in decreased bone mineralization, joint erosion and defects in osteoblast and osteoclast growth.
The 'vanishing bone' or inherited osteolysis/arthritis syndromes represent a heterogeneous group of skeletal disorders characterized by mineralization defects of affected bones and joints. Differing in anatomical distribution, severity and associated syndromic features, gene identification in each 'vanishing bone' disorder should provide unique insights into genetic/molecular pathways contributing to the overall control of skeletal growth and development. We previously described and then demonstrated that the novel autosomal recessive osteolysis/arthritis syndrome, multicentric osteolysis with arthritis (MOA) (MIM #605156), was caused by inactivating mutations in the MMP2 gene [Al Aqeel, A., Al Sewairi, W., Edress, B., Gorlin, R.J., Desnick, R.J. and Martignetti, J.A. (2000) Inherited multicentric osteolysis with arthritis: A variant resembling Torg syndrome in a Saudi family. Am. J. Med. Genet., 93, 11-18.]. These in vivo results were counterintuitive and unexpected since previous in vitro studies suggested that MMP-2 overexpression and increased activity, not deficiency, would result in the bone and joint features of MOA. The apparent lack of a murine model [Itoh, T., Ikeda, T., Gomi, H., Nakao, S., Suzuki, T. and Itohara, S. (1997) Unaltered secretion of beta-amyloid precursor protein in gelatinase A (matrix metalloproteinase 2)-deficient mice. J. Biol. Chem., 272, 22389-22392.] has hindered studies on disease pathogenesis and, more fundamentally, in addressing the paradox of how functional loss of a single proteolytic enzyme results in an apparent increase in bone loss. Here, we report that Mmp2-/- mice display attenuated features of human MOA including progressive loss of bone mineral density, articular cartilage destruction and abnormal long bone and craniofacial development. Moreover, these changes are associated with markedly and developmentally restricted decreases in osteoblast and osteoclast numbers in vivo. Mmp2-/- mice have approximately 50% fewer osteoblasts and osteoclasts than control littermates at 4 days of life but these differences have nearly resolved by 4 weeks of age. In addition, despite normal cell numbers in vivo at 8 weeks of life, Mmp2-/- bone marrow cells are unable to effectively support osteoblast and osteoclast growth and differentiation in culture. Targeted inhibition of MMP-2 using siRNA in human SaOS2 and murine MC3T3 osteoblast cell lines resulted in decreased cell proliferation rates. Taken together, our findings suggest that MMP-2 plays a direct role in early skeletal development and bone cell growth and proliferation. Thus, Mmp2-/- mice provide a valuable biological resource for studying the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the human disease and defining the in vivo physiological role of MMP-2.

17300752
Induction of a program gene expression during osteoblast differentiation with strontium ranelate.
Strontium ranelate, a new agent for the treatment of osteoporosis, has been shown stimulate bone formation in various experimental models. This study examines the effect of strontium ranelate on gene expression in osteoblasts, as well as the formation of mineralized (von Kossa-positive) colony-forming unit-osteoblasts (CFU-obs). Bone marrow-derived stromal cells cultured for 21 days under differentiating conditions, when exposed to strontium ranelate, displayed a significant time- and concentration-dependent increase in the expression of the master gene, Runx2, as well as bone sialoprotein (BSP), but interestingly without effects on osteocalcin. This was associated with a significant increase in the formation of CFU-obs at day 21 of culture. In U-33 pre-osteoblastic cells, strontium ranelate significantly enhanced the expression of Runx2 and osteocalcin, but not BSP. Late, more mature osteoblastic OB-6 cells showed significant elevations in BSP and osteocalcin, but with only minimal effects on Runx2. In conclusion, strontium ranelate stimulates osteoblast differentiation, but the induction of the program of gene expression appears to be cell type-specific. The increased osteoblastic differentiation is the likely basis underlying the therapeutic bone-forming actions of strontium ranelate.

17164398
CD38 is required for priming by TNF-alpha: a mechanism for extracellular coordination of cell fate.
Cytokines are protein messengers that act to modulate the differentiation or activation of their target cells. Bone marrow macrophages can become activated tissue macrophages, dendritic cells, or osteoclasts depending on to which cytokines they are exposed. However, one cytokine can often induce divergent outcomes, suggesting that other signals are needed to establish the specificity of the result. We hypothesize that these signals may derive from the local environment and serve to prime cells to respond toward a specific outcome. Here, it is shown that the cytokine TNF-alpha is capable of affecting the fate of macrophages by upregulating the NADase CD38. CD38 upregulation primes macrophages, such that signals induced by inflammatory stimuli are augmented, while those leading to osteoclast formation are inhibited. We show that TNF-alpha-induced CD38 expression negatively affects the expression of osteoclast markers, while it enhances inflammatory gene expression by decreasing ERK1/2 phosphorylation and increasing NF-kappaB activation. Furthermore, it is shown that CD38 may reduce osteoclastogenesis and increase inflammatory gene induction by decreasing cellular histone deacetylase activity. These results provide a demonstration of how a cytokine can prime cells to differentiate toward a certain lineage or acquire enhanced activation characteristics. Since CD38 is an ectoenzyme, we suggest that the modulation of extracellular NAD(+) metabolism likely serves as a unique mechanism to coordinate the fate of cells within a local environment.

16968888
Evidence that calcineurin is required for the genesis of bone-resorbing osteoclasts.
Here, we demonstrate that the Ca(2+)/calmodulin-sensitive phosphatase calcineurin is a necessary downstream mediator for osteoclast differentiation. Using quantitative PCR, we detected the calcineurin isoforms Aalpha, Abeta, Agamma (catalytic), and B1 (regulatory) in osteoclast precursor RAW-C3 cells. We found that, although the expression of these isoforms remained relatively unchanged during osteoclast differentiation, there was a profound increase in the expression of their primary substrate for calcineurin, nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT)c1. For gain-of-function studies, we incubated osteoclast precursors for 10 min with a calcineurin fusion protein (TAT-calcineurin Aalpha); this resulted in its receptorless influx into >90% of the precursor cells. A marked increase in the expression of the osteoclast differentiation markers tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) and integrin beta(3) followed. In addition, the expression of NFATc1, as well as the alternative substrate for calcineurin, IkappaBalpha, was significantly enhanced. Likewise, transfection with constitutively active NFAT resulted in an increased expression of both TRAP and integrin beta(3). In parallel loss-of-function studies, transfection with dominant-negative NFAT not only inhibited osteoclast formation but also reversed the induction of NFATc1, TRAP, and integrin beta(3) by TAT-calcineurin Aalpha. The expression of these markers was also inhibited by calcineurin Aalpha U1 small nuclear RNA, which significantly reduced calcineurin Aalpha mRNA and protein expression. Consistent with these observations, we observed a reduction in osteoclastogenesis in calcineurin Aalpha(-/-) cells and in osteoclast precursors treated with the calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporin A and FK506. Together, the gain- and loss-of-function experiments establish that calcineurin Aalpha is necessary for osteoclast formation from its precursor and that this occurs via an NFATc1-dependent mechanism.

18033245
Acute onset of hematuria and proteinuria associated with multiorgan involvement of the heart, liver, pancreas, kidneys, and skin in a patient with Henoch-Schönlein purpura.


