21493264
The Challenge of Protocols for Reflux Disease: A Review and Development of a Critical Pathway.
Objectives. Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and laryngopharyngeal reflux (LPR) are very common and controversial diseases. The authors have previously reviewed clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) on reflux disease, and these major consensus statements differ on what constitutes ideal management. The aim is to critically review existing protocols for reflux based on CPG recommendations and to present a refined protocol that may be further used to develop a critical pathway for reflux in ambulatory medical practice. Study Design. Literature review with discussion. Methods. A PubMed search was used to identify current clinical protocols or algorithms for reflux disease, and the principal elements of each were compared. Results. Of the 828 articles identified in the search, 11 met the search criteria. Together with 4 articles previously identified, 15 were analyzed. All protocols discuss the important role of empiric therapy, although with differences in use. Only 5 protocols (33%) were based on systematic review such as CPGs. Eight protocols (53%) used alarm symptoms to prompt a workup. For these patients, upper endoscopy was by far the most common diagnostic method. The use of other modalities varies significantly between protocols. The authors propose a standard protocol based on patient risk factors that employs CPG recommendations and may be used for critical pathway outcomes measures. Conclusion. There are major differences between existing protocols for reflux disease in the literature, reflecting many clinical controversies. Outcomes of different protocols have not been extensively studied. The authors propose a new protocol that is a synthesis of those reviewed and based on risk stratification.

21493194
Cough: a new frontier in otolaryngology.
Both acute and chronic cough are responsible for a significant portion of all ambulatory medical visits annually, over-the-counter self-medication expenses in excess of $3.6 billion in the United States, and impaired quality of life. Yet otolaryngologists only see a small portion of these patients. The diagnosis of cough can be simple or profoundly challenging, and it may be a sentinel indicator of severe underlying disease. The list of diseases that may induce cough is growing, along with an appreciation of their interrelations. These include upper and lower airway diseases, related through the unified airway concept. Gastroesophageal reflux, aspiration, neurologic reflexes, tumor, and systemic diseases are also important. Otolaryngologists are playing an increasingly valuable role in the multidisciplinary approach to these challenging cough patients and master many procedures associated with their evaluation and treatment. There are also leadership opportunities in building coordinated teams to further patient care.

21298646
A review of clinical practice guidelines for reflux disease: toward creating a clinical protocol for the otolaryngologist.
Reflux disease, including gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and laryngopharyngeal reflux (LPR), is an extremely common condition that is diagnosed and treated routinely in an otolaryngology practice. There is great variability in the methods of both diagnosis and treatment amongst otolaryngologists. Our aim is to review current clinical practice guidelines on reflux disease, to identify areas of agreement and controversy, and to begin to work toward a clinical protocol for reflux disease for the otolaryngologist. Literature review with discussion. A PubMed search was performed looking for clinical practice guidelines on either GERD or LPR. Five hundred seventy articles were identified and the most clinically relevant practice guidelines were selected. Thirteen key articles were identified. Eleven of these come from the gastroenterology literature, and none of them come from the otolaryngology literature. There appears to be a consensus on empiric medication trial as first-line therapy for presumed uncomplicated GERD and on prioritizing early identification of patients with severe disease complications. Areas of controversy include the definition of GERD and LPR, which diagnostic algorithm to use in which patient, and the long-term management of medical therapy. Although there are many clinical aspects of reflux disease that still remain a mystery, there is enough literature to support a rudimentary clinical protocol at this time. As further data become available from outcomes measurements, such a protocol may result in improved quality and standardization.

20842035
Pulse dye and other laser treatments for vocal scar.
Vocal fold scar is a challenging clinical problem, resulting in a spectrum of voice-related complaints. While there are a variety of treatment options available, it is rare to obtain outcomes similar to the perfectly normal voice. The pulsed dye and other lasers are an emerging treatment option for cutaneous scar and have shown promise for the treatment of vocal fold scarring. The purpose of this review is to summarize the theory, and describe clinical outcomes from both cutaneous and vocal fold scarring treated with lasers. There are a growing number of papers in the literature substantiating the use of pulsed dye and other lasers used to treat cutaneous scars. Some experimental models describe potential mechanisms of laser effect, which include the development of a sub-basement membrane cleavage plane, as well as up-regulation of proteins which may actively modulate continued fibrosis. One prospective pilot study of 11 patients with vocal fold scarring treated with the pulsed dye laser has also shown statistically significant improvement in subjective and objective voice measures, as well as laryngeal stroboscopy findings after treatment. The pulsed dye and other lasers have shown effectiveness and potential in treating cutaneous and vocal scarring.

20713754
Consequence of dysphagia in the hospitalized patient: impact on prognosis and hospital resources.
To determine if comorbid dysphagia in all hospitalized patients has the potential to prolong hospital stay and increase morbidity. Dysphagia is increasingly prevalent with age and comorbid medical conditions. Our research group has previously shown that dysphagia is a bad prognostic indicator in patients with stroke. Analysis of national database. The National Hospital Discharge Survey (NHDS), 2005-2006, was evaluated for presence of dysphagia and the most common comorbid medical conditions. Patient demographics, associated disease, length of hospital stay, morbidity and mortality were also evaluated. There were over 77 million estimated hospital admissions in the period evaluated, of which 271,983 were associated with dysphagia. Dysphagia was most commonly associated with fluid or electrolyte disorder, esophageal disease, stroke, aspiration pneumonia, urinary tract infection, and congestive heart failure. The median number of hospitalization days for all patients with dysphagia was 4.04 compared with 2.40 days for those patients without dysphagia. Mortality increased substantially in patients with dysphagia associated with rehabilitation, intervertebral disk disorders, and heart diseases. Dysphagia has a significant impact on hospital length of stay and is a bad prognostic indicator. Early recognition of dysphagia and intervention in the hospitalized patient is advised to reduce morbidity and length of hospital stay.

20589388
Odor identification ability and self-reported upper respiratory symptoms in workers at the post-9/11 World Trade Center site.
Following the World Trade Center (WTC) collapse on September 11, 2001, more than 40,000 people were exposed to a complex mixture of inhalable nanoparticles and toxic chemicals. While many developed chronic respiratory symptoms, to what degree olfaction was compromised is unclear. A previous WTC Medical Monitoring and Treatment Program study found that olfactory and nasal trigeminal thresholds were altered by the toxic exposure, but not scores on a 20-odor smell identification test. To employ a well-validated 40-item smell identification test to definitively establish whether the ability to identify odors is compromised in a cohort of WTC-exposed individuals and, if so, whether the degree of compromise is associated with self-reported severity of rhinitic symptoms. The University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test (UPSIT) was administered to 99 WTC-exposed persons and 99 matched normal controls. The Sino-Nasal Outcomes Test (SNOT-20) was administered to the 99 WTC-exposed persons and compared to the UPSIT scores. The mean (SD) UPSIT scores were lower in the WTC-exposed group than in age-, sex-, and smoking history-matched controls [respective scores: 30.05 (5.08) vs 35.94 (3.76); p = 0.003], an effect present in a subgroup of 19 subjects additionally matched on occupation (p < 0.001). Fifteen percent of the exposed subjects had severe microsmia, but only 3% anosmia. SNOT-20 scores were unrelated to UPSIT scores (r = 0.20; p = 0.11). Exposure to WTC air pollution was associated with a decrement in the ability to identify odors, implying that such exposure had a greater influence on smell function than previously realized.

20172251
Cough specialists collaborate for an interdisciplinary problem.


19861191
Unexpected consequences of proton pump inhibitor use.
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are among the most widely prescribed classes of medications for gastroesophageal and laryngopharyngeal reflux diseases. There is emerging evidence that the pathogenesis of disease in laryngeal mucosa is not just related to refluxed acid, but also the presence of pepsin and acidic microenvironments. The widespread use of PPIs is also calling into question potential complications of PPI use. This commentary expands upon these issues with other potential unexpected consequences, and considers the importance of determining a proper approach to patient management.

18564532
Office pulsed dye laser treatment for benign laryngeal vascular polyps: a preliminary study.
The 585-nm pulsed dye laser (PDL) was recently deemed relatively safe and effective for treatment of laryngeal papilloma, dysplasia, and granuloma. We report on in-office PDL treatment of laryngeal vascular polyps. Retrospective case results from 29 consecutive cases of laryngeal polyps were evaluated to determine the percent change in polyps after PDL treatment. Preoperative and postoperative measurements of polyp size, total power delivered to the site, and whether patients opted for postprocedure phonomicrosurgery were analyzed. After PDL treatment, the results varied from complete to partial resolution of the polyp. Four patients requested conventional phonomicrosurgery, and the rest had enough improvement to defer surgery. Almost 40% of patients with larger polyps desired operative intervention after laser treatment, whereas only 13% of those with small polyps opted for phonomicrosurgery. Thirty-eight percent (11 of 29) of the lesions had greater than 70% improvement after 1 or 2 laser treatments (average of 1.1 procedures). Smaller lesions responded better. Thirty-nine percent of small polyps resolved by greater than 70%, whereas only 20% of larger lesions improved by the same amount. There were no adverse events from the office procedure. In-office use of the PDL for treatment of vascular polyps may be a safe alternative to phonomicrosurgery. Small polyps seem to show a better response.

18176340
Effect of proton pump inhibitor pantoprazole on growth and morphology of oral Lactobacillus strains.
Proton pump inhibitors (PPI) used to suppress acid secretion in the stomach are among the most widely prescribed medications. There is emerging evidence of proton secretion elsewhere in the aerodigestive tract, and acidic microenvironments are integral to oral flora such as Lactobacillus. The hypothesis of this study is that the growth rate and morphology of oral Lactobacillus strains are effected by PPIs. Nineteen different strains of Lactobacilli were inoculated in microtiter plates at pH of 4.5 to 6.5 and exposed to twofold dilutions of pantoprazole at a range of 2.5 mg/mL to 2.5 microg/mL. Bacterial growth was monitored, and the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the drug was determined for the strains most sensitive to pantoprazole. In the unexposed (control) group, nine Lactobacilli strains were affected by pH changes from 6.5 to 4.5. In the group exposed to pantoprazole, 9 of the 19 Lactobacilli strains were found to have an MIC below 625 microg/mL, with L. plantarum 14917 being the most sensitive (MIC = 20 microg/mL). In some strains, such as L. s. salivarius 11741, Gram-staining revealed conformational changes in the bacteria when grown in the presence of pantoprazole. Growth rates and morphology of oral Lactobacillus are affected by the pH of the environment. Pantoprazole at supraphysiologic doses further affects growth rates and conformation in some strains. The balance of oral flora and upper digestive tract homeostasis may be affected by unexpected targets of PPI pharmacotherapy, with possible unanticipated consequences.

17765697
Vocal fold masses.
Vocal fold masses are often complex in nature and can have a devastating result on the professional voice. These lesions are usually multifactorial with synergistic contributions over time from voice use demands and technique, medical conditions, medications, and the environment. General categories of benign vocal fold masses in professional voice include nodules, polyps, and cysts, but other pathology should be considered, such as reactive lesions, intracordal scarring, feeding varices, and reparative granuloma. A perspective on these issues is essential for proper diagnosis and management. Video procedures for nodule and polyp surgery accompany this content online.

17547973
The voice and laryngeal dysfunction in stroke: a report from the Neurolaryngology Subcommittee of the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery.
Stroke is the third leading cause of death in the United States, behind heart disease and cancer. It affects as many as 5% of the population over 65 years old, and this number is growing annually due to the aging population. A significant portion of stroke patients that initially survive are faced with the risk of aspiration, as well as quality-of-life issues relating to impaired communication. The goal of this paper is to define the scope of practice in otolaryngology for these patients, and to review pertinent background literature. Consensus report and retrospective literature review. Otolaryngology involvement in these patients is critical to their rehabilitation, which often requires an interdisciplinary team of specialists. This committee presentation explores epidemiological data regarding the impact of stroke and its complications on hospitalizations. A pertinent review of neuroanatomy as it relates to laryngeal function is also discussed. State-of-the-art diagnostic and therapeutic procedures are presented. There is a well-defined set of diagnostic and therapeutic options for laryngeal dysfunction in the stroke patient. Otolaryngologists play a critical role in the interdisciplinary rehabilitation team.

17419528
Human lung mucous glands manifest evidence of the H+/K+-ATPase proton pump.
The H+/K+-ATPase proton pump has been demonstrated in human laryngeal submucosal glands, and is not solely present in the parietal cells of the stomach. Although proton secretion is present in the lung, a variety of mechanisms have been elucidated. The hypothesis of this study is that the H+/K+-ATPase proton pump is one additional pathway of proton secretion in the human lung. Fourteen surgical lung specimens from 10 subjects were retrospectively obtained after approval from our Human Subjects Committee. Banked human stomach tissue was used for comparative positive and negative controls. Sections were immunostained with 2 monoclonal antibodies selectively reactive with alpha or beta subunits of the H+/K+-ATPase proton pump. In the human lung, consistent staining for both subunits was present in the mucous gland cells and ducts in all specimens in which mucous glands were present (6 specimens from 5 subjects). Overall, weak to strong staining was present in focal areas within the multicellular mucous glands. There was only scant focal staining in the respiratory epithelium in 4 specimens. Stomach parietal cells exhibited strongly positive staining for both subunits of the proton pump. There was no staining in stomach cells that were not morphologically consistent with parietal cells. The H+/K+-ATPase proton pump is present in mucous cells and ducts in the human lung, with some variable expression noted. Proton pump inhibitor pharmacotherapy may have a site of action in the human lung, explaining some of the controversies otherwise attributable to interrelatedness of aerodigestive tract disease.

