20732520
Predictors of major morbidity and mortality after pneumonectomy utilizing the Society for Thoracic Surgeons General Thoracic Surgery Database.
Pneumonectomy is associated with a significant incidence of perioperative morbidity and mortality. The purpose of this study is to identify the risk factors responsible for adverse outcomes in patients after pneumonectomy utilizing The Society of Thoracic Surgeons General Thoracic Surgery Database (STS GTDB). All patients who had undergone pneumonectomy between January 2002 and December 2007 were identified in the STS GTDB. Among 80 participating centers, 1,267 patients were selected. Logistic regression analysis was performed on preoperative variables for major adverse outcomes. The rate of major adverse perioperative events was 30.4%, including 71 patients who died (5.6%). Major morbidity was defined as pneumonia, adult respiratory distress syndrome, empyema, sepsis, bronchopleural fistula, pulmonary embolism, ventilatory support beyond 48 hours, reintubation, tracheostomy, atrial or ventricular arrhythmias requiring treatment, myocardial infarct, reoperation for bleeding, and central neurologic event. Patients with major morbidity had a longer mean length of stay compared with patients without major morbidity (13.3 versus 6.1 days, p < 0.001). Independent predictors of major adverse outcomes were age 65 years or older (p < 0.001), male sex (p = 0.026), congestive heart failure (p = 0.04), forced expiratory volume in 1 second less than 60% of predicted (p = 0.01), benign lung disease (p = 0.006), and requiring extrapleural pneumonectomy (p = 0.018). Among patients with lung carcinoma, those receiving neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy were more at risk for major morbidity than patients without induction therapy (p = 0.049). The mortality rate after pneumonectomy by thoracic surgeons participating in the STS database compares favorably to that in previously published studies. We identified risk factors for major adverse outcomes in patients undergoing pneumonectomy.

19464454
Thoracoscopic segmentectomy compares favorably with thoracoscopic lobectomy for patients with small stage I lung cancer.
As thoracoscopic lobectomy becomes widely applied for treatment of non-small cell lung cancer, thoracoscopic segmentectomy remains controversial for patients with small stage I lung cancers. Questions remain regarding safety, morbidity, mortality, and recurrence rate. This study compared outcomes between thoracoscopic segmentectomy and lobectomy. Retrospective review was undertaken of patients who underwent thoracoscopic segmentectomy or lobectomy for clinical stage I non-small cell lung cancer between January 2002 and February 2008. Indications for segmentectomy were tumor smaller than 3 cm, limited pulmonary reserve, comorbidities, and peripheral tumor location. Thirty-one patients underwent segmentectomy and 113 underwent lobectomy. Patients after segmentectomy had worse mean forced expiratory volume in 1 second than after lobectomy (83% vs 92%, P = .04). There were no differences in mean number of nodes (10) and nodal stations (5) resected. Segmentectomy and lobectomy groups had similar median chest tube durations (2 vs 3 days, P = .18), stays (both 4 days), total complications, recurrence rates, and survivals at mean follow-ups of 22 and 21 months, respectively. Lobectomy group had 1 30-day death; segmentectomy group had none. There were 5 (17.2%) recurrences after segmentectomy and 23 (20.4%) after lobectomy (P = .71), with locoregional recurrence rates of 3.5% and 3.6%, respectively. Thoracoscopic segmentectomy is a safe option for experienced thoracoscopic surgeons treating patients with small stage I lung cancers. No significant difference in oncologic outcome was seen between thoracoscopic segmentectomy and thoracoscopic lobectomy. Lymph node dissection could be performed as effectively during segmentectomy as lobectomy.

18222220
Electromagnetic navigational bronchoscopy: a surgeon's perspective.
Diagnostic yield of flexible bronchoscopy is often limited by the size and location of the lesion of interest. Novel technologies have evolved that can improve the accuracy and expand the applicability of flexible bronchoscopy in rendering a tissue diagnosis for pulmonary nodules. One recent technical advance uses electromagnetic guidance to improve the ability of the bronchoscopist to navigate within the lung parenchyma as well as to localize and biopsy mediastinal pathology. We have gained a preliminary experience with navigational bronchoscopy using electromagnetic guidance to successfully biopsy peripheral lung lesions, place fiducial catheters to aid stereotactic radiotherapy, and to biopsy mediastinal lymph nodes in the staging of lung cancer. Not only will navigational bronchoscopy lead to improvements in the diagnostic yield of standard flexible bronchoscopy, but we envision potential therapeutic modalities that can be used this system.

18222201
Video-assisted thoracoscopic lobectomy: state of the art and future directions.
Thoracoscopic lobectomy is performed with increasing frequency for early-stage lung cancer. Several published reports suggest thoracoscopic resection is safe, with the potential advantage of shorter hospital stay, quicker recovery, and comparable oncologic results. Data on 180 video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) patients who underwent thoracoscopic lobectomy or sublobar anatomic resection at our institution between January 2002 and December 2006 were reviewed. The conversion rate to thoracotomy, complications, length of stay, and duration of chest tube drainage were determined. Similar variables were evaluated for patients aged older than 80 years, those with a forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) that was less than 50% predicted, those who had undergone preoperative neoadjuvant therapy, and those who had undergone lung-sparing anatomic resections. Thoracoscopic anatomic lung resection was performed successfully in 166 patients. One of 180 patients (0.6%) died, and 14 patients (9.2%) underwent conversions. Overall median length of stay was 4 days (range, 1 to 98; interquartile range [IQR], 3), and median duration of chest tube drainage was 3 days (range, 0 to 35 days; IQR, 2). The median length of hospital stay and median chest tube duration for the group aged 80 years and older was 5 and 3 days; for the segmental resection group, 4 and 3 days; for the chemotherapy or radiotherapy induction group, 3.5 and 3 days; and for the FEV1 less than 50% group, 5.5 and 4 days, respectively. No patients died in any of these groups. Thoracoscopic lung resection can be performed safely in selected patients aged 80 years and older, in those with marginal pulmonary function, and in those with pathologic response to neoadjuvant therapy.

