19178553
Substance use and functional impairment among adolescents directly exposed to the 2001 World Trade Center attacks.
The relationship between exposure to the World Trade Center (WTC) attacks, increased substance use, functional impairment and mental health service use, controlling for depression and post-traumatic stress disorder, was assessed through an in-school survey of directly exposed students (N = 1040) attending the five middle and five high schools nearest the WTC. The survey was conducted 18 months after the attacks. Students with one WTC exposure risk factor had a five-fold increase in substance use, while those with three or more exposure risks had a nearly 19-fold increase. Increased substance use was associated with impaired school work, school behaviour and grades. Students reporting increased substance use were nearly twice as likely to want help but were no more likely than asymptomatic students to receive services. Adolescents reporting increased substance use, without co-morbidity, were less likely to receive psychological services than others. Attention to the needs of substance-using adolescents exposed to disaster is needed.

18447108
The prevalence and characteristics of childhood overweight in a multiethnic, school-based health setting.
The prevalence and correlates of overweight and the risk of overweight in minority children attending urban school-based health centers remains poorly characterized. The purpose of our study was to examine the prevalence and characteristics of overweight and at risk for overweight in low socioeconomic status minority children enrolled in East Harlem school-based health centers in New York City. A retrospective cross-sectional study during the period of September 2002 to August 2003. Four Pediatric School-based Health Centers in East Harlem. Children and adolescents, aged 5 to 18 years. We examined presence of overweight or the risk of overweight based on body mass index (BMI) percentile and other clinical characteristics. Bivariate and multivariate analyses were performed to assess the relationship between demographics and clinical characteristics with overweight and the risk of overweight. Of the 491 children enrolled, 45.8% were either overweight or at risk for overweight, with the highest risk observed in Hispanic/Latino children. This latter relation remained significant after adjusting for age, sex, and birthweight status. In addition, high screening office blood pressure was related to overweight status and higher BMI percentile. A large proportion of minorities, especially Hispanic/Latino children, attending school-based health centers in an urban community sample, are overweight or at risk for overweight. Elevated screening blood pressure was also a common co-morbidity. Further research should determine the predictors and correlates of overweight, and effective targeted school-based interventions should be tested in this high-risk population.

