19447648
Multisite near-infrared spectroscopy predicts elevated blood lactate level in children after cardiac surgery.
To determine if a relationship exists between regional oxyhemoglobin saturation (rSO(2)) measured at various body locations by near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) and blood lactate level in children after cardiac surgery. A prospective, observational study. A pediatric cardiac intensive care unit in a university hospital. Twenty-three children undergoing repair of congenital heart disease. Patients with single-ventricle physiology and/or residual intracardiac shunts were excluded. None. Cerebral, splanchnic, renal, and muscle rSO(2) values were recorded every 30 seconds via NIRS for 24 hours postoperatively. Blood lactate levels measured minimally at 0, 2, 4, 6 and 24 hours postoperatively were correlated with rSO(2) values derived by averaging all values recorded during the 60 minutes preceding the blood draw. Twenty-three patients were enrolled with 163 lactate measurements and more than 39,000 rSO(2) observations analyzed. Cerebral rSO(2) had the strongest inverse correlation with lactate level followed by splanchnic, renal, and muscle rSO(2) (r = -0.74, p < 0.0001, r = -0.61, p < 0.0001, r = -0.57, p < 0.0001, and r = -0.48, p < 0.0001, respectively). The correlation improved by averaging the cerebral and renal rSO(2) values (r = -0.82, p < 0.0001). Furthermore, an averaged cerebral and renal rSO(2) value <or=65% predicted a lactate level >or=3.0 mmol/L with a sensitivity of 95% and a specificity of 83% (p = 0.0001). Averaged cerebral and renal rSO(2) less than 65% as measured by NIRS predicts hyperlactatemia (>3 mmol/L) in acyanotic children after congenital heart surgery. Hence, this noninvasive, continuous monitoring tool may facilitate the identification of global hypoperfusion caused by low cardiac output syndrome in this population.

18603059
Extubation in the operating room after congenital heart surgery in children.
Early extubation in the operating room after surgery for congenital heart disease has been described; however, postoperative mechanical ventilation in the intensive care unit remains common practice in many institutions. The goal of this study was to identify perioperative factors associated with not proceeding with planned operating room extubation. We performed a retrospective chart review of 224 patients (aged 1 month to 18 years, median 20 months) undergoing surgery for congenital heart defects requiring cardiopulmonary bypass. Patients mechanically ventilated preoperatively were excluded. A stepwise logistic regression model was used to test for the independent influence of various perioperative factors on extubation in the operating room. Overall, 79% of patients were extubated in the operating room. Younger age and longer cardiopulmonary bypass time were the strongest predictors for not extubating. Each step down to a younger age group (<2, 2-4, 4-6, 6-12, >12 months) reduced the chance of extubation in the operating room by 56%. Cardiopulmonary bypass time for more than 150 minutes was associated with an 11.8-fold increased risk of not being extubated. Male gender and high inotrope requirement after cardiopulmonary bypass were also significantly associated with fewer children being extubated. Extubation in the operating room after surgery for congenital heart disease was successful in the majority of patients. The strongest independent risk factors for failure of this strategy included younger age and longer cardiopulmonary bypass time.

18397903
Development and implementation of a pediatric cardiac anesthesia/intensive care database.
Systematic collection and electronic storage of data can assist in improving quality and efficiency of patient care and can provide a data set to interrogate for subsequent performance improvement and clinical research purposes. In this article, an electronic perioperative pediatric cardiac surgery database to be used by a multidisciplinary care team was designed, developed, and implemented. Technical goals for the design included low cost, rapid development and implementation, adequate security, and potential for internal and external distribution. Implementation of the described database has proved to be invaluable for quality assurance and statistical analysis of data relevant to patient care. From the overall positive experience, it was concluded that the electronic data management does not always need major cost investment.

18242288
Multiple thoracic aortic aneurysms after mediastinitis in an infant after repair of coarctation of the aorta.


17564653
Continuous positive airway pressure and lung separation during cardiopulmonary bypass to facilitate congenital heart surgery via the right thorax in children.
We describe a fast track anesthesia technique that facilitates congenital heart surgery via right axillary thoracotomy in children. Continuous positive airway pressure on the dependent lung, before and during cardiopulmonary bypass, approximates the heart towards the chest wall incision, and significantly improves the surgeon's access to the heart.

