21062623
Analysis of a purported SHANK3 mutation in a boy with autism: clinical impact of rare variant research in neurodevelopmental disabilities.
There is strong evidence for rare, highly penetrant genetic variants playing an etiological role in multiple neurodevelopmental disabilities, including autism spectrum disorders. The rate of discovery of such rare variants is increasing with the advent of larger sample collections, chromosome microarray analyses, and high-throughput sequencing. As the variants that are being discovered can be highly penetrant, they lead immediately to model systems with construct validity, critical for understanding the underlying neurobiology of these conditions, which in turn can provide leads for novel therapeutic targets. Moreover, these discoveries can benefit families with information about recurrence risk, resolve concerns about etiology, provide information about associated medical issues, and engender directed advocacy for specific genetic conditions. For these reasons, diagnostic laboratories are taking advantage of research data as they are produced. In the current report, we present our molecular analysis of a child with a purported disruptive mutation in SHANK3 identified by a commercial genetic testing laboratory and we provide evidence that this was not an etiological variant. The variant was a 1-bp insertion in exon 11 of the RefSeq gene, which we then determined was inherited from a healthy mother and found in ~1% of controls. Since the variant would be predicted to disrupt the reference gene, and the penetrance of SHANK3 mutations is very high, we did follow up molecular and bioinformatic analyses and concluded that the presumptive exon containing the variant is not likely to be present in most or all SHANK3 transcripts. The results highlight difficulties that can arise with rapid translation of research findings to clinical practice. Researchers are in a unique position to generate resources with collated and curated information that can inform research, genetic testing, clinicians, and families about the best practices as pertains to rare genetic variants in neurodevelopmental disabilities. Of immediate importance would be a well-curated database of gene variation identified in large numbers of typically developing individuals and in individuals affected with neurodevelopmental disabilities. Such a database would reduce false-positive results in clinical settings, would be helpful in structure-function analyses, and would direct translational research to pathways most likely to benefit families.

20381196
Evidence against a role for rare ADAM10 mutations in sporadic Alzheimer Disease.
The Alzheimer amyloid protein precursor (APP) is subject to proteolysis by ADAM10 and ADAM17, precluding the formation of Abeta. Recently, coding variations in ADAM10 resulting in altered function have been reported in familial Alzheimer disease (AD). The authors carried out a large-scale (n = 576: Controls, 271; AD, 305) resequencing study of ADAM10 in sporadic AD. The results do not support a significant role for ADAM10 mutations in AD. The results also make it clear that the careful examination of ancestry required in any case-control comparison is especially true with rare variations, where even a very small number of variations might form the basis of scientific conclusions.

19393990
Gene expression patterns associated with posttraumatic stress disorder following exposure to the World Trade Center attacks.
Although genetic risk factors for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in similarly traumatized cohorts can be confounded with risk for type of exposure, the primary risk for exposure to the 9/11 attack on New York City was proximity, allowing study of PTSD risk in a sample that is not confounded by exposure-related risk. Thirty-five Caucasians (15 with PTSD, stratified for exposure, age, and gender) were selected from a population-representative sample of persons exposed to the attack from which longitudinal data had been collected in four previous waves. Whole blood gene expression and cortisol levels were obtained. Seventeen probe sets were differentially expressed in PTSD. Identified genes were generally involved in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, signal transduction, or brain and immune cell function. FKBP5, a modulator of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) sensitivity, showed reduced expression in PTSD, consistent with enhanced GR responsiveness. FKBP5 expression was predicted by cortisol when entered with PTSD severity in regression analysis. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction confirmed significant reductions in FKBP5. Also less expressed in PTSD were STAT5B, a direct inhibitor of GR, and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) Class II. Consistent with observations of HPA axis dysfunction in PTSD, several genes involved in glucocorticoid signaling are differentially expressed among those with current PTSD.

19360675
A large-scale screen for coding variants in SERT/SLC6A4 in autism spectrum disorders.
In the current study we explored the hypothesis that rare variants in SLC6A4 contribute to autism susceptibility and to rigid-compulsive behaviors in autism. We made use of a large number of unrelated cases with autism spectrum disorders (approximately 350) and controls (approximately 420) and screened for rare exonic variants in SLC6A4 by a high-throughput method followed by sequencing. We observed no difference in the frequency of such variants in the two groups, irrespective of how we defined the rare variants. Furthermore, we did not observe an association of rare coding variants in SLC6A4 with rigid-compulsive traits scores in the cases. These results do not support a significant role for rare coding variants in SLC6A4 in autism spectrum disorders, nor do they support a significant role for SLC6A4 in rigid-compulsive traits in these disorders.

18925931
Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification for genetic screening in autism spectrum disorders: efficient identification of known microduplications and identification of a novel microduplication in ASMT.
It has previously been shown that specific microdeletions and microduplications, many of which also associated with cognitive impairment (CI), can present with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) represents an efficient method to screen for such recurrent microdeletions and microduplications. In the current study, a total of 279 unrelated subjects ascertained for ASDs were screened for genomic disorders associated with CI using MLPA. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) and/or direct DNA sequencing were used to validate potential microdeletions and microduplications. Methylation-sensitive MLPA was used to characterize individuals with duplications in the Prader-Willi/Angelman (PWA) region. MLPA showed two subjects with typical ASD-associated interstitial duplications of the 15q11-q13 PWA region of maternal origin. Two additional subjects showed smaller, de novo duplications of the PWA region that had not been previously characterized. Genes in these two novel duplications include GABRB3 and ATP10A in one case, and MKRN3, MAGEL2 and NDN in the other. In addition, two subjects showed duplications of the 22q11/DiGeorge syndrome region. One individual was found to carry a 12 kb deletion in one copy of the ASPA gene on 17p13, which when mutated in both alleles leads to Canavan disease. Two subjects showed partial duplication of the TM4SF2 gene on Xp11.4, previously implicated in X-linked non-specific mental retardation, but in our subsequent analyses such variants were also found in controls. A partial duplication in the ASMT gene, located in the pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) of the sex chromosomes and previously suggested to be involved in ASD susceptibility, was observed in 6-7% of the cases but in only 2% of controls (P = 0.003). MLPA proves to be an efficient method to screen for chromosomal abnormalities. We identified duplications in 15q11-q13 and in 22q11, including new de novo small duplications, as likely contributing to ASD in the current sample by increasing liability and/or exacerbating symptoms. Our data indicate that duplications in TM4SF2 are not associated with the phenotype given their presence in controls. The results in PAR1/PAR2 are the first large-scale studies of gene dosage in these regions, and the findings at the ASMT locus indicate that further studies of the duplication of the ASMT gene are needed in order to gain insight into its potential involvement in ASD. Our studies also identify some limitations of MLPA, where single base changes in probe binding sequences alter results. In summary, our studies indicate that MLPA, with a focus on accepted medical genetic conditions, may be an inexpensive method for detection of microdeletions and microduplications in ASD patients for purposes of genetic counselling if MLPA-identified deletions are validated by additional methods.

18348195
An analysis of candidate autism loci on chromosome 2q24-q33: evidence for association to the STK39 gene.
A susceptibility locus for autism was identified to the chromosome 2q24-q33 region in independent cohorts of families, especially in subsets clinically defined with phrase speech delay (PSD). In the present work, we screened 84 linkage-informative SNPs covering this locus in a cohort of 334 families with autism and in subsets identified with PSD. We observed linkage to autism with the highest non-parametric linkage score (NPL) of 2.79 (P = 0.002) in the PSD subset with at least two affected subjects. In addition, using a set of 109 additional gene-oriented SNPs in this interval we observed that several SNPs encompassing the SLC25A12 gene provided the maximum evidence for linkage (NPL = 3.32, P = 0.0003). Using the transmission disequilibrium test to test for associations, we observed significant over-transmissions of rs2056202 (P = 0.006) within the SLC25A12 gene, rs1807984 (P = 0.007) within the STK39 gene, and rs2305586 (P = 0.009) within the ITGA4 gene. We also found evidence for association between autism and two other SNPs (rs1517342, P = 0.012 and rs971257, P = 0.030) or haplotypes (P = 0.003) of the STK39 gene. STK39 encodes a serine/threonine kinase (SPAK/PASK/STE20-SPS1 homolog) abundantly expressed in the brain with roles in cell differentiation, cell transformation and proliferation, and in regulation of ion transporters. In summary, we have observed further evidence for linkage and association between autism and loci within the 2q24-q33 region, including at STK39, a novel candidate gene for autism.

18001468
Mutation analysis of the NSD1 gene in patients with autism spectrum disorders and macrocephaly.
Sotos syndrome is an overgrowth syndrome characterized by macrocephaly, advanced bone age, characteristic facial features, and learning disabilities, caused by mutations or deletions of the NSD1 gene, located at 5q35. Sotos syndrome has been described in a number of patients with autism spectrum disorders, suggesting that NSD1 could be involved in other cases of autism and macrocephaly. We screened the NSD1 gene for mutations and deletions in 88 patients with autism spectrum disorders and macrocephaly (head circumference 2 standard deviations or more above the mean). Mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing of all exons and flanking regions. Dosage analysis of NSD1 was carried out using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. We identified three missense variants (R604L, S822C and E1499G) in one patient each, but none is within a functional domain. In addition, segregation analysis showed that all variants were inherited from healthy parents and in two cases were also present in unaffected siblings, indicating that they are probably nonpathogenic. No partial or whole gene deletions/duplications were observed. Our findings suggest that Sotos syndrome is a rare cause of autism spectrum disorders and that screening for NSD1 mutations and deletions in patients with autism and macrocephaly is not warranted in the absence of other features of Sotos syndrome.

17427195
Mutation screening of the PTEN gene in patients with autism spectrum disorders and macrocephaly.
Mutations in the PTEN gene are associated with a broad spectrum of disorders, including Cowden syndrome (CS), Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, Proteus syndrome, and Lhermitte-Duclos disease. In addition, PTEN mutations have been described in a few patients with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) and macrocephaly. In this study, we screened the PTEN gene for mutations and deletions in 88 patients with ASDs and macrocephaly (defined as >or=2 SD above the mean). Mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing of all exons and flanking regions, as well as the promoter region. Dosage analysis of PTEN was carried out using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). No partial or whole gene deletions were observed. We identified a de novo missense mutation (D326N) in a highly conserved amino acid in a 5-year-old boy with autism, mental retardation, language delay, extreme macrocephaly (+9.6 SD) and polydactyly of both feet. Polydactyly has previously been described in two patients with Lhermitte-Duclos disease and CS and is thus likely to be a rare sign of PTEN mutations. Our findings suggest that PTEN mutations are a relatively infrequent cause of ASDs with macrocephaly. Screening of PTEN mutations is warranted in patients with autism and pronounced macrocephaly, even in the absence of other features of PTEN-related tumor syndromes.

