20350198
Lack of preparation, physical health after childbirth, and early postpartum depressive symptoms.
Prior research has not examined the association of patient expectations or preparation by providers for the postpartum experience with depressive symptoms. We investigated whether lack of preparation for the postpartum experience and physical health after uncomplicated childbirth were associated with early postpartum depressive symptoms. We conducted a telephone survey of 720 early postpartum mothers in New York City. Mothers reported on depressive symptoms, physical symptoms, provider preparation for the postpartum experience, and other factors. Nearly 39% of patients reported depressive symptoms; 24% did not feel adequately prepared by their provider for the postpartum experience. Mothers reported a range of physical symptoms: 98% reported daily vaginal bleeding, 79% reported cesarean section or episiotomy site pain, 82% reported breast pain, and 32% reported urinary incontinence. Patients who reported inadequate preparation by their provider were more likely to report depressive symptoms compared with patients who reported adequate preparation (53% vs. 35%, p < 0.001). In a multivariable model predicting postpartum depressive symptoms, adjusted odds ratios (ORs) remained elevated for perceived lack of preparation for the postpartum experience, more physical symptoms, and more physical functional limitations. Further research is needed to investigate whether preparing patients for expected health consequences after pregnancy may reduce the incidence of early postpartum depressive symptoms.

20093900
Lack of patient preparation for the postpartum period and patients' satisfaction with their obstetric clinicians.
To assess whether lack of patient preparation for common physical and emotional postpartum symptoms is associated with patient satisfaction with obstetric clinicians. We conducted a telephone survey of 724 postpartum women. Women were interviewed 2 weeks postpartum to assess self-perceived preparation for 11 common physical and emotional postpartum symptoms, overall preparation for the postpartum experience, physical and emotional symptoms, experience with the health care system, satisfaction with clinician, and other factors. The associations of patient satisfaction with preparation, access to care, demographics, and other factors were examined. Many women were not prepared to expect common postpartum physical and emotional symptoms. Only 24% of the women surveyed were prepared to expect urinary incontinence, and fewer than half were prepared to expect breastfeeding problems, hair loss, hemorrhoids, large mood swings, and anxiety. Lack of preparation for common physical and emotional symptoms was associated with lower satisfaction with the clinician. After adjusting for demographic factors, having a regular doctor, access, physical and emotional symptom status, and other factors, rating the clinician as excellent was associated with preparation for common physical and emotional symptoms (odds ratio 1.08, 95% confidence interval 1.01-1.16), more access, and overall preparation for the postpartum experience. Satisfaction with the clinician was associated with return for postpartum visit within 3 months of delivery (P<.001). Lack of preparation for the postpartum experience, including failure to discuss common physical and emotional symptoms, is associated with reduced patient satisfaction with obstetric clinicians. II.

19495946
Approaching NIH guideline recommended care for maternal-infant health: clinical failures to use recommended antenatal corticosteroids.
To assess the use of antenatal corticosteroids in clinical circumstances for which both the NIH Guideline and local experts recommend their use and to describe characteristics associated with failure to use recommended antenatal steroids. We convened local experts to adapt the NIH statement by identifying clinical circumstances for which they agree antenatal steroids should always be used. We conducted a retrospective chart review on a cohort study of mothers who delivered premature (24-34 weeks) infants between 2000 and 2002 at three New York City hospitals and investigated the association of failure to treat with antenatal steroids with characteristics of the mother, pregnancy, delivery, and hospital. Twenty percent (101/515) of eligible mothers failed to receive indicated antenatal corticosteroid therapy. Of these, 43% delivered more than 2 h after admission, and 33% delivered more than 4 h after admission, indicating sufficient time to have treated them. Lack of prenatal care, longer gestation, advanced cervical exam, and intact membranes at admission were associated with failure to receive the recommended therapy. Antenatal steroids were under-utilized in our sample. If our results our generalizable, opportunities for quality improvement in the antenatal management of mothers in preterm labor exist.

19238520
Modifiable factors associated with changes in postpartum depressive symptoms.
Up to 50% of mothers report postpartum depressive symptoms yet providers do a poor job predicting and preventing their occurrence. Our goal was to identify modifiable factors (situational triggers and buffers) associated with postpartum depressive symptoms. Observational prospective cohort telephone study of 563 mothers interviewed at 2 weeks and 6 months postpartum. Mothers reported on demographic factors, physical and emotional symptoms, daily function, infant behaviors, social support, and skills in managing infant and household. Mothers were categorized into four groups based on the presence of depressive symptoms at 2 weeks and at 6 months postpartum: never, always, late onset, and remission groups. Fifty-two percent did not have depressive symptoms at 2 weeks or at 6 months (never group), 14% had symptoms at both time points (always group), 10% had late onset, and 24% had early onset of symptoms with remission. As compared with women in the never group, women in the always and late onset groups had high-risk characteristics (e.g., past history of depression), more situational triggers (e.g., physical symptoms), and less robust social and personal buffers (i.e., social support and self-efficacy). As compared with the never group, mothers in the remission group had more situational triggers and fewer buffers initially. Changes in situational triggers and buffers were different for the four groups and were correlated with group membership. Situational triggers such as physical symptoms and infant colic, and low levels of social support and self-efficacy in managing situational demands are associated with postpartum depressive symptoms. Further research is needed to investigate whether providing education about the physical consequences of childbirth, providing social support, and teaching skills to enhance self-efficacy will reduce the incidence of postpartum symptoms of depression.

18332492
When does a difference become a disparity? Conceptualizing racial and ethnic disparities in health.
Definitions of racial and ethnic disparities fall along a continuum from differences with little connotation of being unjust to those that result from overt discrimination. Where along this continuum one decides that a racial difference becomes a disparity is subjective, but the magnitude of the injustice is generally proportional to how much control a person is perceived to have over the cause of the difference in health. The degree to which one sees environmental factors and social context as shaping choices has important implications for the measurement of disparities and ultimately for directing efforts to eliminate them.

18306240
Racial disparities in infant mortality: a quality of care perspective.
Black infants in the United States are more than twice as likely to die as White infants in the first year of life. Reducing the existing racial disparity in infant mortality rates is a major health policy focus. Despite decades of research aimed at reducing preterm births, our efforts have been largely unsuccessful. Much greater success has been achieved in reducing the morbidity and mortality of premature infants, largely through improvements in obstetrical and neonatal care. However, it is an open question whether such improvements have reduced racial disparities in infant mortality. In this article, we recommend a new framework for addressing infant mortality disparities. We suggest that a quality of care problem may partially underlie racial disparities in infant mortality rates.

18267978
Black/white differences in very low birth weight neonatal mortality rates among New York City hospitals.
We sought to determine whether differences in the hospitals at which black and white infants are born contribute to black/white disparities in very low birth weight neonatal mortality rates in New York City. We performed a population-based cohort study using New York City vital statistics records on all live births and deaths of infants weighing 500 to 1499 g who were born in 45 hospitals between January 1, 1996, and December 31, 2001 (N = 11 781). We measured very low birth weight risk-adjusted neonatal mortality rates for each New York City hospital and assessed differences in the distributions of non-Hispanic black and non-Hispanic white very low birth weight births among these hospitals. Risk-adjusted neonatal mortality rates for very low birth weight infants in New York City hospitals ranged from 9.6 to 27.2 deaths per 1000 births. White very low birth weight infants were more likely to be born in the lowest mortality tertile of hospitals (49%), compared with black very low birth weight infants (29%). We estimated that, if black women delivered in the same hospitals as white women, then black very low birth weight mortality rates would be reduced by 6.7 deaths per 1000 very low birth weight births, removing 34.5% of the black/white disparity in very low birth weight neonatal mortality rates in New York City. Volume of very low birth weight deliveries was modestly associated with very low birth weight mortality rates but explained little of the racial disparity. Black very low birth weight infants more likely to be born in New York City hospitals with higher risk-adjusted neonatal mortality rates than were very low birth weight infants, contributing substantially to black-white disparities.

20182436
Surfactant use for premature infants with respiratory distress syndrome in three New York city hospitals: discordance of practice from a community clinician consensus standard.
To assess concordance with a locally developed standard of care for premature infants with respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) for whom the standard recommends surfactant treatment within 2 h of birth, and to examine the association between clinical, demographic, and hospital characteristics with discordance from the standard. Retrospective cohort study of 773 infants weighing < or =1750 g born in any of the three New York City hospitals between 1999 and 2002. 227 of the 773 infants (29%) met criteria for treatment according to the standard. Of these, 37% received surfactant by 2 h. By 4 h, 70% of infants who met the standard received surfactant. White infants were more likely to receive surfactant by 4 h (85%) than African American (61%) or Latino infants (67%). Multivariable logistic regression revealed significant odds ratios predicting discordance from the relaxed criteria (4 h) for African American race (4.10, 95% confidence interval: 1.30 to 13.00), 100 g of birth weight (odds ratio: 1.22, 95% confidence interval: 1.10 to 1.34), and hospital of birth. Many infants with RDS failed to receive surfactant replacement therapy at 2 and 4 h after birth. African Americans and those born larger were less likely to receive surfactant. If these data can be generalized, there is a large opportunity to reduce infant morbidity from RDS and to reduce racial/ethnic disparities in birth outcomes by increasing the rate and speed with which surfactant is delivered to these infants.

