21599869
Does poor early metabolic control predict subsequent poor control in young children with Type 1 diabetes: An exploratory study.
Background:? We sought to determine whether poor metabolic control during the early stages of Type 1 diabetes mellitus predicts control during subsequent years. We hypothesized that poor control in the first year after diagnosis would predict poor control in the following year, and that poor control in the second year after diagnosis would predict poor metabolic control in subsequent years. Methods:? We conducted a retrospective review of a cohort of urban children treated for diabetes at our institution who were diagnosed between 1992 and 2005. We calculated odds ratios to determine whether control in Year 1 or in Year 2 predicted control in Years 3-6. Cox regression analyses were used to determine whether poor early control predicted progression to subsequent poor control. Results:? Metabolic control in the first year after diagnosis was not a good predictor of future control. However, poor metabolic control in the second year after diagnosis was highly predictive of poor control in subsequent years and predicted faster progression to poor control. Conclusion:? The findings suggest that poor metabolic control in Year 2 may be a predictor of subsequent poor metabolic control. Targeting prevention interventions to reduce non-adherence and to enhance metabolic control to families that show poor metabolic control in Year 2 may prove to be an optimum investment in terms of improved medical outcomes and enhanced quality of life.

20441725
A randomized controlled trial of the safety and promise of cognitive-behavioral therapy using imaginal exposure in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder resulting from cardiovascular illness.
We investigated the physical safety of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) utilizing imaginal exposure in patients who suffered from posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) following a life-threatening cardiovascular event. In this phase I, prospective, single-blind trial conducted from April 2006 through April 2008, we randomly assigned 60 patients to receive either 3 to 5 sessions of imaginal exposure therapy (experimental group) or 1 to 3 educational sessions only (control group). Criteria for PTSD and other mental health disorders were evaluated according to DSM-IV using the full Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID). Safety assessments included patients' blood pressure and pulse before and after each study session and the occurrence of deaths, hospitalizations, repeat myocardial infarctions, or invasive procedures. We also investigated the effects of the treatment on PTSD symptoms (Impact of Event Scale and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Scale), depression (Beck Depression Inventory-II), and the Clinical Global Impressions-Severity of Illness (CGI-S) scale. There were no significant differences between the experimental and control groups and between exposure and nonexposure sessions in any of the safety measures. In addition, confidence intervals were such that the nonsignificant effects of exposure therapy were not of clinical concern. For example, the mean difference in systolic pressure between control and exposure sessions was 0.5 mm Hg (95% CI, -6.1 to 7.1 mm Hg). Nonsignificant improvements were found on all psychiatric measures in the experimental group, with a significant improvement in CGI-S in the entire cohort (mean score difference, -0.6; 95% CI, -1.1 to -0.1; P = .02) and a significant improvement in PTSD symptoms in a subgroup of patients with acute unscheduled cardiovascular events and high baseline PTSD symptoms (mean score difference, -1.2; 95% CI, -2.0 to -0.3; P = .01). Cognitive-behavioral therapy that includes imaginal exposure is safe and promising for the treatment of posttraumatic stress in patients with cardiovascular illnesses who are traumatized by their illness. clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00364910.

18794506
Site matters: winning the hearts and minds of patients in a cardiology clinic.
In medical care settings, mental health symptoms of depression and distress are associated with poor medical outcomes, yet they are often underrecognized. Authors sought to examine the effect of having immediate mental-health screening in the cardiology clinic. The Patient Health Questionnaire and the Impact of Event Scale were used to screen for depression and distress in 316 patients at an urban cardiology clinic. Because of poor follow-up rates, a psychiatrist was placed on the premises of the cardiology clinic to facilitate referrals. Placing a psychiatrist within the cardiology clinic significantly improved the rate of successful referrals. Because 45 patients (14%) endorsed suicidal thoughts, authors conclude that mental health screening programs should include an immediate evaluation by a clinician.

18768035
Age at diagnosis, gender, and metabolic control in children with type 1 diabetes.
To examine whether age at diagnosis and gender affect early metabolic control in children with type 1 diabetes. Data on age at diagnosis, gender, pubertal status, and metabolic control were gathered by a retrospective chart review of children diagnosed between 1992 and 2005. Mean hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) values were compared at five time points: at diagnosis and at 6, 12, 24, and 36 months after diagnosis. At diagnosis, girls aged 6-12 years presented with significantly higher HbA1c levels than girls diagnosed at older or younger ages. Their HbA1c at diagnosis was also significantly higher than that in boys of the same age. There was no gender difference among children diagnosed at ages 0-5 or 13+ yr. At 6 months after diagnosis, only age at diagnosis was associated with metabolic control, with children diagnosed when older presenting with lower HbA1c levels. At 12, 24, and 36 months after diagnosis, there were no significant effects of age at diagnosis or gender on glycemic status. At initial diagnosis, girls in the 6-12 age group presented with higher HbA1c levels compared with boys and girls of other age groups. Although endocrine changes associated with puberty may partly explain the findings, more investigation to elucidate mechanisms accounting for the interaction of age and gender with glycemic status is needed.

18435606
Transitioning health care responsibility from caregivers to patient: a pilot study aiming to facilitate medication adherence during this process.
Transition in pediatric transplant recipients consists of both a physical shift in medical care location as well as a transition in health care responsibilities from caregivers to patients. The purpose of the present study was to test the feasibility of a pilot intervention aiming to facilitate the transition in health care responsibilities from caregivers to patients while patients are still receiving pediatric services. Twenty-two patients were enrolled in a two-session educational protocol aiming to facilitate transition of responsibility. Patients were recruited from an outpatient transplant clinic. Ten were referred because of suspected difficulty in transitioning of care, and 12 were consecutively recruited without any specific a priori concerns. Medication adherence, measured through the use of standard deviations of tacrolimus blood levels, and ALT levels were the medical outcome measures. Complete data are available for 20 patients. Mean ALT levels improved after the follow-up period. For referred patients, adherence and ALT levels improved. Standard deviation of tacrolimus decreased from 3.33 to 2.23, t = 2.52, p = 0.04. Mean ALT decreased from 120.33 to 63.99, t = 3.01, p = 0.01. Maximal ALT values decreased overall from 284.10 to 101.20, t = 2.61, p = 0.03. Our findings suggest that targeted education regarding transition in responsibility for adolescents' own health care is feasible in the outpatient environment and may assist families who are facing this potentially challenging process. A randomized, controlled study with a substantial number of enrolled patients is needed to establish the efficacy of this or other approaches.

17885569
Childhood abuse, nonadherence, and medical outcome in pediatric liver transplant recipients.
The study assessed the relationship between a history of child abuse, nonadherence to medications, and medical outcome in children who had a liver transplant. Abuse history for children and adolescents ages 8 to 21 who underwent a liver transplantation at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York was obtained in interviews in 2002. Adherence to tacrolimus was assessed from January 1 to December 31, 2003 by computing the SD of a series of medication blood levels for each patient. Biopsy-proven rejection episodes, degree of fluctuation of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and maximal ALT levels were recorded as indicators of medical outcome. Of 72 eligible patients, 56 were evaluated. Five had documented abuse. Abused children were less adherent to their medication regimen (p = .02; 95% confidence interval [CI] -2.66 to -0.24), had poor disease control (higher maximal ALT, p <.01; 95% CI -613.72 to -249.55), had greater fluctuation in ALT levels (p <.01; 95% CI -151.19 to -65.91), and suffered more biopsy-proven rejection episodes (two episodes in the abused cohort versus none in the rest) in 2003. A history of child abuse is a significant risk factor for poor outcome posttransplantation and should be evaluated routinely. Adherence to medications can be a target for intervention in patients with a history of abuse.

17663682
Adherence and medical outcomes in pediatric liver transplant recipients who transition to adult services.
Non-adherence to medications is associated with poor medical outcomes in adolescent transplant recipients. It is unclear whether non-adherence is further compromised when transplant recipients transition to the adult health care system. The purpose of the present study was to examine whether adherence changes during transition. We reviewed the medical records of 14 recently transitioned patients and compared their adherence and corresponding medical outcomes before and after transition. These outcomes were also compared with two cohorts of patients receiving care solely in pediatric or adult services. Medication adherence, measured through the use of standard deviations of tacrolimus blood levels, was examined for all patients. We found that adherence to tacrolimus significantly decreased after transition. After transitioning, patients furthermore exhibited poorer adherence than patients in the other two cohorts did over time. This small retrospective study suggests that the period of transition from pediatric to adult transplant clinics is a vulnerable one. Larger, prospective investigations of the transition process are necessary before recommendations are made regarding interventions.

18435607
Improving adherence to medications in pediatric liver transplant recipients.
We describe results from a clinical program, which aimed at improving adherence to medications in children who had a liver transplant. We followed the medical outcomes of 23 children and adolescents who participated in a clinical adherence-improvement protocol during the years 2001-2002. The protocol included identification of non-adherent patients by examining tacrolimus blood levels and intervention by increasing the frequency of clinic visits for non-adherent patients. In the two-yr preintervention (1999-2000), there was no improvement in any of the outcomes. After the intervention, the number of patients with high alanine aminotransferase levels (100 and above) decreased significantly, from eight before the intervention to four afterwards. Other outcomes, including the number of rejection episodes (three before, none after) and the degree of adherence to tacrolimus, also improved, but the improvement did not reach statistical significance. Although non-adherent patients were called to clinic more often under the protocol, the intervention did not lead to increased outpatient costs. This adherence--improvement intervention appears to be promising in improving outcomes in pediatric liver transplant recipients. Larger, controlled studies are needed to establish the efficacy of this or other approaches.

