21461387
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck is an epidemic that reaches all parts of the world. Making the diagnosis relies on the acumen of the clinician and pathologist. Various pathologic subtypes exist and differ in histology and prognosis. High-risk tumors need aggressive treatment and vigilant surveillance to monitor for recurrence. Large tumors, deep tissue invasion, perineural involvement, recurrence, location in high-risk areas, and immunosuppression are implicated in worsening prognosis. Surgery is the mainstay of treatment with adjuvant radiation therapy as needed for aggressive tumors; however, other modalities are potentially useful for low-risk lesions. The use of Mohs surgery has become increasingly useful and has shown high success rates. Involvement of parotid and neck lymph nodes significantly affects outcomes and the physician should be comfortable with management of this complex disease. This paper examines the diagnosis, pathology, clinical course, and treatment options for cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.

21339401
The role of reconstruction for transoral robotic pharyngectomy and concomitant neck dissection.
To evaluate the impact of primary reconstruction of postablative defects following transoral robotic surgery on function and the risk of orocutaneous fistula. Prospective nonrandomized clinical trial. Tertiary academic medical center. Thirty-one patients treated with transoral robotic pharyngectomy for malignant disease. Each case was analyzed for patient age, sex, primary site of the tumor, pathologic characteristics, stage of disease, complications, fistula rate, and functional outcomes. Functional outcomes were assessed using the Performance Status Scale for Head and Neck Cancer Patients and the Functional Oral Intake Scale. In 25 patients, the primary treatment was with transoral robotic pharyngectomy, and 6 cases were salvage procedures performed for recurrent disease following radiation (3 patients) or chemoradiation (3 patients). Twenty-six patients underwent a concomitant unilateral selective neck dissection, and 3 patients underwent concomitant bilateral selective neck dissections; 2 patients did not require a neck dissection for treatment of the primary malignant tumor. Complication rate, fistula rate, and oral function. Primary intraoral reconstruction was performed in all 31 patients. Musculomucosal advancement flap pharyngoplasty was performed in 25 patients with a concomitant velopharyngopasty (6 patients), and radial forearm free flap reconstruction was performed in 6 patients. There were no intraoperative complications; however, postoperatively, 1 patient developed a neck hematoma that was treated with bedside drainage and 4 patients sustained minor musculomucosal flap necrosis of the superior aspect of the flap. None of the patients developed a neck infection of salivary fistula. Endoscopic evaluation of swallowing demonstrated that none of the patients experienced aspiration or velopharyngeal reflux, and the performance Status Scale for Head and Neck Cancer Patients and the Functional Oral Intake Scale at 2 weeks, 2 months, 6 months, 9 months, and 1 year demonstrated a progressive improvement in diet, swallowing, and oral function. Primary transoral robotic reconstruction may provide a benefit by decreasing the fistula rate in patients undergoing concomitant neck dissection. Patients regain excellent function following surgery and adjuvant therapy.

21246519
Phase 1 trial of concurrent erlotinib, celecoxib, and reirradiation for recurrent head and neck cancer.
BACKGROUND: Concurrent inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is an active and well tolerated regimen in recurrent head and neck cancer (HNC). In the current phase 1 trial, the authors sought to determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and efficacy of concurrent erlotinib and celecoxib as a radiosensitizing regimen. METHODS: Fourteen patients with previously irradiated HNC with no distant metastases who required reirradiation were eligible. Treatment consisted of daily erlotinib 150 mg and twice daily celecoxib (escalated from 200 mg to 600 mg using a 3 + 3 design with an expanded cohort at the MTD) starting on Day 1 and was continued during radiation. Daily radiation was started on Day 15, and maintenance erlotinib was recommended. RESULTS: The recommended phase 2 dose of celecoxib was 400 mg. Three dose-limiting toxicities included late in-field orocutaneous fistula (Dose Level 2), osteonecrosis (Dose Level 3), and trismus (Dose Level 3). Acute grade ?3 toxicities were uncommon and included mucositis (21%) and dermatitis (14%). At a median follow-up of 11 months, the 1-year locoregional control, progression-free survival, and overall survival rates were 60%, 37%, and 55%, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Concurrent erlotinib, celecoxib, and reirradiation was a feasible and clinically active regimen in a population of patients with recurrent HNC who had a poor prognosis. Cancer 2011. © 2011 American Cancer Society.

21046586
Syphilitic lymphadenitis diagnosed via fine needle aspiration biopsy.
Syphilis is coming back in the recent a few decades especially in the gay and HIV populations. Since syphilis can be "the great mimic" clinically and pathologically, a case report with updated review can be helpful to the medical community. We report, a case of syphilitic lymphadenitis diagnosed via fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB). The pitfalls associated with the diagnosis of syphilitic lymphadenitis will be discussed.The patient's medical records were reviewed. The pertinent history, clinical course, and ancillary studies including FNAB cytology with special stains are presented. In addition to the case report, we discuss the diagnosis of syphilitic lymphadenitis and the role of FNAB cytology.This was a 37-year-old man presenting with a two-month history of a growing neck mass, night sweats, and a ten pound weight loss. The patient had been treated one month earlier for primary syphilis. Examination of the head and neck revealed a 3 cm right level II mass. FNAB cytology showed heterogeneous population of lymphocytes and plasma cells suggesting reactive changes. Modified silver staining of the cell block slide was performed and revealed spirochetes, consistent with syphilis. The patient's lymphadenitis resolved with a course of antibiotic treatment.Although lymphadenopathy is a rare presentation of syphilis, it should be included in the differential diagnosis for patients who offer a suspect history. FNAB with silver staining is an effective, minimally invasive way to confirm the diagnosis. Diagn. Cytopathol. 2010. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

20833855
FDG PET with contrast-enhanced CT: a critical imaging tool for laryngeal carcinoma.
Fluorine 18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) has evolved to be an essential imaging modality in the evaluation of laryngeal carcinoma. Although the modality has limited utility in assessing the extent of the primary tumor, FDG PET has proved to be superior to anatomic modalities in the detection of lymph node and distant metastases. The role of FDG PET in the evaluation of patients with laryngeal tumors that are clinically classified as N0 has not shown consistent usefulness because of the innate resolution limitations of the camera. In the posttherapy setting, however, FDG PET has consistently demonstrated a high negative predictive value in the identification of recurrent disease, both during the course of therapy and during long-term follow-up. In addition, contrast material-enhanced computed tomography (CT) in conjunction with FDG PET has demonstrated a complementary role by allowing for superior anatomic coregistration and therefore more definitive diagnosis. There is sufficient evidence that with further advances in PET technology, this modality will likely become more useful in the detection of small lesions and occult nodal disease, as well as in guiding the management of laryngeal carcinoma.

20830768
Phase 2 trial of concurrent 5-fluorouracil, hydroxyurea, cetuximab, and hyperfractionated intensity-modulated radiation therapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer.
The objective of this phase 2 study was to evaluate the tolerability and efficacy of incorporating cetuximab and simultaneous integrated-boost (SIB), intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) into a well described 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and hydroxyurea (HU)-based chemoradiation regimen. Patients with stage IVA and IVB or high-risk stage III squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck were enrolled on a phase 2 trial. Prior organ-conserving surgery or induction chemotherapy was allowed off protocol. SIB-IMRT was prescribed to low-risk volumes (43.2 gray [Gy] to 48 Gy) and intermediate-risk volumes (54-63 Gy). A separate IMRT cone-down plan was targeted to macroscopic disease (72 Gy). The median radiation dose was 72 Gy (range, 60-72 Gy) administered in 1.5 Gy fractions twice daily during Weeks 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9. Concurrent systemic therapy consisted of 5-FU (600 mg/m²), HU (500 mg twice daily), and cetuximab (250 mg/m²). From January 2007 through April 2008, 33 patients were enrolled. At a median follow-up of 24 months, the 2-year rates of locoregional control, distant control, disease-free survival, and overall survival were 83%, 79%, 69%, and 86%, respectively. Grade 3 toxicity consisted of mucositis in 33% of patients, radiation dermatitis in 15%of patients, anemia in 18% of patients, leukopenia in 18% of patients, neutropenia in 12% of patients, and thrombocytopenia in 3% of patients. Most patients (64%) were able to tolerate treatment without a feeding tube, and there were no acute or late grade ?4 adverse events. The current results indicated that concurrent 5-FU, HU, and cetuximab plus SIB-IMRT is a promising and reasonably well tolerated approach to incorporating molecularly targeted therapy into curative therapy for patients with locally advanced head and neck cancer.

20231587
Reconstruction of the mandible and the maxilla: the evolution of surgical technique.
The upper and lower jaws play an essential role in mastication, articulation, and cosmetic form. The mandible provides support for tongue position and elevation of the larynx during swallowing, while the maxilla provides support for the nasal structures as well as an opposing structure to the mandible during mastication. The evolution of mandibular and maxillary reconstruction dates back to the early 19th century. Before the introduction of free tissue transfer, a variety of local flaps, regional flaps, and prosthetics were introduced, yet each was met with eventual failure. Since the introduction of free tissue transfer, mandibular and maxillary reconstruction has become as much of an art as it has a science. Whether the mandibular or the palatomaxillary defects are a result of trauma, congenital deformity, or tumor extirpation, the resultant effect often disrupts both form and function. With these considerations taken together, jaw reconstruction is a unique undertaking in which the artistic reconstruction of the facial skeleton is met with the science of reestablishing the mechanics of mastication. The site, size, and associated soft-tissue defects represent the 3 most important factors in determining the impact of a given defect on function and aesthetics. There is also an inherent difference between defects that are sustained in a controlled fashion, such as during cancer ablation, and those that result from trauma. The consideration of these complexities in jaw reconstruction is reflected in the wide variety of approaches and techniques that have evolved over the past century.

20155361
Contemporary management of cancer of the oral cavity.
Oral cancer represents a common entity comprising a third of all head and neck malignant tumors. The options for curative treatment of oral cavity cancer have not changed significantly in the last three decades; however, the work up, the approach to surveillance, and the options for reconstruction have evolved significantly. Because of the profound functional and cosmetic importance of the oral cavity, management of oral cavity cancers requires a thorough understanding of disease progression, approaches to management and options for reconstruction. The purpose of this review is to discuss the most current management options for oral cavity cancers.

19544537
The diagnostic and prognostic utility of positron emission tomography/computed tomography-based follow-up after radiotherapy for head and neck cancer.
The detection of subclinical head and neck cancer recurrence or a second primary tumor may improve survival. In the current study, the authors investigated the clinical value of a follow-up program incorporating serial (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography integrated with computed tomography (PET/CT) in the detection of recurrent disease in patients with head and neck cancer. A total of 240 PET/CT scans were reviewed in 80 patients with head and neck cancer who were treated with radiotherapy (RT) from July, 2005 through August, 2007. All patients were followed with clinical examination, PET/CT, and correlative imaging for a minimum of 11 months (median follow-up, 21 months). The sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values of PET/CT-based follow-up for detecting locoregional recurrence were 92%, 82%, 42%, and 98%, respectively. Corresponding values for distant metastases or second primary tumors were 93%, 96%, 81%, and 98%, respectively. Eight patients (10%) developed disease recurrences or second primary tumors that were amenable to salvage surgery with negative surgical margins. The 2-year progression-free survival and 2-year overall survival rates were significantly different between patients who had a negative and those with a positive PET/CT result within 6 months of the completion of RT (93% vs 30% [P<.001] and 100% vs 32% [P<.001], respectively). Although post-therapy follow-up using PET/CT is reportedly associated with a high false-positive rate in the irradiated head and neck, PET/CT appears to be a highly sensitive technique for the detection of recurrent disease. Furthermore, negative PET/CT results within 6 months of the completion of RT offer significant prognostic value.

19393949
Facial transplantation: the next frontier in head and neck reconstruction.
Facial reconstruction poses a unique surgical challenge-restoring the aesthetic form and function of the face. Established techniques for reconstruction include skin grafts, local cutaneous tissue flaps, and free flap autografts. The anatomic complexity of the face renders it challenging, however, to obtain a successful cosmetic and functional result. The success of recent hand, knee joint, and larynx allotransplantation and advances in immunosuppressive regimens have pushed the technical frontiers of composite tissue transfer to include partial facial transplantation. This article reviews current techniques for reconstruction of facial defects, with a focus on the microsurgical, immunologic, and ethical considerations of facial allotransplantation.

19130975
Transoral robotic assisted free flap reconstruction.


19031407
Selective neck dissection following adjuvant therapy for advanced head and neck cancer.
In the past, surgeons believed that in order to eradicate regional disease, a radical or modified radical neck dissection was necessary. An evolution in surgical principles and the popularization of primary chemoradiation has raised the questions regarding the role of neck dissection and the extent of neck dissection following therapy. The aim of this study was to determine the efficacy of selective neck dissection (SND) for patients with N2 or N3 disease following treatment with primary radiation therapy or chemoradiation. A retrospective review of 58 patients with stage III or IV head and neck squamous cell carcinoma was conducted. The primary sites included base of tongue (n = 15), hypopharynx (n = 12), tonsil (n = 16), larynx (n = 11), and unknown primary (n = 4). Definitive treatment consisted of either concomitant chemoradiation (67.2%) or external beam radiation therapy (32.8%). In the monotherapy group, all patients received a total curative dose of 66 to 72 Gy in once-daily fractions of 180 to 200 cGy. The combined chemoradiation group received a similar radiation schedule and a 4-day continuous infusion of cisplatin (20 mg/m(2)/day) and 5-fluorouracil (1000 mg/m(2)/day). A planned SND of levels II to IV was performed on all the patients 3 to 6 weeks after completion of definitive medical therapy. Seventy neck dissections were performed on 58 patients with advanced neck disease following radiation or chemoradiation. The median time of follow-up was 34 months (range, 9-71 months) following the neck dissection. Pathologically, 22.4% (13/58) of the patients had viable tumor cells identified in the neck dissection specimen. Seventy-two percent of the patients are currently alive, and 28% died as a result of distant disease, local or regional recurrence, or other causes. Of patients who died from distant disease, 11% had pathological evidence of residual tumor cells identified in the neck dissection specimen. Of patients who died from local or regional disease, 50% had pathological evidence of residual tumor cells identified in the neck dissection specimen. The rate of regional recurrence following SND is similar to reported rates following modified/radical neck dissection. This suggests that SND provides an appropriate surgical option for advanced neck disease in select patients following adjuvant therapy.

19029867
Transoral robotic surgery using a carbon dioxide flexible laser for tumors of the upper aerodigestive tract.
To determine the safety, feasibility, and efficacy of coupling transoral robotic technology with the flexible carbon dioxide (CO2) laser for various tumors of the oropharynx and supraglottic larynx. Prospective, pilot trial. Eight patients were enrolled in an IRB-approved prospective trial for transoral robotic surgery with the aid of the flexible CO2 laser. Seven male patients with early carcinoma of the oropharynx or larynx successfully underwent tumor extirpation with the transoral robot and the flexible CO2 laser. We were unable to gain access to the supraglottic larynx in one female patient. The final pathology revealed seven patients with squamous cell carcinoma and one patient with adenoid cystic carcinoma. The flexible CO2 laser provided fine incisions with excellent hemostasis and minimal peripheral tissue injury. Additionally, the laser provided an excellent tool for raising pharyngeal flaps for reconstruction of the oropharynx. The flexible CO2 laser offers a unique advantage of precise incisions and may provide a valuable tool for both tumor extirpation and the creation of flaps for transoral robotic reconstruction.

18972413
Transoral robotic surgery for the management of head and neck cancer: a preliminary experience.
The aim of this prospective study was to determine the technical feasibility, safety, and efficacy of transoral robotic surgery (TORS) for a variety of malignant head and neck lesions. From April 2007 to November 2007, 20 patients were enrolled in an institutional review board-approved prospective trial using the daVinci surgical robot. Inclusion criteria for the study consisted of adults with early head and neck cancer involving the oral cavity, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx. Twenty patients were included in this study. In 2 cases, access to the tumor was inadequate and the procedure was terminated. In all 18 cases, negative resection margins were achieved. Intraoral reconstruction was performed in 8 patients. Fifteen of 18 patients underwent concomitant unilateral (n = 10) or bilateral (n = 5) selective neck dissections. None of the patients required tracheotomy and there were no intraoperative or postoperative complications. The average setup time was 54.6 minutes (range, 140-20 minutes), with a precipitous decrease in the setup time as the study progressed. TORS is a safe, feasible, and minimally invasive alternative to classic open surgery or endoscopic transoral laser surgery in patients with early cancer of the head and neck. With increasing experience, surgical setup as well as operative time will continue to decrease.

18849862
Transoral robotic surgery using an image guidance system.
To describe a novel technique using the image guidance system for transoral robotic surgery of the pharyngeal and parapharyngeal spaces. Case series presentation. Three cases of oropharyngeal and pharyngeal space lesions are reviewed for presentation, workup, and original management. Final pathology of a vascular malformation, an acinic cell adenocarcinoma, and a squamous cell carcinoma were located and minimally invasively removed by a transoral robotic approach with the aid of image guidance. No complications or recurrences were observed on an average of 7 month follow-up. Transoral robotic surgery using an image guidance system seems safe and effective in assisting dissection.

18794447
A rare prevertebral ordinary lipoma presenting as obstructive sleep apnea: computed tomographic and magnetic resonance imaging findings.


18722228
The administration of IL-12/GM-CSF and Ig-4-1BB ligand markedly decreases murine floor of mouth squamous cell cancer.
To assess immune-based gene therapy in a murine floor of mouth (FOM) squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) model. In vitro and in vivo testing of immune therapy for SCC. Multiple SCC lines were infected by using advRSV-interleukin-12 (IL-12) and advCMV-interleukin-12/granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (IL-12/GM-CSF) and monitored for production of IL-12 and GM-CSF. Intratumoral injections of viral vectors were administered with systemic Ig-4-1BB ligand in an orthotopic murine FOM SCC model and followed for tumor size and survival. In vitro, all cell lines produced substantial levels of IL-12 and GM-CSF. In vivo, tumors treated with advCMV-IL-12/GM-CSF and Ig-4-1BBL showed a striking reduction in tumor volume (vs control P<0.0001) and improved median survival (38 days vs 19 days for control, P<0.0001). Combination immune-based therapies effectively improve survival in mice bearing FOM SCC over single-modality therapy.

18424979
Combined endoscope-assisted transclival clipping and endovascular stenting of a basilar trunk aneurysm: case report.
We describe a patient with a mid-basilar aneurysm treated with combined endoscope-assisted transsphenoidal clipping and endovascular stenting. A 28-year-old woman was transferred to the cranial base surgery center with an acute Grade III subarachnoid hemorrhage. Cerebral angiography demonstrated a small basilar trunk aneurysm that was not amenable to acute endovascular treatment. The patient underwent sublabial transsphenoidal/transclival endoscope-assisted clipping of the aneurysm and subsequent stenting of the affected segment. The aneurysm was repaired with a low-profile Weck clip (Weck Closure Systems Research, Triangle Park, NC) that permitted a watertight closure of the clival dura using cardiac Medtronic U-clips (Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN). Postoperatively, the patient had no evidence of cerebrospinal fluid leakage. Watertight dural closure was possible due to the use of a low-profile aneurysm clip that did not protrude through the dural defect, as well as self-tying sutures.

18258379
Correlation of positron emission tomography standard uptake value and pathologic specimen size in cancer of the head and neck.
To correlate positron emission tomography (PET) standard uptake value (SUV) with pathologic specimen size in patients with head-and-neck cancers. Eighteen patients with Stage II-IVB head-and-neck cancer with 27 tumors who underwent PET and computed tomography (CT) imaging of the head and neck followed by surgical resection were selected for this study. Various SUV thresholds were examined, including the software default (SUV(def)), narrowing the window by 1 standard deviation (SD) of the maximum (SUV-1SD), and SUV cutoff values of 2.5 or greater (SUV2.5) and 40% or greater maximum (SUV40). Volumetric pathologic data were available for 12 patients. Tumor volumes based on pathologic examination (gold standard), CT, SUV(def), SUV-1SD, SUV2.5, and SUV40 were analyzed. PET identified five tumors not seen on CT. The sensitivity of PET for identifying primary tumors was 94% (17 of 18). The Sensitivity of PET for staging the neck was 90% (9 of 10), whereas the specificity was 78% (7 of 9). The SUV2.5 method was most likely to overestimate tumor volume, whereas SUV(def) and SUV-1SD were most likely to underestimate tumor volume. The PET scan provides more accurate staging of primary tumors and nodal metastases for patients with advanced head-and-neck cancer than CT alone. Compared with the gold standard, significant variability exists in volumes obtained by using various SUV thresholds. A combination of clinical, CT, and PET data should continue to be used for optimal treatment planning. The SUV40 method appears to offer the best compromise between accuracy and reducing the risk of underestimating tumor extent.

18164833
Adjuvant radiotherapy and survival for patients with node-positive head and neck cancer: an analysis by primary site and nodal stage.
Adjuvant radiotherapy (RT) is frequently recommended for node-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) treated with primary surgery. The impact of RT on survival for various subgroups of node-positive HNSCC has not been clearly demonstrated. Within the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Database, we identified 5297 patients with node-positive (N1 to N3) HNSCC treated with definitive surgery with or without adjuvant RT between 1988 and 2001. The median follow-up was 4.4 years. Adjuvant RT significantly improved 5-year overall survival (46.3%: 95% confidence interval [CI], 44.7-48.0% for surgery + RT, vs. 35.2%: 95% CI, 32.0-38.5% for surgery alone, p < 0.001) and cancer-specific survival (54.8%: 95% CI, 53.2-56.4% for surgery + RT, vs. 46.2% for surgery alone 95% CI, 42.4-50.0%, p < 0.05). Use of adjuvant RT remained a significant predictor of survival on multivariable analysis (hazard ratio [HR], 0.75; 95% CI, 0.68-0.83; p < 0.001). Subset analyses demonstrated that adjuvant RT was associated with significantly improved survival for N1 (HR, 0.78; 95% CI; 0.67-0.90; p = 0.001), N2a (HR, 0.82; 95% CI, 0.67-0.99, p = 0.048) and N2b to N3 nodal disease (HR, 0.62; 95% CI, 0.51-0.75; p < 0.001). Adjuvant RT increased overall survival for node-positive patients with oropharynx (HR, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.57-0.90; p = 0.004), hypopharynx (HR, 0.66; 95% CI, 0.49 to 0.88; p = 0.004), larynx (HR, 0.66; 95% CI, 0.52-0.84; p = 0.001), and oral cavity (HR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.73-0.98; p = 0.025) primary tumors. In a large population-based analysis, adjuvant RT significantly improves overall survival for patients with node-positive HNSCC. All nodal stages, including N1, appear to benefit from the addition of RT to definitive surgery.

18076014
Adjuvant radiotherapy improves overall survival for patients with lymph node-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Although adjuvant radiotherapy (RT) is often recommended for locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (HNSCC), its effect on overall or cancer-specific survival has not been clearly demonstrated. In the current study, the frequency and effect of adjuvant RT on overall survival was investigated in patients with resected lymph node-positive head and neck cancer. Within the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database, patients were selected with lymph node-positive HNSCC (American Joint Committee on Cancer and SEER stage 3/4) who were treated either with surgery alone or surgery and RT and were diagnosed between 1988 and 2001. A total of 8795 patients who met the inclusion criteria for analysis comprised the study population, with a median follow-up of 4.3 years for patients still alive at the time of last follow-up. Adjuvant RT was utilized in 84% of patients. Adjuvant RT improved the 5-year overall survival (43.2% [95% confidence interval (95% CI), 41.9-44.4%] for surgery + RT vs 33.4% [95% CI, 30.7-36.0%] for surgery alone; P < .001) and cancer-specific survival (50.9% for surgery + RT vs 42.1% for surgery) on univariate analysis. On multivariate analysis, adjuvant RT (hazards ratio [HR] of 0.78; 95% CI, 0.71-0.86 [P < .001]) remained a significant predictor of improved survival. The significant benefit of radiation on overall survival was noted for lymph node-positive patients with both primary tumors localized to the involved organ (HR of 0.81; 95% CI, 0.71-0.94 [P = .007]) and more locally invasive primary tumors (HR of 0.77; 95% CI, 0.68-0.87 [P < .001]). In what to the authors' knowledge is the largest reported analysis of adjuvant RT in patients with locally advanced HNSCC published to date, adjuvant RT resulted in an approximately 10% absolute increase in 5-year cancer-specific survival and overall survival for patients with lymph node-positive HNSCC compared with surgery alone. Despite combined surgery and adjuvant RT, outcomes in this high-risk population remain suboptimal, emphasizing the need for continued investigation of innovative treatment approaches.

18043494
Combined VSV oncolytic virus and chemotherapy for squamous cell carcinoma.
Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) is a negative-strand ribonucleic acid (RNA) virus that replicates specifically in tumor cells and has oncolytic effects in a variety of malignant tumors. We previously demonstrated recombinant VSV vectors incorporating viral fusion protein (rVSV-F) and interleukin 12 (rVSV-IL12) to have significant antitumor effects against squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in a murine model. Here we evaluate the potential to combine a potent chemotherapeutic agent for SCC (cisplatin) with rVSV-F and rVSV-IL12 to improve efficacy. In vitro, three SCC cell lines were tested using rVSV-F and rVSV-IL12 with cisplatin, monitoring viral replication and cell survival. In an orthotopic floor of mouth murine SCC model, intratumoral injections of virus combined with systemic cisplatin were tested for tumor control and animal survival. In vitro, virus and cisplatin combination demonstrated rapid replication and enhanced tumor cell kill. Human keratinocytes were unaffected by virus and cisplatin. In vivo, combined rVSV-F with cisplatin reduced tumor burden and improved survival (P = .2 for both), while rVSV-IL12 monotherapy had better tumor control (P = .06) and survival (P = .024) than combination therapy. Addition of cisplatin did not affect the ability of either virus to replicate in or kill murine SCC cells in vitro. In vivo, combination therapy enhancedrVSV-F antitumor activity, but diminished rVSV-IL12 antitumor activity. Combination therapy may provide useful treatment for SCC with the development of more efficient viral vectors in combination with different chemotherapy agents or immunostimulatory agents.

17988195
Metastasis of uterine leiomyosarcoma to the thyroid gland: case report and review of the literature.
Metastasis of uterine leiomyosarcoma to the thyroid is extremely rare. Only three cases have been previously reported. We present a case of uterine leiomyosarcoma metastatic to the thyroid gland and review the current literature on this topic.

17972312
Vessel-depleted neck: techniques for achieving microvascular reconstruction.
In the neck, the recipient vessels most frequently used for microsurgical reconstruction are compromised by prior surgery and radiation. We conducted a retrospective chart review of all patients who underwent microvascular reconstruction between July 2001 and June 2005. Donor vessels, vein grafts, and flap survival were examined. Fourteen of 197 patients (7%) were identified with a vessel-depleted neck. All patients had undergone a prior neck dissection and radiation (100%) or chemoradiation (42%). Free flap revascularization was achieved using the transverse cervical artery with a vein graft and a cephalic vein (4 patients), thoracoacromial artery and cephalic vein (3 patients), internal mammary artery and vein (3 patients), and inferior thyroid artery and cephalic vein (1 case). In 3 patients, the reverse flow thoracodorsal artery and cephalic vein were used to vascularize the scapular flap. The cephalic vein, transverse cervical, internal mammary, and thoracoacromial vessels represent reliable alternatives in the vessel-depleted neck.

17956165
Extended tracheal stenosis secondary to a massive substernal goiter.


17902151
Recent changes in the treatment of patients with advanced laryngeal cancer.
Since the original data from the Department of Veterans Affairs Laryngeal Cancer Study Group demonstrated that nonsurgical therapy could achieve survival rates comparable to total laryngectomy in selected cases, there has been a progressive increase in employment of nonsurgical therapy for the management of advanced laryngeal cancer. Both neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by conventionally fractionated or hyperfractioned radiotherapy for chemotherapy responders, or simultaneously administered chemoradiation has resulted in a significant number of patients who achieved cure while preserving their larynges. Nevertheless, combined chemotherapy and external beam radiation is associated with a variety of acute and chronic sequelae that can have a debilitating impact on function and quality of life. Although no therapeutic option is without risk, the decision regarding the modality of therapy for a patient with advanced laryngeal cancer should prompt a careful review of the current surgical techniques available for treatment. Data on quality of life and aging, as well as advances in minimally invasive surgical techniques, are available today that were not available at the time of the Veterans study. Selection of optimal therapy is often complex and raises the question whether the pendulum may have swung too far in the direction of nonsurgical therapy for advanced laryngeal cancer. This article reviews the current options available for a patient with advanced laryngeal cancer and discusses the impact of therapy.

17725439
Parathymic parathyroid adenoma.


17696843
Goitrous Hashimoto's thyroiditis presenting as obstructive sleep apnea.


17621627
KLF6 allelic loss is associated with tumor recurrence and markedly decreased survival in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
The Krüppel-like transcription factor (KLF6) gene is a tumor suppressor gene (TSG) reported to be dysregulated and inactivated through loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and/or somatic mutation in a number of major human cancers. The aim of the present study was to examine KLF6 gene status and expression in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). A collection of 81 well-characterized oral and oropharyngeal HNSCC samples were analyzed for evidence of KLF6 LOH and mutation and differences in expression patterns between normal and cancerous tissues and these findings were correlated with clinicopathological variables. We also tested the effect of KLF6 inhibition in HNSCC cell lines on proliferation and p21 expression. LOH was found in approximately 30% of cases and was strongly correlated with cancer progression, tumor recurrence and decreased patient survival. Overall, median survival of patients with LOH was less than half (19 vs. 41 months, p=0.036, stratified on stage) than those without loss. Risk of death for patients with LOH was 8 times greater independent of tumor size, nodal status, tobacco smoking or treatment modality (HR 7.89, 95% CI: 1.9-32.4). Subsequent analyses revealed KLF6 mutations in only 2 of 20 samples, but altered subcellular protein localization in 64% of tumors. Targeted stable reduction of KLF6 in HNSCC cell lines increased cellular proliferation while decreasing p21 expression. Taken together, these findings suggest that KLF6 LOH represents a clinically-relevant biomarker predicting patient survival and tumor recurrence and that dysregulation of KLF6 function plays an important role in HNSCC progression.

17478221
Fusogenic vesicular stomatitis virus for the treatment of head and neck squamous carcinomas.
This study investigates the efficacy of recombinant fusogenic VSV [rVSV-NDV/F(L289A) or rVSV-F] in the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). The in vitro replication and cytotoxicity of rVSV-F were studied in two human SCC cell lines, in one murine SCC cell line, and in human keratinocytes. The effects on tumor size and animal survival were investigated following in vivo rVSV-F treatment of floor-of-mouth tumor model C3H/HeJ mice. Recombinant VSV-F preferentially induced rapid syncytia formation, and replicated in (P < 0.04) and killed (P < 1 x 10(-13)) all three SCC lines tested. The virus had no observable effect on human keratinocytes. Tumor size was smaller (P < 0.03) and overall survival was better (P < 0.001) for treated animals than for control animals. Recombinant VSV-F confers a modest survival benefit for HNSCC in this orthotopic murine model. This oncolytic virus holds promise as a novel cancer treatment for recurrent HNSCC.

17204993
Interleukin-12 expression enhances vesicular stomatitis virus oncolytic therapy in murine squamous cell carcinoma.
Replication-competent, vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) has been demonstrated to be an effective oncolytic agent in a variety of malignant tumors. Cytokine gene transfer has also been used as immunomodulatory therapy for cancer. To test the use of combining these two approaches, an oncolytic VSV vector (rVSV-IL12) was designed to express the murine interleukin 12 (IL12) gene. This cytokine-carrying oncolytic virus was compared with an analogous noncytokine-carrying fusogenic virus (rVSV-F) in the treatment of murine SCC VII squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). The authors performed in vitro testing of recombinant VSV-F and recombinant VSV-IL12 in SCC cell lines. In vivo testing of multiple direct intratumoral injections of rVSV-F or rVSV-IL12 in an orthotopic floor of mouth murine model was performed. Each cell line was tested using rVSV-F or rVSV-IL12 at multiplicity of infection of 0.01. The ability of each virus to replicate was tested by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction over 48 hours to determine viral copies of RNA. Cell survival was determined by MTT assay over 72 hours. IL12 expression by rVSV-IL12-treated cells was determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Both viruses demonstrated similar infection efficiency, viral replication, and cytotoxicity in vitro. In an SCC VII orthotopic floor of mouth model in immunocompetent C3H/HeJ mice, multiple intratumoral injections with each virus caused a significant reduction in tumor volume when compared with saline injections alone. The rVSV-IL12-treated tumors showed a striking reduction in tumor volume when compared with rVSV-F and saline-treated tumors (P < .005). This striking reduction in tumor volume translated into a substantial survival benefit in rVSV-IL12-treated animals. No treatment-related toxicity was observed in either group. rVSV-IL12 is a novel oncolytic vesicular stomatitis virus that effectively expresses IL12 and significantly enhances the treatment of head and neck murine carcinoma. Such combined oncolytic and immunomodulatory strategies hold promise in the treatment of head and neck cancers.

17112771
Evolution of the management of laryngeal cancer.
The treatment of laryngeal cancer has evolved through several phases, starting with wide extirpative surgical resection, and evolving through an era of conservation surgery and, finally, planned treatment using modalities of irradiation, chemotherapy and surgery in various combinations. Attempts to extirpate laryngeal cancer date to the nineteenth century, but only by the mid-twentieth century did advances in anesthesia, blood transfusion and antibiotics, make this surgery safe and reliable. Techniques of partial laryngectomy by external approach developed in the second half of the twentieth century, and endoscopic use of the laser refined the concept and provided a new paradigm for surgical treatment, particularly for early lesions. During most of this era, radiation was employed as an alternative method of treatment, with surgery reserved for salvage of radiation failure. By the last decade of the twentieth century, and to the present time, the value of combined modality therapy, using planned combinations of irradiation, chemotherapy and surgery became the standard of care for advanced laryngeal cancer, permitting maximal laryngeal preservation with the highest attainable cure rates.

19342543
The significance and management of incidental [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose-positron-emission tomography uptake in the thyroid gland in patients with cancer.
Incidental positron-emission tomography (PET) uptake in the thyroid bed represents a diagnostic dilemma. Currently, there is no consensus regarding the significance of this finding or the most appropriate approach to management. The purpose of this study was to determine the significance of incidental fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the thyroid gland on [(18)F]FDG-positron-emission tomography (FDG-PET/CT) in patients being initially staged for lymphomas and/or cancers other than of thyroid origin. A retrospective review was conducted on patients who were incidentally found to have focal FDG uptake in the thyroid bed on initial staging for cancer. Patient records were assessed for age, sex, clinical presentation, standard uptake values (SUV(max)), on FDG-PET/CT, and CT findings in those patients undergoing FDG-PET/CT, fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology, and surgical pathologic examination. Thirty patients were identified with incidental FDG-PET uptake in the thyroid bed from 630 studies performed for evaluation of cancer between March 2004 and June 2006. Complete records were available for 18 patients (6 men, 12 women). Five (27.8%) of 18 patients with incidental focal FDG-PET/CT uptake in the thyroid gland demonstrated papillary thyroid carcinoma on final pathologic findings. The mean and SD of SUV(max) was 3.0 +/- 1.8 (range, 1.1-7.4) overall, 2.9 +/- 1.6 (range, 1.1-6.8) in the patients without malignant growth, and 3.4 +/- 2.6 (range, 1.1-7.4) in the 5 patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma. No statistical difference in SUV(max) was noted between patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma and patients with benign pathologic findings (P = .63). Incidental FDG-PET uptake in the thyroid gland in patients with cancer of nonthyroidal origin is associated with a 27.8% risk for well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma; however, there seems to be no correlation between intensity of FDG uptake and the risk for a malignant process.

18768722
High uptake in schneiderian papillomas of the maxillary sinus on positron-emission tomography using fluorodeoxyglucose.
Schneiderian papillomas are benign tumors of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses often asymptomatic in their early stages. We report a case of a maxillary sinus oncocytic schneiderian papilloma first detected by positron-emission tomography by using fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Schneiderian papillomas demonstrate increased FDG uptake, similar to that of other oncocytic tumors, making it important for otolaryngologists and radiologists to realize that high uptake of FDG does not necessarily indicate a malignant lesion.

