19483473
Differential expression of imprinted genes in normal and IUGR human placentas.
Genomic imprinting refers to silencing of one parental allele in the zygotes of gametes depending upon the parent of origin. Loss of imprinting (LOI) is the gain of function from the silent allele that can have a maximum effect of doubling the gene dosage. LOI may play a significant role in the etiology of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Using placental tissue from ten normal and seven IUGR pregnancies, we conducted a systematic survey of the expression of a panel of 74 "putatively" imprinted genes using quantitative RT-PCR. We found that 52/74 ( approximately 70%) of the genes were expressed in human placentas. Nine of the 52 (17%) expressed genes were significantly differentially expressed between normal and IUGR placentas; five were upregulated (PHLDA2, ILK2, NNAT, CCDC86, PEG10) and four downregulated (PLAGL1, DHCR24, ZNF331, CDKAL1). We also assessed LOI profile of 14 imprinted genes in 14 normal and 24 IUGR placentas using a functional and sensitive assay developed in our laboratory. Little LOI was observed in any placentas for five of the genes (PEG10, PHLDA2, MEG3, EPS15, CD44). With the 149 heterozygosities examined, 40 (26.8%) exhibited LOI >3%. Some genes exhibited frequent LOI in placentas regardless of the disease status (IGF2, TP73, MEST, SLC22A18, PEG3), while others exhibited LOI only in IUGR placentas (PLAGL1, DLK1, H19, SNRPN). Importantly, there was no correlation between gene expression and LOI profile. Our study suggests that genomic imprinting may play a role in IUGR pathogenesis, but mechanisms other than LOI may contribute to dysregulation of imprinted genes.

18769151
A sensitive functional assay reveals frequent loss of genomic imprinting in human placenta.
Loss of imprinting (LOI) is the gain of expression from the silent allele of an imprinted gene normally expressed from only one parental copy. LOI has been associated with neurodevelopmental disorders and reproductive abnormalities. The mechanisms of imprinting are varied, with DNA methylation representing only one. We have developed a functional transcriptional assay for LOI that is not limited to a single mechanism of imprinting. The method employs allele-specific PCR analysis of RT-PCR products containing common readout polymorphisms. With this method, we are able to measure LOI at the sensitivity of 1%. The method has been applied to measurement of LOI in human placentas. We found that RNA was stable in placentas stored for more than one hour at 4 degrees C following delivery. We analyzed a test panel of 26 genes known to be imprinted in the human genome. We found that 18 genes were expressed in placenta. Fourteen of the 18 expressed genes contained common readout polymorphisms in the transcripts with a minor allele frequency >20%. We found that 5 of the 14 genes were not imprinted in placenta. Using the remaining nine genes, we examined 93 heterozygosities in 27 samples. The range of LOI was 0%-96%. Among the 93 heterozygosities, we found 23 examples (25%) had LOI >3% and eight examples (9%) had LOI 1-3%. Our results indicate that LOI is common in human placentas. Because LOI in placenta is common, it may be an important new biomarker for influences on prenatal epigenetics.

