20005485
HIV and CKD epidemiology.
Nephrologists can serve many important functions for HIV-infected patients, including identifying risks for developing kidney disease, detecting and diagnosing kidney disease, distinguishing antiretroviral-induced kidney injury from kidney disease in the setting of antiretroviral therapy, comanaging the clinical course and complications of CKD, and preparing patients for dialysis and/or transplantation. The epidemiology of kidney disease in HIV informs us for these functions by describing the natural history of disease, its frequent occurrence in high-risk communities, and its potential causes. Risk factors that drive CKD in HIV are black race, hypertension, diabetes, HIV viral replication with low CD4 cell counts, high viral load or acquired immune deficiency syndrome-defining conditions, and antiretroviral agents with nephrotoxic potential. The prevalence of these risk factors in any population determines the magnitude of the problem, which can range from as low as 2% to as high as 30%. Recent research focuses on kidney health in HIV. Important links between HIV viral replication and glomerular filtration rate, even in patients with normal kidney function, are now being reported. A review of these data provides the foundation for a better understanding of kidney disease and, hopefully, better treatment for patients with HIV.

19672119
Diminished benefits of drug-eluting stents versus bare metal stents in patients with severe renal insufficiency.
Since their introduction, the use of drug-eluting stents (DES) has increasingly become standard practice due to their decreased rates of in-stent restenosis and target lesion revascularization (TLR) rates in comparison to bare metal stents (BMS). However, these benefits have not been reproduced in patients with severe renal disease (SRD). This study compared TLR rates in patients with severe renal insufficiency treated with DES vs. BMS. Between 2003 and 2006, we collected data on 6,220 consecutive patients receiving either DES or BMS. Both groups were similar in angiographic and clinical variables. TLR rates at 270 days and 1 year were then compared between patients receiving DES or BMS with varying creatinine clearance (CrCl). At 1 year after PCI, TLR rates were significantly lower for DES in patients with CrCl >60 (5 vs. 9.3%; p < 0.0001). However, in patients with CrCl <40 ml/min or on dialysis there was no significant difference in TLR rates for DES vs. BMS. While DES showed improved clinical outcomes in patients with normal and mildly impaired renal function, they showed no benefit over BMS in patients with moderate to severe renal insufficiency. Coupled with the possibly increased risk of late stent thrombosis with DES, BMS may be a more appropriate and safer stent in this population.

19013328
Estimating glomerular filtration rate in patients with HIV infection.
Accurate markers of glomerular filtration rate in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected persons would be useful for early diagnosis of HIV-associated nephropathy and other glomerular diseases, and for identifying patients at high risk for subsequent declines in kidney function who also may develop cardiovascular disease or renal complications from antiretroviral agents or other therapies. Creatinine-based estimates of glomerular filtration rate have not been tested rigorously in HIV-infected persons. Their accuracy has been questioned in malnourished patients, with or without a wasting syndrome, and in those treated with anabolic steroids. Cystatin C level is increased in HIV, but more studies are needed to determine its association with kidney function, inflammation, and long-term outcomes.

17885301
Chronic kidney disease in HIV infection: an urban epidemic.
Kidney disease is an important complication of HIV, particularly in minority populations. We describe the burden of chronic kidney disease among 1239 adults followed at an urban AIDS center, with an estimated prevalence of 15.5% (n = 192). Independent predictors of kidney disease included older age, black race, hepatitis C virus exposure, and lower CD4 cell count. These data suggest that chronic kidney disease remains a common complication of HIV infection in the era of antiretroviral therapy.

17699301
Medical risks in living kidney donors: absence of proof is not proof of absence.
Living-kidney donation has become increasingly widespread, yet there has been little critical analysis of existing studies of long-term medical outcomes in living donors. This review analyzes issues in study design that affect the quality of the evidence and summarizes possible risk factors in living donors. Virtually all studies of long-term outcomes in donors are retrospective, many with large losses to follow-up, and therefore are subject to selection bias. Most studies have small sample sizes and are underpowered to detect clinically meaningful differences between donors and comparison groups. Many studies compare donors with the general population, but donors are screened to be healthier than the general population and this may not be a valid comparison group. Difficulties in measurement of BP and renal function may underestimate the impact of donation on these outcomes. Several studies have identified possible risk factors for development of hypertension, proteinuria, and ESRD, but potential vulnerability factors in donors have not been well explored and there is a paucity of data on cardiovascular risk factors in donors. Prospective registration of living kidney donors and prospective studies of diverse populations of donors are essential to protect living donors and preserve living-kidney donation.

17532662
Assessing kidney function in HIV infection.
Chronic kidney disease often goes unrecognized, and the NIH encourages clinical laboratories to report glomerular filtration rate (GFR) estimates when they report serum creatinine levels. Chronic kidney disease based on estimated GFRs below 60 mL/min/1.73m2 is seen in as many as 10% of persons with HIV infection and even more frequently when urinary protein excretion is measured. The Cockcroft-Gault formula and Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) equation are the most widely used to estimate GFR. Although which estimate is more reliable is still debated, both are superior to serum creatinine levels alone for evaluating kidney function. The Cockcroft-Gault formula is the standard FDA measure for recommended renal dose adjustment; the MDRD equation is considered the most reliable predictor of GFR within the range of 20 to 60 mL/min/1.73m2. Neither equation has been validated in HIV or other special populations. Patients with proteinuria or a reduced GFR should undergo further evaluation and referral to a nephrologist.

17262056
How important is screening angiography for CAS in diabetic patients awaiting transplant? A nephrologist's view.


