20826270
Protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPN14 is a regulator of lymphatic function and choanal development in humans.
The lymphatic vasculature is essential for the recirculation of extracellular fluid, fat absorption, and immune function and as a route of tumor metastasis. The dissection of molecular mechanisms underlying lymphangiogenesis has been accelerated by the identification of tissue-specific lymphatic endothelial markers and the study of congenital lymphedema syndromes. We report the results of genetic analyses of a kindred inheriting a unique autosomal-recessive lymphedema-choanal atresia syndrome. These studies establish linkage of the trait to chromosome 1q32-q41 and identify a loss-of-function mutation in PTPN14, which encodes a nonreceptor tyrosine phosphatase. The causal role of PTPN14 deficiency was confirmed by the generation of a murine Ptpn14 gene trap model that manifested lymphatic hyperplasia with lymphedema. Biochemical studies revealed a potential interaction between PTPN14 and the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 (VEGFR3), a receptor tyrosine kinase essential for lymphangiogenesis. These results suggest a unique and conserved role for PTPN14 in the regulation of lymphatic development in mammals and a nonconserved role in choanal development in humans.

20226738
Oligoclonality, impaired class switch and B-cell memory responses in WHIM syndrome.
Heterozygous truncating mutations in CXCR4 have been identified as a cause of WHIM syndrome (warts, hypogammaglobulinemia, immunodeficiency and myelokathexis). The receptor truncations have been proposed to lead to altered lymphocyte trafficking. The purpose of the described studies was to characterize the B-cell repertoire in WHIM subjects. We confirmed profound B-cell lymphopenia and demonstrated oligoclonality of the circulating B-cell pool by HCDR3 spectratyping. The response to immunization was studied in one subject utilizing a bacteriophage PhiX174 immunization protocol. Spectratyping showed oligoclonality at baseline with normalization of the HCDR3 length distribution by 5 months after immunization with PhiX174 with eventual return to the baseline state. Isotype switching from phage specific neutralizing antibody of the IgM class to IgG was markedly reduced. Overall, these data suggest that impaired CXCR4 signaling in WHIM syndrome results in defective B-cell function and abnormal isotype switching, possibly through effects on germinal center trafficking of lymphocytes.

19836982
Newborn screening and early biochemical follow-up in combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria, cblC type, and utility of methionine as a secondary screening analyte.
Combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria, cobalamin C (cblC) type, is an inherited disorder of vitamin B(12) metabolism caused by mutations in MMACHC. CblC typically presents in the neonatal period with neurological deterioration, failure to thrive, cytopenias, and multisystem pathology including renal and hepatic dysfunction. Rarely, affected individuals present in adulthood with gait ataxia and cognitive decline. Treatment with hydroxocobalamin may ameliorate the clinical features of early-onset disease and prevent clinical late-onset disease. Propionic acidemia (PA), methylmalonic acidemia (MMA), and various disorders of cobalamin metabolism are characterized by elevated propionylcarnitine (C3) on newborn screening (NBS). Distinctions can be made between these disorders with secondary analyte testing. Elevated methionine is already routinely used as a NBS marker for cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency. We propose that low methionine may be useful as a secondary analyte for specific detection of cbl disorders among a larger pool of infants with elevated C3 on NBS. Retrospective analysis of dried blood spot (DBS) data in patients with molecularly confirmed cblC disease. Nine out of ten patients with confirmed cblC born in New York between 2005 and 2008 had methionine below 13.4mumol/L on NBS. Elevated C3, elevated C3:C2 ratio, and low methionine were incorporated into a simple screening algorithm that can be used to improve the specificity of newborn screening programs and provide a specific and novel method of distinguishing cblC from other disorders of propionate metabolism prior to recall for confirmatory testing. It is anticipated that this algorithm will aid in early and specific detection of cobalamin C, D, and F diseases, with no additional expense to NBS laboratories screening for organic acidemias and classical homocystinuria.

19767224
High prevalence of structural heart disease in children with cblC-type methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria.
To characterize the frequency and nature of cardiovascular defects in patients with CblC-type methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria (cblC), an inborn error of cobalamin (vitamin B12) metabolism resulting in accumulation of methylmalonic acid and homocysteine. A retrospective observational study was conducted investigating 10 patients with cblC ranging in age from 2 weeks to 24 years (mean 4.4 years +/- 7.5 years, median 0.6 years). All patients underwent a complete 2-D echocardiogram including quantitative assessment of left ventricular systolic function. Structural heart defects were detected in 50% of patients with cblC. Heart defects included left ventricular (LV) non-compaction (3), secundum atrial septal defect (2), muscular ventricular septal defect (1), dysplastic pulmonary valve without pulmonary stenosis (1) and mitral valve prolapse with mild mitral regurgitation (1). One patient had resolved cor pulmonale and right heart failure secondary to pulmonary embolism. All patients had quantitatively normal LV systolic function. Diverse and clinically significant structural heart defects appear to be highly prevalent in cblC, perhaps due to abnormal DNA and histone methylation during embryogenesis. The specific cardiac defects detected in our cohort were variable, and studies with a larger number of patients are needed to establish which forms are most common. Routine and periodic cardiovascular evaluation may be indicated in patients with cblC.

19604711
Profiling of oxidative stress in patients with inborn errors of metabolism.
Free radical formation resulting in oxidative stress is a hallmark of mitochondrial dysfunction. Indeed, oxidative stress has been demonstrated to be an underlying pathophysiologic process in various inborn errors of metabolism. Metabolic profiling of oxidative stress may provide a non-specific measure of disease activity that may further enable physicians to monitor disease. In the present study, we investigated two markers of oxidative damage in urinary samples from IEM subjects and controls: F-2 isoprostanes, a measure of lipid peroxidation and di-tyrosine, a measure of protein oxidation. We also determined urinary antioxidant activity in these samples. Subsets of IEM patients showed significantly higher levels of the damage markers isoprostanes and di-tyrosine. Of note, patients with cobalamin disorders (i.e., CblB and CblC) consistently had the highest levels of oxidative damage markers. Lower urine antioxidant capacity was seen in all subject categories, particularly cobalamin disorders and propionic acidemia. Longitudinal studies in subjects with MSUD showed good concordance between markers of oxidative damage and acute decompensation. Overall, quantifying oxidative stress offers a unique perspective to IEM. These measures may provide a means of addressing mitochondrial function in IEM and aid in the development of therapeutic targets and clinical monitoring in this diverse set of disorders.

