21419699
Innate control of B cell responses.
Mature B cells generate protective immunity by undergoing immunoglobulin (Ig) class switching and somatic hypermutation, two Ig gene-diversifying processes that usually require cognate interactions with T cells that express CD40 ligand. This T cell-dependent pathway provides immunological memory but is relatively slow to occur. Thus, it must be integrated with a faster, T cell-independent pathway for B cell activation through CD40 ligand-like molecules that are released by innate immune cells in response to microbial products. Here, we discuss recent advances in our understanding of the interplay between the innate immune system and B cells, particularly at the mucosal interface. We also review the role of innate signals in the regulation of Ig diversification and production.

21353515
The function and regulation of immunoglobulin D.
Recent discoveries of IgD in ancient vertebrates suggest that IgD has been preserved in evolution from fish to human for important immunological functions. A non-canonical form of class switching from IgM to IgD occurs in the human upper respiratory mucosa to generate IgD-secreting B cells that bind respiratory bacteria and their products. In addition to enhancing mucosal immunity, IgD class-switched B cells enter the circulation to 'arm' basophils and other innate immune cells with secreted IgD. Although the nature of the IgD receptor remains elusive, cross-linking of IgD on basophils stimulates release of immunoactivating, proinflammatory and antimicrobial mediators. This pathway is dysregulated in autoinflammatory disorders such as hyper-IgD syndrome, indicating that IgD orchestrates an ancestral surveillance system at the interface between immunity and inflammation.

21034970
Innate signaling networks in mucosal IgA class switching.
The past 20 years have seen a growing interest over the control of adaptive immune responses by the innate immune system. In particular, considerable attention has been paid to the mechanisms by which antigen-primed dendritic cells orchestrate the differentiation of T cells. Additional studies have elucidated the pathways followed by T cells to initiate immunoglobulin responses in B cells. In this review, we discuss recent advances on the mechanisms by which intestinal bacteria, epithelial cells, dendritic cells, and macrophages cross talk with intestinal T cells and B cells to induce frontline immunoglobulin A class switching and production.

21029959
Vaccination strategies to promote mucosal antibody responses.
There are great interest and demand for the development of vaccines to prevent and treat diverse microbial infections. Mucosal vaccines elicit immune protection by stimulating the production of antibodies at mucosal surfaces and systemic districts. Being positioned in close proximity to a large community of commensal microbes, the mucosal immune system deploys a heterogeneous population of cells and a complex regulatory network to maintain the balance between surveillance and tolerance. A successful mucosal vaccine relies on leveraging the functions of these immune cells and regulatory components. We review the important cellular interactions and molecular pathways underlying the induction and regulation of mucosal antibody responses and discuss their implications on mucosal vaccination.

20727035
New insights into the enigma of immunoglobulin D.
Immunoglobulin D (IgD) has remained a mysterious antibody class for almost half a century. IgD was initially thought to be a recently evolved Ig isotype expressed only by some mammalian species, but recent discoveries in fishes and amphibians demonstrate that IgD was present in the ancestor of all jawed vertebrates and has important immunological functions. The structure of IgD has been very dynamic throughout evolution. Mammals can express IgD through alternative splicing and class switch recombination. Active cell-dependent and T-cell-independent IgM-to-IgD class switching takes place in a unique subset of human B cells from the upper aerodigestive mucosa, which provides a layer of mucosal protection by interacting with many pathogens and their virulence factors. Circulating IgD can bind to myeloid cells such as basophils and induce antimicrobial, inflammatory, and B-cell-stimulating factors upon cross-linking, which contributes to not only immune surveillance but also inflammation and tissue damage when this pathway is overactivated under pathological conditions. Recent research shows that IgD is an important immunomodulator that orchestrates an ancestral surveillance system at the interface between immunity and inflammation.

20676093
The transmembrane activator TACI triggers immunoglobulin class switching by activating B cells through the adaptor MyD88.
BAFF and APRIL are innate immune mediators that trigger immunoglobulin G (IgG) and IgA class-switch recombination (CSR) in B cells by engaging the receptor TACI. The mechanism that underlies CSR signaling by TACI remains unknown. Here we found that the cytoplasmic domain of TACI encompasses a conserved motif that bound MyD88, an adaptor that activates transcription factor NF-kappaB signaling pathways via a Toll-interleukin 1 (IL-1) receptor (TIR) domain. TACI lacks a TIR domain, yet triggered CSR via the DNA-editing enzyme AID by activating NF-kappaB through a Toll-like receptor (TLR)-like MyD88-IRAK1-IRAK4-TRAF6-TAK1 pathway. TACI-induced CSR was impaired in mice and humans lacking MyD88 or the kinase IRAK4, which indicates that MyD88 controls a B cell-intrinsic, TIR-independent, TACI-dependent pathway for immunoglobulin diversification.

