21442033
Animal Models for Influenza Virus Pathogenesis and Transmission.
Influenza virus infection of humans results in a respiratory disease that ranges in severity from sub-clinical infection to primary viral pneumonia that can result in death. The clinical effects of infection vary with the exposure history, age and immune status of the host, and also the virulence of the influenza strain. In humans, the virus is transmitted through either aerosol or contact-based transfer of infectious respiratory secretions. As is evidenced by most zoonotic influenza virus infections, not all strains that can infect humans are able to transmit from person-to-person. Animal models of influenza are essential to research efforts aimed at understanding the viral and host factors that contribute to the disease and transmission outcomes of influenza virus infection in humans. These models furthermore allow the pre-clinical testing of antiviral drugs and vaccines aimed at reducing morbidity and mortality in the population through amelioration of the virulence or transmissibility of influenza viruses. Mice, ferrets, guinea pigs, cotton rats, hamsters and macaques have all been used to study influenza viruses and therapeutics targeting them. Each model presents unique advantages and disadvantages, which will be discussed herein.

19230160
The biology of influenza viruses.
The influenza viruses are characterized by segmented, negative-strand RNA genomes requiring an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of viral origin for replication. The particular structure ofthe influenza virus genome and function of its viral proteins enable antigenic drift and antigenic shift. These processes result in viruses able to evade the long-term adaptive immune responses in many hosts.

18684820
Oseltamivir-resistant influenza A viruses are transmitted efficiently among guinea pigs by direct contact but not by aerosol.
Influenza viruses resistant to the neuraminidase (NA) inhibitor oseltamivir arise under drug selection pressure both in vitro and in vivo. Several mutations in the active site of the viral NA are known to confer relative resistance to oseltamivir, and influenza viruses with certain oseltamivir resistance mutations have been shown to transmit efficiently among cocaged ferrets. However, it is not known whether NA mutations alter aerosol transmission of drug-resistant influenza virus. Here, we demonstrate that recombinant human influenza A/H3N2 viruses without and with oseltamivir resistance mutations (in which NA carries the mutation E119V or the double mutations E119V I222V) have similar in ovo growth kinetics and infectivity in guinea pigs. These viruses also transmit efficiently by the contact route among cocaged guinea pigs, as in the ferret model. However, in an aerosol transmission model, in which guinea pigs are caged separately, the oseltamivir-resistant viruses transmit poorly or not at all; in contrast, the oseltamivir-sensitive virus transmits efficiently even in the absence of direct contact. The present results suggest that oseltamivir resistance mutations reduce aerosol transmission of influenza virus, which could have implications for public health measures taken in the event of an influenza pandemic.

