21175846
Hepatopulmonary syndrome in children - is conventional liver transplantation always needed?
Willis AD, Miloh TA, Arnon R, Iyer KR, Suchy FJ, Kerkar N. Hepatopulmonary syndrome in children - is conventional liver transplantation always needed? Clin Transplant 2010 DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0012.2010.01378.x. © 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Abstract:? Background:? Hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) is the association of liver disease, hypoxemia, and intrapulmonary vascular dilatations. There are little data on the management of HPS in children other than conventional orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Aims:? To describe the patient characteristics, mode of diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes of children with HPS at our center. Methods:? Retrospective review of patients diagnosed with HPS between 1997 and 2007 after IRB approval. Results:? There were 10 patients, six females; median age at diagnosis of HPS was 12?yr. Six with cirrhosis underwent OLT and had subsequent resolution of HPS and are stable at last follow-up. Of the remaining four, two had cirrhosis. HPS resolved without conventional OLT in the following four patients: hepatitis C after antiviral treatment, biliary atresia with portal hypertension after transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting, Abernethy syndrome after auxiliary partial OLT, and in a child with splenic vein thrombosis after splenectomy. Conclusions:? Our series shows resolution of HPS in all patients and 100% survival after conventional OLT. Four children had resolution of HPS after surgical or medical treatments other than conventional OLT. Careful review of clinical status and underlying pathophysiology and anatomy at diagnosis of HPS should inform treatment decisions.

17967377
Complications of enteral access.
Innovation in endoscope design and application of lessons and techniques from minimally invasive surgery is allowing endoscopists to explore new frontiers in enteral access and meet the demands of an increasingly savvy and aging 'baby boomer' population that has high health care expectations. Another small but very labor intensive group of patients that is contributing both to increased awareness and to the demand for specialized nutrition support services, is made up of patients with intestinal failure. With steadily accruing experience in the care of these patients on long term home parenteral and enteral nutrition, as well as the improved outcomes for intestinal transplantation, these services are poised for exponential growth in coming years. The endoscopist whose practice involves enteral access should be capable of providing the whole gamut of enteral access services allowing individualization of approach to ensure the best possible outcomes for a given patient and indication. Experience with management of the many common complications of enteral access is a pre-requisite for successful long-term outcomes. While it would be desirable that such enteral access be provided within a broader multi-disciplinary model of specialized nutrition support, in the current climate of a tightening health care economy that may be counsel for perfection.

