20881774
Development of a novel scoring tool for the identification of large ?5 cm abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Current screening recommendations for abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) target >3-cm diameter aneurysms in ever-smoking 65- to 75-year-old males. However, more than 50% of AAA ruptures occur in individuals outside this patient cohort, and only a subset of AAAs detected are large enough to warrant surgery. In this analysis, we evaluated more than 3 million screened individuals and developed a scoring tool to identify ?5-cm diameter AAAs in the entire population at risk. Between 2003 and 2008, demographics and risk factors were collected from 3.1 million people undergoing ultrasound screening for AAA by Life Line Screening, Inc. Using multivariable logistic regression analysis, we identified risk factors and developed a scoring system to predict the presence of ?5-cm diameter AAAs. Smoking had a profound influence on the risk of AAA, which increased with number of cigarettes smoked and years of smoking, and decreased following smoking cessation. Novel findings included a protective effect of exercise, normal weight, and Black/Hispanic race/ethnicity. Using these and other factors, the scoring system provided good predictive accuracy (C-statistic = 0.82), when tested against the validation subset of the study cohort. The model predicts the presence of 121,000 ?5 cm AAA in the US population (prevalence: 0.14%). Demonstrating the inadequacy of the current screening recommendations, only 35% of these aneurysms were among males aged 65 to 75 years. Based on the largest cohort of patients ever screened for AAA, we developed a screening strategy that can identify large AAAs in a broad population of individuals at risk.

19632560
Assessing technological change in cardiothoracic surgery.
Technological innovation--broadly defined as the development and introduction of new drugs, devices, and procedures--has played a major role in advancing the field of cardiothoracic surgery. It has generated new forms of care for patients and improved treatment options. Innovation, however, comes at a price. Total national health care expenditures now exceed $2 trillion per year in the United States and all current estimates indicate that this number will continue to rise. As we continue to seek the most innovative medical treatments for cardiovascular disease, the spiraling cost of these technologies comes to the forefront. In this article, we address 3 challenges in managing the health and economic impact of new and emerging technologies in cardiothoracic surgery: (1) challenges associated with the dynamics of technological growth itself; (2) challenges associated with methods of analysis; and (3) the ways in which value judgments and political factors shape the translation of evidence into policy. We conclude by discussing changes in the analytical, financial, and institutional realms that can improve evidence-based decision-making in cardiac surgery.

19486755
Randomized trials in surgery.


20840476
Process of care events in transplantation: effects on the cost of hospitalization.
Deviations in the processes of healthcare delivery that affect patient outcomes are recognized to have an impact on the cost of hospitalization. Whether deviations that do not affect patient outcome affects cost has not been studied. We have analyzed process of care (POC) events that were reported in a large transplantation service (n = 3,012) in 2005, delineating whether or not there was a health consequence of the event and assessing the impact on hospital resource utilization. Propensity score matching was used to adjust for patient differences. The rate of POC events varied by transplanted organ: from 10.8 per 1000 patient days (kidney) to 17.3 (liver). The probability of a POC event increased with severity of illness. The majority (81.5%) of the POC events had no apparent effect on patients' health (63.6% no effect and 17.9% unknown). POC events were associated with longer length of stay (LOS) and higher costs independent of whether there was a patient health impact. Multiple events during the same hospitalization were associated with the highest impact on LOS and cost. POC events in transplantation occur frequently, more often in sicker patients and, although the majority of POC events do not harm the patient, their effect on resource utilization is significant.

