21149317
The simplicity complex: exploring simplified health messages in a complex world.
A challenge in individual and public health at the start of the 21st century is to effectively communicate health and science information about disease and complex emergencies. The low health literacy of millions of adults in the USA has been referred to as a 'silent killer'. A popular approach to improving health communication and health promotion to low health literate consumers has been to simplify the language of health information. The expected result has been that individuals and groups will better understand information and will then make informed decisions about their health and behaviors. This expectation has grown to include the belief that the public will be better prepared to take appropriate action in complex natural and man-made emergencies. Demonstrating the efficacy of this approach remains, in large part, uninvestigated. And it is becoming more evident that health literacy itself is complex and multifaceted. This article applies linguistic and sociolinguistic models in order to better articulate the role of simplification in health communication and health promotion. Focusing on two models from sociolinguistics-pragmatics and text theory-the article discusses their usefulness in rethinking message simplification. The discussion proposes that a richer, more theory-based understanding of text structures and functions, along with other powerful constructs, including cultural appropriateness, relevancy and context, are needed to close the gaps between health messages, health messengers and patients/the public. The article concludes by making recommendations for future study to empirically test the strengths and limitations of these models and constructs.

19672677
Introducing abortion patients to a culture of support: a pilot study.
Currently in the United States, women who have abortions face a societal culture in which disapproval, stigma, and misinformation about the risks and sequelae of abortion are common. The purpose of this study is to pilot test an intervention that introduces abortion patients to a "culture of support" by providing validating messages and information about groups and services that support women in their reproductive decisions, addressing stigma, and providing information to help women identify and avoid sources of abortion misinformation. Twenty-two women who completed their post-operative exam after abortion were enrolled to take part in the study intervention. In-depth interviews were conducted to explore patient experiences and responses to the intervention. All (22/22) participants responded that they believed that interventions like the one studied could help women avoid letting the judgmental actions and attitudes of others "get to them so much". All (20/20) participants felt that the intervention was personally helpful to them. An intervention that introduces women having abortions to a "culture of support" was well-received. This study provides a framework for future research about the content, strength, and effect of societal and cultural influences on women having abortions and for additional research about interventions to promote resilience after abortion.

