21374078
Sinusoidal galvanic vestibular stimulation (sGVS) induces a vasovagal response in the rat.
Blood pressure (BP) and heart rate (HR) were studied in isoflurane-anesthetized Long-Evans rats during sinusoidal galvanic vestibular stimulation (sGVS) and sinusoidal oscillation in pitch to characterize vestibular influences on autonomic control of BP and HR. sGVS was delivered binaurally via Ag/AgCl needle electrodes inserted over the mastoids at stimulus frequencies 0.008-0.4 Hz. Two processes affecting BP and HR were induced by sGVS: 1) a transient drop in BP (?15-20 mmHg) and HR (?3 beat*s(-1)), followed by a slow recovery over 1-6 min; and 2) inhibitory modulations in BP (?4.5 mmHg/g) and HR (?0.15 beats*s(-1)/g) twice in each stimulus cycle. The BP and HR modulations were approximately in-phase with each other and were best evoked by low stimulus frequencies. A wavelet analysis indicated significant energies in BP and HR at scales related to twice and four times the stimulus frequency bands. BP and HR were also modulated by oscillation in pitch at frequencies 0.025-0.5 Hz. Sensitivities at 0.025 Hz were ?4.5 mmHg/g (BP) and ?0.17 beat*s(-1)/g (HR) for pitches of 20-90°. The tilt-induced BP and HR modulations were out-of-phase, but the frequencies at which responses were elicited by tilt and sGVS were the same. The results show that the sGVS-induced responses, which likely originate in the otolith organs, can exert a powerful inhibitory effect on both BP and HR at low frequencies. These responses have a striking resemblance to human vasovagal responses. Thus, sGVS-activated rats can potentially serve as a useful experimental model of the vasovagal response in humans.

19645957
Effects of the linear vestibulo-ocular reflex on accommodative vergence eye movements.
The aim of the study was to determine whether accommodation to the relative motion of a target along the visual axis of one eye during fore-aft movement of the head could induce accurate vergence over a wide range of viewing distances and frequencies of oscillation, despite lack of vision in the second eye. This was compared to the vergence when both eyes viewed the target. Two rhesus monkeys were trained to fixate a visual target located 216-336 mm in front and along the visual axis of one eye, while being sinusoidally translated in the fore-aft direction. There was no movement of the seeing eye while the other eye converged, regardless of whether there was vision in the converged eye. Gain and phase of the convergence were determined based on the ratio of actual versus expected eye position if the target was accurately fixated. During translation at frequencies from 0.05 to 2 Hz, the eye converged on the target with an eye position gain of approximately 1, and a phase close to zero. When vision was occluded in the converging eye, gains of convergence were 0.6-0.8 Hz up to 2 Hz, and the phases remained close to zero. At low frequencies of fore-aft movement, when the acceleration was negligible, convergence was driven by accommodation in the seeing eye. At higher frequencies, vergence could also be driven by the linear vestibulo-ocular reflex (lVOR). Thus, vision in one nonmoving eye and the lVOR combine to generate convergence over a wide range of frequencies and viewing distances.

17946708
Head fixed field coil system for measuring eye movements in freely moving monkeys.
Coil systems have been a standard for measuring eye movements since they were first introduced. These systems, which have been designed to work at low frequencies (20 KHz), generally require large field coils so that a uniform field can be established at the eye coil site. This configuration makes it virtually impossible to study eye movements in freely moving animals. In this paper, we describe the design of a coil system, which operates at radio frequencies (10 MHz). This system allows the use of compact coils with radii of 10 mm that are capable of accurately measuring eye movements in three dimensions during head free locomotion. This system opens the possibility for studying eye movements in freely moving monkeys under a wide range of conditions.

