21518886
PNAS Plus: Regeneration of axons in injured spinal cord by activation of bone morphogenetic protein/Smad1 signaling pathway in adult neurons.
Axon growth potential is highest in young neurons but diminishes with age, thus becoming a significant obstacle to axonal regeneration after injury in maturity. The mechanism for the decline is incompletely understood, and no effective clinical treatment is available to rekindle innate growth capability. Here, we show that Smad1-dependent bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling is developmentally regulated and governs axonal growth in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons. Down-regulation of the pathway contributes to the age-related decline of the axon growth potential. Reactivating Smad1 selectively in adult DRG neurons results in sensory axon regeneration in a mouse model of spinal cord injury (SCI). Smad1 signaling can be effectively manipulated by an adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector encoding BMP4 delivered by a clinically applicable and minimally invasive technique, an approach devoid of unwanted abnormalities in mechanosensation or pain perception. Importantly, transected axons are able to regenerate even when the AAV treatment is delivered after SCI, thus mimicking a clinically relevant scenario. Together, our results identify a therapeutic target to promote axonal regeneration after SCI.

21376239
Astrocyte-neuron lactate transport is required for long-term memory formation.
We report that, in the rat hippocampus, learning leads to a significant increase in extracellular lactate levels that derive from glycogen, an energy reserve selectively localized in astrocytes. Astrocytic glycogen breakdown and lactate release are essential for long-term but not short-term memory formation, and for the maintenance of long-term potentiation (LTP) of synaptic strength elicited in vivo. Disrupting the expression of the astrocytic lactate transporters monocarboxylate transporter 4 (MCT4) or MCT1 causes amnesia, which, like LTP impairment, is rescued by L-lactate but not equicaloric glucose. Disrupting the expression of the neuronal lactate transporter MCT2 also leads to amnesia that is unaffected by either L-lactate or glucose, suggesting that lactate import into neurons is necessary for long-term memory. Glycogenolysis and astrocytic lactate transporters are also critical for the induction of molecular changes required for memory formation, including the induction of phospho-CREB, Arc, and phospho-cofilin. We conclude that astrocyte-neuron lactate transport is required for long-term memory formation.

21316153
Neuropathic pain- and glial derived neurotrophic factor-associated regulation of cadherins in spinal circuits of the dorsal horn.
Neuropathic pain is associated with reorganization of spinal synaptic circuits, implying that adhesion proteins that normally build and modify synapses must be involved. The adhesion proteins E- and N-cadherin delineate different synapses furnished by nociceptive primary afferents, but dynamic aspects of cadherin localization in relationship to onset, maintenance or reversibility of neuropathic pain are uncharacterized. Here, we find very different responses of these cadherins to L5 spinal nerve transection (SNT)-induced mechanical allodynia and to intrathecal glial derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), which has potent analgesic effects in this pain model. In L5, E-cadherin is rapidly eliminated in patches within lamina IIi contemporaneously with the onset of mechanical allodynia. Intrathecal GDNF in conjunction with, or at 7 days after, L5 SNT prevents or reverses both the loss of E-cadherin and abnormal pain sensation. In contrast, N-cadherin undergoes a delayed and transient increase uniformly across lamina I-II that is insensitive to GDNF. Some N-cadherin-labeled profiles codistribute with GAP-43, suggesting a role in axon sprouting. Patterns of immunolabeling for GDNF receptor components GFR?1, NCAM, and RET after L5 SNT suggest that GFR?1 and NCAM are the principal receptors operative in this model. In addition, GFR?1 codistributes with E-cadherin, but not N-cadherin, profiles. Together, these data indicate strikingly divergent patterns of temporal and molecular regulation of different cadherins at distinct nociceptive circuits in response to spinal nerve injury, suggesting that the two cadherins and the circuits with which they are affiliated participate in different aspects of synaptic and circuit reorganization associated with neuropathic pain.

20882551
Building and remodeling synapses.
Synaptic junctions are generated by adhesion proteins that bridge the synaptic cleft to firmly anchor pre- and postsynaptic membranes. Several cell adhesion molecule (CAM) families localize to synapses, but it is not yet completely understood how each synaptic CAM family contributes to synapse formation and/or structure, and whether or how smaller groups of CAMs serve as minimal, functionally cooperative adhesive units upon which structure is based. Synapse structure and function evolve over the course of development, and in mature animals, synapses are composed of a greater number of proteins, surrounded by a stabilizing extracellular matrix, and often contacted by astrocytic processes. Thus, in mature networks undergoing plasticity, persistent changes in synapse strength, morphology, or number must be accompanied by selective and regulated remodeling of the neuropil. Recent work indicates that regulated, extracellular proteolysis may be essential for this, and rather than simply acting permissively to enable synapse plasticity, is more likely playing a proactive role in driving coordinated synaptic structural and functional modifications that underlie persistent changes in network activity. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

20848607
Synaptic loss and retention of different classic cadherins with LTP-associated synaptic structural remodeling in vivo.
Cadherins are synaptic cell adhesion molecules that contribute to persistently enhanced synaptic strength characteristic of long-term potentiation (LTP). What is relatively unexplored is how synaptic activity of the kind that induces LTP-associated remodeling of synapse structure affects localization of cadherins, particularly in mature animals in vivo, details which could offer insight into how different cadherins contribute to synaptic plasticity. Here, we use a well-described in vivo LTP induction protocol that produces robust synaptic morphological remodeling in dentate gyrus of adult rats in combination with confocal and immunogold electron microscopy to localize cadherin-8 and N-cadherin at remodeled synapses. We find that the density and size of cadherin-8 puncta are significantly diminished in the potentiated middle molecular layer (MML) while concurrently, N-cadherin remains tightly clustered at remodeled synapses. These changes are specific to the potentiated MML, and occur without any change in density or size of synaptophysin puncta. Thus, the loss of cadherin-8 probably represents selective removal from synapses rather than overall loss of synaptic junctions. Together, these findings suggest that activity-regulated loss and retention of different synaptic cadherins could contribute to dual demands of both flexibility and stability in synapse structure that may be important for synaptic morphological remodeling that accompanies long-lasting plasticity. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

20668183
Persistence of coordinated long-term potentiation and dendritic spine enlargement at mature hippocampal CA1 synapses requires N-cadherin.
Persistent changes in spine shape are coupled to long-lasting synaptic plasticity in hippocampus. The molecules that coordinate such persistent structural and functional plasticity are unknown. Here, we generated mice in which the cell adhesion molecule N-cadherin was conditionally ablated from postnatal, excitatory synapses in hippocampus. We applied to adult mice of either sex a combination of whole-cell recording, two-photon microscopy, and spine morphometric analysis to show that postnatal ablation of N-cadherin has profound effects on the stability of coordinated spine enlargement and long-term potentiation (LTP) at mature CA1 synapses, with no effects on baseline spine density or morphology, baseline properties of synaptic neurotransmission, or long-term depression. Thus, N-cadherin couples persistent spine structural modifications with long-lasting synaptic functional modifications associated selectively with LTP, revealing unexpectedly distinct roles at mature synapses in comparison with earlier, broader functions in synapse and spine development.

19047646
Extracellular proteolysis by matrix metalloproteinase-9 drives dendritic spine enlargement and long-term potentiation coordinately.
Persistent dendritic spine enlargement is associated with stable long-term potentiation (LTP), and the latter is thought to underlie long-lasting memories. Extracellular proteolytic remodeling of the synaptic microenvironment could be important for such plasticity, but whether or how proteolytic remodeling contributes to persistent modifications in synapse structure and function is unknown. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) is an extracellular protease that is activated perisynaptically after LTP induction and required for LTP maintenance. Here, by monitoring spine size and excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) simultaneously with combined 2-photon time-lapse imaging and whole-cell recordings from hippocampal neurons, we find that MMP-9 is both necessary and sufficient to drive spine enlargement and synaptic potentiation concomitantly. Both structural and functional MMP-driven forms of plasticity are mediated through beta1-containing integrin receptors, are associated with integrin-dependent cofilin inactivation within spines, and require actin polymerization. In contrast, postsynaptic exocytosis and protein synthesis are both required for MMP-9-induced potentiation, but not for initial MMP-9-induced spine expansion. However, spine expansion becomes unstable when postsynaptic exocytosis or protein synthesis is blocked, indicating that the 2 forms of plasticity are expressed independently but require interactions between them for persistence. When MMP activity is eliminated during theta-stimulation-induced LTP, both spine enlargement and synaptic potentiation are transient. Thus, MMP-mediated extracellular remodeling during LTP has an instructive role in establishing persistent modifications in both synapse structure and function of the kind critical for learning and memory.

18815270
The neurotrophin-inducible gene Vgf regulates hippocampal function and behavior through a brain-derived neurotrophic factor-dependent mechanism.
VGF is a neurotrophin-inducible, activity-regulated gene product that is expressed in CNS and PNS neurons, in which it is processed into peptides and secreted. VGF synthesis is stimulated by BDNF, a critical regulator of hippocampal development and function, and two VGF C-terminal peptides increase synaptic activity in cultured hippocampal neurons. To assess VGF function in the hippocampus, we tested heterozygous and homozygous VGF knock-out mice in two different learning tasks, assessed long-term potentiation (LTP) and depression (LTD) in hippocampal slices from VGF mutant mice, and investigated how VGF C-terminal peptides modulate synaptic plasticity. Treatment of rat hippocampal slices with the VGF-derived peptide TLQP62 resulted in transient potentiation through a mechanism that was selectively blocked by the BDNF scavenger TrkB-Fc, the Trk tyrosine kinase inhibitor K252a (100 nm), and tPA STOP, an inhibitor of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), an enzyme involved in pro-BDNF cleavage to BDNF, but was not blocked by the NMDA receptor antagonist APV, anti-p75(NTR) function-blocking antiserum, or previous tetanic stimulation. Although LTP was normal in slices from VGF knock-out mice, LTD could not be induced, and VGF mutant mice were impaired in hippocampal-dependent spatial learning and contextual fear conditioning tasks. Our studies indicate that the VGF C-terminal peptide TLQP62 modulates hippocampal synaptic transmission through a BDNF-dependent mechanism and that VGF deficiency in mice impacts synaptic plasticity and memory in addition to depressive behavior.

18496871
Developmental and comparative aspects of posterior medial thalamocortical innervation of the barrel cortex in mice and rats.
The thalamocortical projection to the rodent barrel cortex consists of inputs from the ventral posterior medial (VPM) and posterior medial (POm) nuclei that terminate in largely nonoverlapping territories in and outside of layer IV. This projection in both rats and mice has been used extensively to study development and plasticity of highly organized synaptic circuits. Whereas the VPM pathway has been well characterized in both rats and mice, organization of the POm pathway has only been described in rats, and no studies have focused exclusively on the development of the POm projection. Here, using transport of Phaseolus vulgaris leucoagglutinin(PHA-L) or carbocyanine dyes, we characterize the POm thalamocortical innervation of adult mouse barrel cortex and describe its early postnatal development in both mice and rats. In adult mice, POm inputs form a dense plexus in layer Va that extends uniformly underneath layer IV barrels and septa. Innervation of layer IV is very sparse; a clear septal innervation pattern is evident only at the layer IV/Va border. This pattern differs subtly from that described previously in rats. Developmentally, in both species, POm axons are present in barrel cortex at birth. In mice, they occupy layer IV as it differentiates, whereas in rats, POm axons do not enter layer IV until 1-2 days after its emergence from the cortical plate. In both species, arbors undergo progressive and directed growth. However, no layer IV septal innervation pattern emerges until several days after the cytoarchitectonic appearance of barrels and well after the emergence of whisker-related clusters of VPM thalamocortical axons. The mature pattern resolves earlier in rats than in mice. Taken together, these data reveal anatomical differences between mice and rats in the development and organization of POm inputs to barrel cortex, with implications for species differences in the nature and plasticity of lemniscal and paralemniscal information processing.

18064706
Cadherin-8 and N-cadherin differentially regulate pre- and postsynaptic development of the hippocampal mossy fiber pathway.
Cells sort into regions and groups in part by their selective surface expression of particular classic cadherins during development. In the nervous system, cadherin-based sorting can define axon tracts, restrict axonal and dendritic arbors to particular regions or layers, and may encode certain aspects of synapse specificity. The underlying model has been that afferents and their targets hold in common the expression of a particular cadherin, thereby providing a recognition code of homophilic cadherin binding. However, most neurons express multiple cadherins, and it is not clear whether multiple cadherins all act similarly in shaping neural circuitry. Here we asked how two such cadherins, cadherin-8 and N-cadherin, influence the guidance and differentiation of hippocampal mossy fibers. Using organotypic hippocampal cultures, we find that cadherin-8 regulates mossy fiber fasciculation and targeting, but has little effect on CA3 dendrites. In contrast, N-cadherin regulates mossy fiber fasciculation, but has little impact on axonal growth and targeting. However, N-cadherin is essential for CA3 dendrite arborization. Both cadherins are required for formation of proper numbers of presynaptic terminals. Mechanistically, such differential actions of these two cadherins could, in theory, reflect coupling to distinct intracellular binding partners. However, we find that both cadherins bind beta-catenin in dentate gyrus (DG). This suggests that cadherins may engage different intracellular signaling cascades downstream of beta-catenin, coopt different extracellular binding partners, or target distinct subcellular domains. Together our findings demonstrate that cadherin-8 and N-cadherin are critical for generating the mossy fiber pathway, but that each contributes differentially to afferent and target differentiation, thereby complementing one another in the assembly of a synaptic circuit.

17909100
The extracellular protease matrix metalloproteinase-9 is activated by inhibitory avoidance learning and required for long-term memory.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of extracellularly acting proteolytic enzymes with well-recognized roles in plasticity and remodeling of synaptic circuits during brain development and following brain injury. However, it is now becoming increasingly apparent that MMPs also function in normal, nonpathological synaptic plasticity of the kind that may underlie learning and memory. Here, we extend this idea by investigating the role and regulation of MMP-9 in an inhibitory avoidance (IA) learning and memory task. We demonstrate that following IA training, protein levels and proteolytic activity of MMP-9 become elevated in hippocampus by 6 h, peak at 12-24 h, then decline to baseline values by approximately 72 h. When MMP function is abrogated by intrahippocampal infusion of a potent gelatinase (MMP-2 and MMP-9) inhibitor 3.5 h following IA training, a time prior to the onset of training-induced elevation in levels, IA memory retention is significantly diminished when tested 1-3 d later. Animals impaired at 3 d exhibit robust IA memory when retrained, suggesting that such impairment is not likely attributed to toxic or other deleterious effects that permanently disrupt hippocampal function. In anesthetized adult rats, the effective distance over which synaptic plasticity is impaired by a single intrahippocampal infusion of the MMP inhibitor of the kind that blocks IA memory is approximately 1200 microm. Taken together, these data suggest that IA training induces a slowly emerging, but subsequently protracted period of MMP-mediated proteolysis critical for enabling long-lasting synaptic modification that underlies long-term memory consolidation.

17493927
In vivo roles for matrix metalloproteinase-9 in mature hippocampal synaptic physiology and plasticity.
Extracellular proteolysis is an important regulatory nexus for coordinating synaptic functional and structural plasticity, but the identity of such proteases is incompletely understood. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) have well-known, mostly deleterious roles in remodeling after injury or stroke, but their role in nonpathological synaptic plasticity and function in intact adult brains has not been extensively investigated. Here we address the role of MMP-9 in hippocampal synaptic plasticity using both gain- and loss-of-function approaches in urethane-anesthetized adult rats. Acute blockade of MMP-9 proteolytic activity with inhibitors or neutralizing antibodies impairs maintenance, but not induction, of long-term potentiation (LTP) at synapses formed between Schaffer-collaterals and area CA1 dendrites. LTP is associated with significant increases in levels of MMP-9 and proteolytic activity within the potentiated neuropil. By introducing a novel application of gelatin-substrate zymography in vivo, we find that LTP is associated with significantly elevated numbers of gelatinolytic puncta in the potentiated neuropil that codistribute with immunolabeling for MMP-9 and for markers of synapses and dendrites. Such increases in proteolytic activity require NMDA receptor activation. Exposing intact area CA1 neurons to recombinant-active MMP-9 induces a slow synaptic potentiation that mutually occludes, and is occluded by, tetanically evoked potentiation. Taken together, our data reveal novel roles for MMP-mediated proteolysis in regulating nonpathological synaptic function and plasticity in mature hippocampus.

21228308
Imidazoleacetic acid-ribotide induces depression of synaptic responses in hippocampus through activation of imidazoline receptors.
Imidazole-4-acetic acid-ribotide (IAA-RP), an endogenous agonist at imidazoline receptors (I-Rs), is a putative neurotransmitter/regulator in mammalian brain. We studied the effects of IAA-RP on excitatory transmission by performing extracellular and whole cell recordings at Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapses in rat hippocampal slices. Bath-applied IAA-RP induced a concentration-dependent depression of synaptic transmission that, after washout, returned to baseline within 20 min. Maximal decrease occurred with 10 ?M IAA-RP, which reduced the slope of field extracellular postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) to 51.2 ± 5.7% of baseline at 20 min of exposure. Imidazole-4-acetic acid-riboside (IAA-R; 10 ?M), the endogenous dephosphorylated metabolite of IAA-RP, also produced inhibition of fEPSPs. This effect was smaller than that produced by IAA-RP (to 65.9 ± 3.8% of baseline) and occurred after a further 5- to 8-min delay. The frequency, but not the amplitude, of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents was decreased, and paired-pulse facilitation (PPF) was increased after application of IAA-RP, suggesting a principally presynaptic site of action. Since IAA-RP also has low affinity for ?(2)-adrenergic receptors (?(2)-ARs), we tested synaptic depression induced by IAA-RP in the presence of ?(2)-ARs, I(1)-R, or I(3)-R antagonists. The ?(2)-AR antagonist rauwolscine (100 nM), which blocked the actions of the ?(2)-AR agonist clonidine, did not affect either the IAA-RP-induced synaptic depression or the increase in PPF. In contrast, efaroxan (50 ?M), a mixed I(1)-R and ?(2)-AR antagonist, abolished the synaptic depression induced by IAA-RP and abolished the related increase in PPF. KU-14R, an I(3)-R antagonist, partially attenuated responses to IAA-RP. Taken together, these data support a role for IAA-RP in modulating synaptic transmission in the hippocampus through activation of I-Rs.

