21046586
Syphilitic lymphadenitis diagnosed via fine needle aspiration biopsy.
Syphilis is coming back in the recent a few decades especially in the gay and HIV populations. Since syphilis can be "the great mimic" clinically and pathologically, a case report with updated review can be helpful to the medical community. We report, a case of syphilitic lymphadenitis diagnosed via fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB). The pitfalls associated with the diagnosis of syphilitic lymphadenitis will be discussed.The patient's medical records were reviewed. The pertinent history, clinical course, and ancillary studies including FNAB cytology with special stains are presented. In addition to the case report, we discuss the diagnosis of syphilitic lymphadenitis and the role of FNAB cytology.This was a 37-year-old man presenting with a two-month history of a growing neck mass, night sweats, and a ten pound weight loss. The patient had been treated one month earlier for primary syphilis. Examination of the head and neck revealed a 3 cm right level II mass. FNAB cytology showed heterogeneous population of lymphocytes and plasma cells suggesting reactive changes. Modified silver staining of the cell block slide was performed and revealed spirochetes, consistent with syphilis. The patient's lymphadenitis resolved with a course of antibiotic treatment.Although lymphadenopathy is a rare presentation of syphilis, it should be included in the differential diagnosis for patients who offer a suspect history. FNAB with silver staining is an effective, minimally invasive way to confirm the diagnosis. Diagn. Cytopathol. 2010. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

20949470
A comparative study of 200 head and neck FNAs performed by a cytopathologist with versus without ultrasound guidance: Evidence for improved diagnostic value with ultrasound guidance.
Our previous study showed that the sensitivity of head and neck fine-needle aspiration (FNA) procedures was significantly better in the cytopathologist-performed group than in the noncytopathologist-performed group (96 versus 67%). Recently, cytopathologists have learned to use ultrasound machines to assist them in performing FNA procedures. This study was designed to assess whether cytopathologist-performed FNAs with ultrasound guidance can improve diagnostic value in comparison to those done without ultrasound guidance. Two hundred consecutive head and neck FNA cases performed by the same cytopathologist with and without ultrasound guidance were reviewed. Cases consisted of 100 ultrasound-guided FNAs (USGFNAs) performed between July 2008 and March 2009 and 100 palpation-guided FNAs (PGFNAs) performed before July 2008. These cases were correlated with follow-up surgical diagnosis. The diagnostic, suspicious/atypical/suggestive, and nondiagnostic rates (%) for the head and neck FNAs were 83 versus 86, 10 versus 13, and 7 versus 1 in PGFNA group versus USGFNA group, respectively. Surgical follow-up specimens were found in 50 PGFNAs versus 35 USGFNAs. The true-positive, true-negative, false-positive, and false-negative rates (%) were 92, 2, 2, and 4 versus 80, 17, 3, and 0 in PGFNAs versus USGFNAs, respectively. The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), and accuracy were 96, 50, 98, 33, and 94% in PGFNAs versus 100, 86, 97, 100, and 97% in the USGFNA group, respectively. This study also shows increased FNAs of thyroid and salivary glands and other smaller nonpalpable lesions with ultrasound guidance. USGFNAs performed by a cytopathologist could significantly improve the specificity and NPV (P = 0.04) while preserving virtually the same excellent sensitivity and PPV as those of PGFNAs. With ultrasound guidance, a cytopathologist will be able to perform FNAs in smaller, nonpalpable lesions and target complex lesions with confidence and accuracy, thus achieving a better outcome. Diagn. Cytopathol. 2010. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

20949461
Primary CNS plasmablastic lymphoma: Report of a case with CSF cytology, flow cytometry, radiology, histological correlation, and review of the literature.
Plasmablastic lymphoma (PBL) is a rare subtype of diffuse large B cell lymphoma and commonly presents as an oral mass in HIV patients. Extraoral PBL has been reported, including one case of primary central nervous system PBL (PCNSPBL). The cytological features of PBL have been described, including cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytology findings for secondary CNS involvement by PBL. The etiology of PCNSPBL is still unknown. We report here the CSF cytology of a PCNSPBL, which shows a hypercellular specimen composed of markedly atypical, singly dispersed plasmacytoid cells with frequent abnormal mitoses and binucleation. The neoplastic cells are positive for CD138. Flow cytometry of the CSF specimen demonstrates a monoclonal neoplastic cell population, which is CD138 positive, kappa light chain positive, lambda light chain negative, and CD19 negative. Molecular analysis and immunohistochemical stains on a tissue biopsy confirmed the diagnosis and reveal concurrent infections with Epstein-Barr virus and human polyomavirus JC virus. Clinical and radiological correlations are reported, and the literature is reviewed. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case report for CSF cytology of a PCNSPBL, demonstrating the utility of the cytological examination in the triage and diagnosis of this disease. Because of its dismal prognosis, it is critical for cytopathologists to be aware of the entity and recognize the neoplastic cells in CSF specimen. This report also emphasizes the importance of clinical and radiological correlation in the diagnosis of this lethal disease. Diagn. Cytopathol. 2010. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

20368128
Case report: Lung disease in World Trade Center responders exposed to dust and smoke: carbon nanotubes found in the lungs of World Trade Center patients and dust samples.
After the collapse of the World Trade Center (WTC) on 11 September 2001, a dense cloud of dust containing high levels of airborne pollutants covered Manhattan and parts of Brooklyn, New York. Between 60,000 and 70,000 responders were exposed. Many reported adverse health effects. In this report we describe clinical, pathologic, and mineralogic findings in seven previously healthy responders who were exposed to WTC dust on either 11 September or 12 September 2001, who developed severe respiratory impairment or unexplained radiologic findings and underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgical lung biopsy procedures at Mount Sinai Medical Center. WTC dust samples were also examined. We found that three of the seven responders had severe or moderate restrictive disease clinically. Histopathology showed interstitial lung disease consistent with small airways disease, bronchiolocentric parenchymal disease, and nonnecrotizing granulomatous condition. Tissue mineralogic analyses showed variable amounts of sheets of aluminum and magnesium silicates, chrysotile asbestos, calcium phosphate, and calcium sulfate. Small shards of glass containing mostly silica and magnesium were also found. Carbon nanotubes (CNT) of various sizes and lengths were noted. CNT were also identified in four of seven WTC dust samples. These findings confirm the previously reported association between WTC dust exposure and bronchiolar and interstitial lung disease. Long-term monitoring of responders will be needed to elucidate the full extent of this problem. The finding of CNT in both WTC dust and lung tissues is unexpected and requires further study.

20301212
Papanicolaou stain may not be necessary in majority of head and neck fine-needle aspirations: evidence from a correlation study between Diff-Quik-based onsite diagnosis and final diagnosis in 287 head and neck fine-needle aspirations.
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) is a useful tool for immediate assessment of palpable lesions, especially in the head and neck region. The objective of this study is to evaluate the degree of correlation between Diff-Quik-based onsite diagnosis (OD) and final diagnosis (FD) and further improve the efficiency of FNA practice. Two hundred and eighty-seven cytopathologist-performed FNAs from the head and neck region were evaluated. Number of passes, number and type of slides and correlation (agreement, modified final diagnosis and disagreement) between OD and FD were evaluated. Among 287 FNAs, the average number of passes per FNA case was 2 (range, 1-5&.rpar;). The mean number of slides reviewed per case was 5 including 2 Diff-Quik (D-Q)-stained slides, 2 Papanicolaou (Pap)-stained slides, and 1 cell block (CB)/1 cytospin (Cy). 247 of 287 (86%) cases showed agreement between OD and FD. FD on 36 out of 287 cases (12.5%) was slightly modified or refined after reviewing additional slides. A major diagnostic discrepancy was noted in four cases (1.5%), three of which were classified as squamous cell carcinoma on final diagnosis, and confirmed on surgical follow-up. Accurate diagnosis can be achieved in the majority (86%) of head and neck FNAs based on immediate examination of D-Q stained slides alone. In a small number of cases (12.5%), reviewing additional slides may refine the final diagnosis. In rare cases, especially cystic squamous lesions, Pap-stained slides appeared to be helpful. It is plausible to use D-Q-stained slides alone with most head and neck FNAs in order to provide more cost effective and efficient triaging and patient management.

19582809
Metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma presenting as a pancreatic mass by computed tomography scan and mimicking a primary neuroendocrine tumor: a potential pitfall in aspiration cytology.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly malignant neoplasm, often presenting at late stage and portending a poor prognosis for the patient. The peripancreatic fat is a rare site of extrahepatic metastasis, and metastatic HCC can mimic primary pancreatic neoplasms, even in this location. It is crucial to be aware of this pitfall in the evaluation of aspiration cytology of pancreatic neoplasms and to develop a strategy to reach the correct diagnosis. We present an endoscopic ultrasound fine-needle aspiration diagnosis of metastatic HCC presenting as a pancreatic mass radiologically that had neuroendocrine features on various cytological and histological preparations. The metastatic lesions were located surgically in the peripancreatic adipose tissue with involvement of one peripancreatic lymph node. This case illustrates the utility of FNA for diagnosing uncommon presentations of HCC and the importance of clinical history, cell block, and an immunocytochemical panel in determining the origin of the tumor.

19526573
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of granular cell tumor of the tongue: a technique for the aspiration of oral lesions.
Granular cell tumor is most commonly located in the tongue. Despite this common location, there are few reports of fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of the tongue, likely because this is a sensitive area for most patients, and many cytopathologists do not have experience aspirating oral lesions. We report a case of FNAB of a granular cell tumor of the tongue in a 29-year-old man with an unusual presenting history and without symptoms. The diagnosis was made based on the cytomorphology of the direct smears and immunohistochemistry on cell block material. We will also describe cytologic features of the neoplasm, differential diagnosis, and our technique for obtaining the material, as we feel this can be repeated by experienced cytopathologists.

19369629
Immunohistochemical detection of p63 and XIAP in thymic hyperplasia and thymomas.
We subjected 23 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue blocks (11 cases of thymic hyperplasia and 12 thymomas [3 encapsulated, 8 with capsular invasion, and 1 atypical]) to incubation with monoclonal anti-X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and monoclonal anti-p63 (4A4, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA). Granular or heterogeneous cytoplasmic XIAP staining and nuclear p63 staining were considered positive. We compared thymic hyperplasia with thymoma and capsulated thymoma with thymoma with capsular invasion or atypia. p63 was positive in virtually all thymic epithelial cells in hyperplasia and thymoma. XIAP was negative in all hyperplasia cases except one. Of 12 thymomas, 9 were XIAP+ with focal/weak to diffuse/strong positivity: 2 of 3 encapsulated and 7 of 8 thymomas with capsular invasion were XIAP+. One atypical thymoma was XIAP-. XIAP expression differed significantly between hyperplasia and thymoma (P = .0007) but not between capsulated and invasive thymomas (P = .3797). p63 is consistently positive in nonneoplastic and neoplastic thymic epithelium. XIAP expression in thymoma suggests a possible role in the pathogenesis of thymoma and may be helpful in differentiating thymic hyperplasia from thymoma, especially in small biopsy specimens. However, the level of expression does not correlate with capsular invasion or atypia.

19109478
Detection and toxin typing of Clostridium perfringens in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue samples by PCR.
Since current microbiology methods are not suitable to detect Clostridium perfringens in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue samples, we developed a PCR assay to detect toxin-encoding genes and the 16S rRNA gene of C. perfringens. We successfully detected and genotyped C. perfringens in tissue sections from two autopsy cases.

19047108
Association between CCND1 G/A870 polymorphism, allele-specific amplification, cyclin D1 expression, and survival in esophageal and lung carcinoma.
Cyclin D1 is found on 11q13, which is a region frequently amplified in several tumor types. The CCND1 locus gives rise to at least two protein isoforms of D1 (D1a and D1b). A common G/A polymorphism (G/A870) is thought to influence the expression levels of D1a and D1b. D1b has been suggested to be increased in the presence of the A allele and more oncogenic than D1a. Furthermore, the A allele has been reported to correlate with increased risk of carcinoma in several tumor types, suggesting that this polymorphism and D1b are important in tumor progression. However, contradictory data about the polymorphism, D1 variant expression, and correlation with survival have been reported. We explored the relationship between gene amplification, G/A870 genotype, D1a and D1b expression, and overall survival in esophageal adenocarcinoma and non-small cell lung cancer. DNA and RNA were isolated from 54 esophageal adenocarcinoma samples and 89 non-small cell lung cancer samples and were analyzed for gene amplification, genotype at the polymorphism, gene expression, and association with overall survival. The D1 variant expression did not correlate with amplification, genotype, or overall survival in either tumor type. The total D1 expression correlated with decreased patient survival. Several other genes on 11q13 also seem to be overexpressed and correlated with decreased survival. We report that the G/A870 polymorphism does not correlate with patient survival, or with D1a or D1b expression. However, the total D1 expression and the expression of several other genes on 11q13 seem to be associated with esophageal adenocarcinoma patient survival.

18927117
Whole genome exon arrays identify differential expression of alternatively spliced, cancer-related genes in lung cancer.
Alternative processing of pre-mRNA transcripts is a major source of protein diversity in eukaryotes and has been implicated in several disease processes including cancer. In this study we have performed a genome wide analysis of alternative splicing events in lung adenocarcinoma. We found that 2369 of the 17 800 core Refseq genes appear to have alternative transcripts that are differentially expressed in lung adenocarcinoma versus normal. According to their known functions the largest subset of these genes (30.8%) is believed to be cancer related. Detailed analysis was performed for several genes using PCR, quantitative RT-PCR and DNA sequencing. We found overexpression of ERG variant 2 but not variant 1 in lung tumors and overexpression of CEACAM1 variant 1 but not variant 2 in lung tumors but not in breast or colon tumors. We also identified a novel, overexpressed variant of CDH3 and verified the existence and overexpression of a novel variant of P16 transcribed from the CDKN2A locus. These findings demonstrate how analysis of alternative pre-mRNA processing can shed additional light on differences between tumors and normal tissues as well as between different tumor types. Such studies may lead to the development of additional tools for tumor diagnosis, prognosis and therapy.

18784825
Prognostic significance of race and tumor size in carcinosarcoma of gallbladder: a meta-analysis of 68 cases.
Carcinosarcoma of gallbladder, also named sarcomatoid carcinoma and spindle cell carcinoma, is a rare neoplasm. Its clinical features and prognostic determinants are still poorly understood due to its rarity. We identified 67 qualified cases in published literatures and 1 in our institution. 52 of them were females and 16 males (F:M=3.25:1). 27 were Japanese patients and the rest were mainly from the United States and Europe. The mean age was 68.8 years (median 68 years, range 45-91 years). The average tumor size was 6.9 cm (median 5 cm, range 1.0-24.0 cm, n=49). Adenocarcinoma was the most common epithelial component (79.2%) and squamous cell carcinoma was the least common (9.4%). Spindle cell type was the most common mesenchymal component (44.6%) and osteoid was the least common (5.4%). The mean survival was 17.5 months (median 5 months, range 0 to 85 months, n=56). The 1-year and 5-year survival rates were 19+/-5% and 16+/-5% (mean+/-SD), respectively. Kaplan Meier survival analysis was conducted to examine the prognostic value of various clinical parameters. We found Japanese patients had longer survival time than non-Japanese ones (mean=19.9 months vs 11.5 months, median=6 vs 4 months, n=27 vs 24, p=0.022). Patients with smaller tumor (<5.0 cm) had longer survival time (in months) than those with larger tumor (mean 26.6 vs 17.7, median 11 vs 5, n=14 vs 27, p=0.028). The presence of gallstone, epithelial and mesenchymal component types, age and sex of the patients were not significant prognostic factors. In summary, race (Japanese vs non-Japanese) and tumor size are important prognostic factors in carcinosarcoma of gallbladder and they may be used for prognostification.

18432259
Immunohistochemical detection of XIAP and p63 in adenomatous hyperplasia, atypical adenomatous hyperplasia, bronchioloalveolar carcinoma and well-differentiated adenocarcinoma.
The critical distinction of bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC), well-differentiated adenocarcinoma (WDAC) of lung, adenomatous hyperplasia (AH) and atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH), is based on morphological criteria alone, and is therefore potentially subjective. We examined expression of two markers, X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), the most potent of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) family, and p63, a marker of bronchial reserve cells (BRC) and squamous cells, in these entities. H&E slides of 37 tissue blocks from 27 patients were reviewed and classified as AH (n=7), AAH (n=8), BAC (n=9) and WDAC (n=13). Immunostaining was performed on 4 mum sections with monoclonal anti-XIAP and monoclonal anti-p63. Granular or heterogeneous cytoplasmic staining for XIAP and nuclear staining for p63 were considered positive. Neither XIAP nor p63 were detected in normal lung alveolar cells. All seven AHs were negative for XIAP and negative or focally positive for p63. All eight AAHs were positive for XIAP and displayed p63 positivity in scattered cells. All BACs displayed XIAP positivity, which ranged from focal/weak to diffuse/strong. p63 was negative in seven and focally positive in two of nine BACs. Twelve of 13 WDACs showed XIAP positivity in a similar pattern to BAC; all were negative for p63. One aberrant case diagnosed on H & E as WDAC was negative for XIAP but strongly positive for p63. Significant XIAP expression appears to be useful for distinguishing AAH from AH. Commonality of XIAP staining in AAH, BAC and WDAC supports the possibility that AAH may be a pre-malignant lesion. The rarity of p63 expression confirms previous reports and supports a nonbronchial histogenesis of these entities. In contrast, diffuse p63 staining may facilitate the identification of rare cases that may have been misclassified as alveolar in origin based on morphology but may be of BRC origin.

18325467
Immunohistochemical detection of the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) in cervical squamous intraepithelial neoplasia and squamous carcinoma.
Premalignant and invasive squamous lesions of the uterine cervix were surveyed for the immunohistochemical detectability of the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), believed to be the most potent of a novel group of proteins designated inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs). IAPs bind and prevent the activation of apoptosis-mediating caspases. Recent cancer biologic studies have implicated IAPs in therapeutic resistance and tumor aggressiveness. XIAP in particular is considered a highly promising target for drug discovery. Forty-four formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded archival tissue sections were deparaffinized; subjected to citrate-based antigen retrieval; and immunostained with anti-XIAP monoclonal antibody (clone 48, BD Biosciences, San Jose, Calif) diluted 1:250, 4 degrees C x 72 hours; and developed using EnVision-Plus (Dako, Carpinteria, Calif) and diaminobenzidine as chromagen. Particulate or heterogeneous cytoplasmic staining was considered positive. Normal squamous epithelium was XIAP-positive in 7 of 34 cases (20.6%). Preinvasive intraepithelial lesions were positively stained in 54.5% of cases. Nineteen of 22 invasive squamous carcinomas were positive (86.4%). The intensity and extensiveness of XIAP immunostaining varied among individual cases, but trended upward with loss of tumor differentiation: 8 of 9 cases with strong staining were poorly differentiated carcinomas. The present study suggests the characteristic link between poor tumor differentiation and more aggressive clinical behavior could in some malignancies be based upon the concomitant induction of XIAP. Induction of XIAP appears to occur in a subset of intraepithelial lesions; in others, XIAP is detected only upon progression to invasive carcinoma. Detection of enhanced XIAP expression may also pinpoint those lesions that might benefit from pharmacologic disruption of XIAP's actions.

18242245
MicroRNA expression profiles of esophageal cancer.
Expression of microRNAs by array analysis provides unique profiles for classifying tissues and tumors. The purpose of our study was to examine microRNA expression in Barrett esophagus and esophageal cancer to identify potential markers for disease progression. MicroRNA was isolated from 35 frozen specimens (10 adenocarcinoma, 10 squamous cell carcinoma, 9 normal epithelium, 5 Barrett esophagus, and 1 high-grade dysplasia). MicroRNA expression was analyzed with Ambion bioarrays (Ambion, Austin, Tex) containing 328 human microRNA probes. Unsupervised hierarchic clustering resulted in four major branches corresponding with four histologic groups. One branch consisted of 7 normal epithelium samples and 1 squamous cell carcinoma sample. The second branch consisted of 7 squamous cell carcinoma samples and 1 normal epithelium sample. The third branch contained 4 Barrett esophagus samples and 1 squamous cell carcinoma sample. The fourth contained all the adenocarcinoma samples and 1 sample each of Barrett esophagus, normal epithelium, squamous cell carcinoma, and high-grade dysplasia. Supervised classification with principal component analysis determined that the normal epithelium samples were more similar to the squamous cell carcinoma tumors, whereas the Barrett esophagus samples were more similar to adenocarcinoma. Pairwise comparisons between sample types revealed microRNAs that may be markers of tumor progression. Both mir_203 and mir_205 were expressed 2- to 10-fold lower in squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinomas than in normal epithelium. The mir_21 expression was 3- to 5-fold higher in both tumors than in normal epithelium. Prediction analysis of microarray classified 3 Barrett esophagus samples as Barrett esophagus, 1 as adenocarcinoma, and 1 as normal epithelium. Expression profiles of miRNA distinguish esophageal tumor histology and can discriminate normal tissue from tumor. MicroRNA expression may prove useful for identifying patients with Barrett esophagus at high risk for progression to adenocarcinoma.

17951200
Immunohistochemical detection of XIAP in mesothelium and mesothelial lesions.
We examined benign and malignant mesothelial tissue samples for the presence of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), a potent constituent of the inhibitor of apoptosis family of caspase inhibitors. We subjected 55 sections (31 malignant mesotheliomas, 2 well-differentiated peritoneal mesotheliomas, 13 pleural mesothelial hyperplasias, and 9 benign mesothelial tissues) from archival formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded surgical tissue blocks to citrate-based antigen retrieval and then incubated them with monoclonal anti-XIAP (clone 48, dilution 1:250; BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) at 4 degrees C for 72 hours and developed them using EnVision-Plus reagents (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA) and diaminobenzidine as the chromogen. Particulate or nonhomogeneous cytoplasmic staining was considered positive. All 9 normal mesothelial samples were negative for XIAP. Of 13 mesothelial hyperplasias, 1 (8%) was weakly positive in fewer than 10% of cells, as was 1 of 2 well-differentiated peritoneal mesotheliomas. Of 31 malignant mesotheliomas, 25 (81%) displayed XIAP positivity. XIAP immunostaining, when strong, allows for distinction of malignant from benign and hyperplastic mesothelial cell populations and is a potentially useful immunodiagnostic marker in small samples and morphologically controversial cases. Elevated expression of XIAP could contribute to tumorigenesis in mesothelioma.

17599502
Evaluation of efficacy of an ultrasonic scalpel for pulmonary vascular ligation in an animal model.
Dissection to accommodate bulky stapling devices may cause injury to pulmonary arteries in thoracoscopic lobectomies. The Harmonic Ace (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc; Cincinnati, Ohio), a small ultrasonic scalpel used in systemic vessels, was tested on pulmonary vessels in pigs. Nine pigs were assigned 1- or 6-week survival. Lobectomies were performed using the device to divide and ligate pulmonary vessels. Vessel diameter was measured, and ligation outcome was recorded. Necropsies were then performed. Permanent ligation occurred in 76% of arteries and 92% of veins. At the highest power setting, the instrument showed no failure in arteries 5 mm or less and veins 7 mm or less. Necropsies revealed no evidence of postoperative bleeding. Histopathologic analysis revealed acute coagulation necrosis at 1 week. By 6 weeks, the vessel stumps displayed features consistent with normal wound healing. This device reliably divides pulmonary vessels 4 mm and smaller, typically encountered in pig lobectomies. Higher power settings and operator experience may increase effectiveness. Further testing is necessary to delineate the device's limitations before potential use in human pulmonary vasculature.

19392730
Pneumonia due to Legionella feeleii: case report and review of the literature.
Legionella feeleii is a rare cause of community-acquired pneumonia that occurs in immunocompromised hosts who are often receiving corticosteroid therapy. We report a 69-year-old man who underwent bone marrow transplantation and developed pneumonia due to L. feeleii, and review the clinical characteristics of 7 cases of L. feeleii infection reported in the literature.

18831009
Feasibility of immunocytochemical detection of tumor markers (XIAP, phosphohistone H1 and p63) in FNA cellblock samples from head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
One of the major handicaps in contemporary clinical oncology is the inability to predict the responsiveness of any individual's malignancy to specific therapies. The purpose of this study was to test the feasibility of immunocytochemically detecting markers that may be affected by therapy or are predictive of therapeutic responsiveness, including phosphohistone H1 (anti-p-H1 MoAb 12D11) and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) in small samples obtained via fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy procedure, thus improving therapeutic monitoring. p63, a squamous stem cell regulatory protein, was also examined. These three markers were studied in FNA cell block samples of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Twenty-eight alcohol-fixed formalin-postfixed paraffin-embedded cell-block samples from FNAs of patients with HNSCC were subjected to antigen retrieval and then incubated with anti-XIAP, anti-p-H1, and anti-p63, and developed using EnVision-Plus reagents and diaminobenzidine as chromagen; Granular or heterogeneous cytoplasmic staining for XIAP and nuclear staining for p63 and p-H1 were considered positive. Among the 28 cases studied, the overall positive rates for XIAP, p-H1, and p63 were 60.7%, 96.4%, and 92.8%, respectively. The staining intensity for XIAP: + 70.6%, ++ 23.5%, +++ 0%, and ++++ 5.9%; for p-H1: + 48.1%, ++ 11.1%, +++37.0%, and ++++ 3.7%; and for p63: + 11.5%, ++ 23.1%, +++ 53.9%, and ++++ 11.5%. The expression of p-H1 and p63 appeared to be higher and stronger than that of XIAP in HNSCC. This study demonstrated the feasibility of monitoring expression of three tumor markers using FNA samples. p-H1 and XIAP may be useful for monitoring actions of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, XIAP-lowering, and/or apoptosis-inducing drugs, respectively. Future studies will focus on the impact of therapies upon these staining profiles.

