20833849
PET/CT evaluation of cervical cancer: spectrum of disease.
The prognosis of invasive cervical cancer is based on the stage, size, and histologic grade of the primary tumor and the status of the lymph nodes. Assessment of disease stage is essential in determining proper management in individual cases. In the posttherapy setting, the timely detection of recurrence is essential for guiding management and may lead to increased survival. However, the official clinical staging system of the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics has inherent flaws that may lead to inaccurate staging and improper management. Combined positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) represents a major technologic advance, consisting of two integrated complementary modalities whose combined strength tends to overcome their respective weaknesses. PET/CT has higher sensitivity and specificity than do conventional anatomic modalities and is valuable in determining the extent of disease and detecting recurrent or residual tumor. The combination of 2-[fluorine-18]fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose PET with intravenous contrast material-enhanced high-resolution CT has proved useful for avoiding the interpretative weaknesses associated with either modality alone and in increasing the accuracy of staging or restaging. Nonetheless, accurate PET/CT interpretation requires a knowledge of the characteristics of disease spread or recurrence and an awareness of various imaging pitfalls if false interpretations are to be avoided.

20014423
Recent advances in the surgical management of cervical cancer.
Recent advances in the surgical management of early cervical cancer, including abdominal, laparoscopic, vaginal, and robotic approaches to radical hysterectomy as well as fertility-sparing radical trachelectomy, are reviewed. The nerve-sparing abdominal radical hysterectomy technique allows for a significant reduction in postoperative bladder morbidity. Radical vaginal hysterectomy with laparoscopic lymph node dissection is a well-recognized technique that offers excellent cure rates without abdominal entry as well as reduced postoperative febrile and gastrointestinal morbidity. Total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy is a minimally invasive alternative to the traditional abdominal radical hysterectomy approach and yields a comparable safety profile with a significant reduction in blood loss and hospital stay. Robotic surgery is becoming more widely accepted in the management of gynecologic cancers, including radical hysterectomy for early cervical cancer. Young women desiring to bear children in the future may be candidates for fertility preservation options, and the radical trachelectomy operation has been described and performed with abdominal, vaginal, laparoscopic, and robotic techniques. There are a number of surgical options for the treatment of women with early cervical cancer. The feasibility and safety of some of these techniques have been well established, whereas for others, the oncological outcome data are only preliminary. The decision to use newer techniques should be directed by patient variables as well as the surgeon's training and competence with laparoscopy, robotics, or vaginal surgery.

18765043
Robotic radical hysterectomy versus total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy for treatment of early cervical cancer.
To compare intraoperative, pathologic and postoperative outcomes of robotic radical hysterectomy (RRH) to total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy (TLRH) in patients with early stage cervical carcinoma. We prospectively analyzed cases of TLRH or RRH with pelvic lymphadenectomy performed for treatment of early cervical cancer between 2000 and 2008. Thirty patients underwent TLRH and pelvic lymphadenectomy for cervical cancer from August 2000 to June 2006. Thirteen patients underwent RRH and pelvic lymphadenectomy for cervical cancer from April 2006 to January 2008. There were no differences between groups for age, tumor histology, stage, lymphovascular space involvement or nodal status. No statistical differences were observed regarding operative time (323 vs 318 min), estimated blood loss (157 vs 200 mL), or hospital stay (2.7 vs 3.8 days). Mean pelvic lymph node count was similar in the two groups (25 vs 31). None of the robotic or laparoscopic procedures required conversion to laparotomy. The differences in major operative and postoperative complications between the two groups were not significant. All patients in both groups are alive and free of disease at the time of last follow up. Based on our experience, robotic radical hysterectomy appears to be equivalent to total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy with respect to operative time, blood loss, hospital stay, and oncological outcome. We feel the intuitive nature of the robotic approach, magnification, dexterity, and flexibility combined with significant reduction in surgeon's fatigue offered by the robotic system will allow more surgeons to use a minimally invasive approach to radical hysterectomy.

18667172
Patient clinical factors influencing use of hysterectomy in New York, 2001-2005.
To determine the effect of patient clinical factors on the utilization of hysterectomy and alternatives of hysterectomy. The database of Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield was abstracted for all claims relating to a hysterectomy procedure or a hysterectomy-associated diagnosis during the 48 consecutive months of May 2001-April 2005. Two hundred ninety-five thousand one hundred forty-eight claim lines were abstracted and analyzed by CPT and diagnostic grouping codes. One thousand nine hundred seventy-two hysterectomies were performed during the time analyzed, and 5,077 hysterectomy alternatives. The mean age of all patients encountered was 39.1 years. Patients undergoing a hysterectomy alternative or hysterectomy had mean ages of 46.0 and 49.7 years, respectively. Abnormal bleeding was associated with the most encounters, while leiomyomata was associated with the most hysterectomies performed. Patients who undergo hysterectomy are, on average, older than those undergoing office management or hysterectomy alternatives. Procedures are most commonly associated with diagnosis of bleeding, leiomyomata, or cancer. Bleeding typically results in a hysterectomy alternative, while leiomyomata has the highest association with hysterectomy.

18639208
Effect of physician gender and specialty on utilization of hysterectomy in New York, 2001-2005.
The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of physician gender and specialty on the utilization of hysterectomy and alternatives to hysterectomy. The database of Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield was abstracted for all claims relating to a hysterectomy procedure or a hysterectomy-associated diagnosis during the 48 consecutive months May 2001-April 2005. Two hundred ninety-five thousand, one hundred forty-eight claim lines were abstracted and analyzed by CPT and diagnostic grouping codes. One thousand nine hundred seventy-two hysterectomies were performed during the time analyzed, as well as 5077 hysterectomy alternatives. These 7049 procedures represented 2.4% of all coded physician encounters. Male physicians utilize hysterectomy and hysterectomy alternatives at the same rate as female physicians. Physicians who practice gynecology-only or gynecologic oncology utilize laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomy more often than their counterparts who practice obstetrics as well as gynecology. Gender does not influence the rate of hysterectomy for similar clinical diagnoses. Subspecialty physicians utilize laparoscopic assisted vaginal hysterectomies more frequently than general obstetricians and gynecologists.

18197000
New techniques in radical hysterectomy.
To review the recent literature regarding modifications of abdominal radical hysterectomy as well as development of new approaches including laparoscopic, vaginal, and robotic radical hysterectomy. Nerve-sparing radical hysterectomy technique allows for significant reduction in postoperative bladder morbidity. Radical vaginal hysterectomy with laparoscopic lymph node dissection is a well-recognized technique that offers excellent cure rates with absence of abdominal entry as well as reduced postoperative febrile and gastrointestinal morbidity. Total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy is a minimally invasive alternative to a traditional abdominal radical hysterectomy approach that yields comparable safety profile with a significant reduction in blood loss and hospital stay. Robotic surgery is becoming more widely accepted in the management of gynecologic cancers and larger series describing successful treatment of cervical cancer with robotic radical hysterectomy are soon to be published. There are a number of approaches to performing radical hysterectomy. The feasibility and safety of these techniques have been well established. Preliminary oncologic outcome data are encouraging. The decision to utilize newer techniques depends on the patient and type of practice, as well as the surgeon's comfort level with laparoscopy, robotics, or vaginal surgery.

17630176
Combined laparoscopic and radical vaginal treatment of primary vaginal leiomyosarcoma in a patient with unicornuate uterus and pelvic kidney.
We report a case of primary vaginal leiomyosarcoma occurring in a patient with a unicornuate uterus and pelvic kidney. The patient was treated with radical partial vaginectomy, unilateral groin dissection, total laparoscopic hysterectomy, and left pelvic laparoscopic lymphadenectomy, followed by adjuvant chemotherapy. Twenty-five months after her original procedure, the patient is alive and free of disease. The exact association between müllerian anomalies and primary malignancies of the genitourinary tract is unclear. It is nonetheless important to be aware of the close embryonic association between the genital and urinary tracts when evaluating such patients and choosing the appropriate surgical and therapeutic approach.

17349571
Xanthogranulomatous salpingitis associated with fallopian tube mucosal endometriosis: a clue to the pathogenesis.
Xanthogranulomatous salpingitis is an unusual inflammatory lesion of the fallopian tube, characterized by accumulation of foamy macrophages in the wall of the fallopian tube along with other chronic inflammatory cells. Only a few cases of xanthogranulomatous salpingitis have been reported in the English medical literature, some under different nomenclature. An association, most commonly with pelvic inflammatory disease and endometriosis, has been suggested. A 41-year-old woman with prior history of breast carcinoma underwent bilateral salpingoophorectomy because of hematosalpinx. The histology revealed xanthogranulomatous salpingitis in the setting of extensive fallopian tube mucosal endometriosis, endometritis, and presence of an intrauterine contraceptive device. Multiple etiologies have been linked to the xanthogranulomatous process at this location in previously reported cases. A whole spectrum of changes may exist in this lesion and probably represent a specialized form of tissue reaction secondary to multiple etiologies. Although it has been associated with pelvic endometriosis, it has never been demonstrated through progressive changes, beginning with mucosal endometriosis to the full-blown xanthogranulomatous inflammation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case that demonstrates different stages in the pathogenesis of this lesion and provides an insight into the histogenesis of this entity.

17292454
Renal artery thrombosis following secondary cytoreduction in a patient with ovarian cancer.
In order to successfully perform aggressive cytoreductive surgery for patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer, resection of retroperitoneal disease in close proximity to major vessels is often required. We describe a case of a 44-year-old female patient with a history of Stage IV carcinoma of the ovary, who underwent a successful secondary debulking procedure. To remove the left para-aortic tumor implant she required complete mobilization of the left kidney, with skeletonization of the left renal artery and vein. Postoperatively, the patient developed left renal artery thrombosis necessitating a unilateral nephrectomy. This is, to our knowledge, the first reported case of renal artery thrombosis following a debulking procedure. Gynecologic oncologists should be aware of this possibility and be familiar with the diagnosis and management of this condition.

17386041
A case-controlled study of total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy versus radical abdominal hysterectomy in a fellowship training program.
To determine whether total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy (TLRH) is a feasible alternative to an abdominal radical hysterectomy (ARH) in a gynecologic oncology fellowship training program. We prospectively collected cases of all of the patients with cervical cancer treated with TLRH and pelvic lymphadenectomy by our division from 2000 to 2006. All of the patients from the TLRH group were matched 1:1 with the patients who had ARH during the same period based on stage, age, histological subtype, and nodal status. Thirty patients were treated with TLRH with a mean age of 48.3 years (range, 29-78 years). The mean pelvic lymph node count was 31 (range, 10-61) in the TLRH group versus 21.8 (range, 8-42) (P < 0.01) in the ARH group. Mean estimated blood loss was 200 cc (range, 100-600 cc) in the TLRH with no transfusions compared to 520 cc in the ARH group (P < 0.01), in which five patients required transfusions. Mean operating time was 318.5 min (range, 200-464 min) compared to 242.5 min in the ARH group (P < 0.01), and mean hospital stay was 3.8 days (range, 2-11 days) compared to 5.6 days in the ARH group (P < 0.01). All TLRH cases were completed laparoscopically. All patients in the TLRH group are disease free at the time of this report. In conclusion, it is feasible to incorporate TLRH training into the surgical curriculum of gynecologic oncology fellows without increasing perioperative morbidity. Standardization of TLRH technique and consistent guidance by experienced faculty is imperative.

