20350649
Genomic loss of imprinting in first-trimester human placenta.
The purpose of this study was to investigate imprinting patterns in first-trimester human placentas. Using samples of 17 first-trimester and 14 term placentas from uncomplicated pregnancies, we assessed loss of imprinting (LOI) at the RNA level in a panel of 14 genes that are known to be imprinted in the placenta with the use of a quantitative allele-specific reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analysis of those genes that contained readout single nucleotide polymorphisms in their transcripts. There is significant LOI (ie, biallelic expression) in all 14 genes in first-trimester placentas. LOI was more variable and generally at lower levels at term. Although there is little difference in gene expression, the level of LOI is higher in the first-trimester placentas, compared with term placentas. Genomic imprinting appears to be a dynamic maturational process across gestation in human placenta. In contrast with prevailing theories, epigenetic imprints may continue to evolve past 12 weeks of gestation.

20309920
Epigenetics in women's health care.
Epigenetics refers to structural modifications to genes that do not change the nucleotide sequence itself but instead control and regulate gene expression. DNA methylation, histone modification, and RNA regulation are some of the mechanisms involved in epigenetic modification. Epigenetic changes are believed to be a result of changes in an organism's environment that result in fixed and permanent changes in most differentiated cells. Some environmental changes that have been linked to epigenetic changes include starvation, folic acid, and various chemical exposures. There are periods in an organism's life cycle in which the organism is particularly susceptible to epigenetic influences; these include fertilization, gametogenesis, and early embryo development. These are also windows of opportunity for interventions during the reproductive life cycle of women to improve maternal-child health. New data suggest that epigenetic influences might be involved in the regulation of fetal development and the pathophysiology of adult diseases such as cancer, diabetes, obesity, and neurodevelopmental disorders. Various epigenetic mechanisms may also be involved in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. Additionally, environmental exposures are being held responsible for causing epigenetic changes that lead to a disease process. Exposure to heavy metals, bioflavonoids, and endocrine disruptors, such as bisphenol A and phthalates, has been shown to affect the epigenetic memory of an organism. Their long-term effects are unclear at this point, but many ongoing studies are attempting to elucidate the pathophysiological effects of such gene-environment interactions.

19244065
Effect of increased body mass index on the accuracy of estimated fetal weight by sonography in twins.
The purpose of this study was to determine whether increasing body mass index (BMI) decreases the accuracy of sonographic estimations of fetal weight in twin gestations. A chart review was conducted, in which 361 charts of patients with twin gestations over a 2-year period were reviewed. A total of 194 patients had sonographic examinations for fetal weight within 6 days of delivery and were included in the analysis. The difference between the sonographically estimated fetal weight was compared with the actual birth weight for each twin and stratified for the patient's BMI. There was a significant increasing trend in mean absolute percent errors with increasing BMIs in both twins (P< .05). The mean absolute percent errors for twin A were 6% for patients with a BMI of less than 25 and 9% for those with a BMI of greater than 30. The mean absolute percent errors for twin B were 6.7% for patients with a BMI of less than 25 and almost 11.7% for those with a BMI of greater than 30. There was a significantly increasing trend in mean absolute differences in grams for both twins with increasing gestational age, with almost a 4-fold increase from less than 28 weeks to greater than 36 weeks in both twins (P< .05). Increasing maternal obesity decreases the accuracy of sonographically determined fetal weight in twin gestations, particularly for twin B.

18928991
Contemporary outcomes with the latest 1000 cases of multifetal pregnancy reduction (MPR).
This study was undertaken to report on the outcome of multifetal pregnancy reduction in the most up-to-date largest single center experience with this procedure, and compare the outcome to the first 1000 cases performed at the same institution. 1000 consecutive cases of multifetal pregnancy reduction performed at the Mount Sinai Medical Center between the years 1999-2006 were identified. Pregnancy outcomes were retrieved from a large database as well as chart review. Differences in means and proportions were evaluated by analysis of variance, chi-square, Cochran-Armitage test for trend or 2-tailed Fisher exact test as appropriate. Outcomes were available on 841 cases, for a follow-up rate of 84.1%; 95.2% of patients delivered after 24 weeks, for a complete loss rate of 4.7%. There was a significant trend toward decreasing loss rates with decreasing starting numbers. Mean gestational age at delivery was later, and birthweights greater, for reduction to singletons vs twins. Loss rates after multifetal pregnancy reduction have remained stable at 4.7%. The lowest loss rate occurred in the patients reducing from twins to a singleton (2.1%). Reduction to a singleton was also associated with higher birthweights and lower rates of preterm deliveries.

18850518
The association between vasa previa, multiple gestations, and assisted reproductive technology.
Patients with multiple gestations, low-lying placentas, velamentous cord insertions, and history of assisted conception should be evaluated carefully for a vasa previa. Serial surveillance for signs of preterm labor and elective cesarean delivery at 34 to 35 weeks after corticosteroids for fetal lung maturity is a reasonable management strategy for vasa previa in multiple gestations.

18639217
Chorionic villus sampling and the risk of adverse outcome in patients undergoing multifetal pregnancy reduction.
The objective of the study was to determine whether patients undergoing chorionic villus sampling (CVS) prior to MPR are at increased risk for adverse outcome compared to those who did not. We retrospectively identified multifetal pregnancy reduction (MPR) patients from an established database. Maternal demographic data were collected. Outcomes including complete pregnancy loss prior to 24 weeks' gestation, gestational age at delivery, and birthweight were analyzed. There was no significant difference in pregnancy loss between the 2 groups (CVS [4%] vs no CVS [7%], P = .098). When stratified by finishing number, there was a significantly lower loss rate in the singleton CVS group (2% vs 9%, P = .025) and no significant difference in reduced twins. There was no significant difference in the average gestational age of delivery or birthweight. CVS prior to MPR does not increase the risk of pregnancy loss. Our data suggest that CVS prior to singleton reduction may decrease the risk of adverse outcome.

17972236
Differences in fetal growth, discordancy, and placental pathology in reduced versus nonreduced twins.
This study evaluated the effect of multifetal pregnancy reduction on the incidence of small for gestational age (SGA) and discordance in reduced versus nonreduced twins and differences in placental pathology. A computerized ultrasound database was used to identify diamniotic-dichorionic twins who delivered at our institution. Reduced (n = 36) versus nonreduced twins (n = 243) were compared for differences in rates of SGA and discordancy (>or= 20%.) The groups were compared for differences in maternal and neonatal characteristics, as well as differences in placental pathology. Chi-square tests were used to compare differences in means. Stepwise logistic regression was used to adjust for potential confounders including placental pathology. The rate of SGA in either twin A or B remained nonsignificant after adjustment for the use of assisted reproductive technology and gestational age at delivery in the stepwise logistic model (odds ratio, 1.7 95%; confidence interval, 0.5, 5.2). The average discordance at delivery was 12.4% in reduced versus 11.4% in the nonreduced twins ( P = 0.54). We found no overall differences in placental pathology between the two groups. Reduced and nonreduced twins have no significant differences in SGA fetuses, growth discordancy, or placental pathology.

17592059
Successful management of a consecutive cervical pregnancy by sonographically guided transvaginal local injection: case report and review of the literature.
The purpose of this study was to describe the successful management of a recurrent cervical pregnancy with local injection and to review similarly treated cases to determine adverse outcomes. A case of a recurrent cervical pregnancy treated with transvaginal local injection was reported. A MEDLINE English language search identified 90 cases of cervical pregnancy treated with local therapy. This literature was analyzed with regard to the various demographic and outcome variables described. Successful use of the transvaginal local approach is described. A review of cases identified a mean maternal age of 33.6 years with a mean gestational age at diagnosis of 7.5 weeks. Bleeding was the most common presenting sign (79%). The mean beta-human chorionic gonadotropin level at the time of diagnosis was 27,798 IU with an average time to resolution of 7.5 weeks. The most common risk factor was a history of curettage (69%), followed by previous cesarean delivery (35%). An additional dose of methotrexate was needed in 6% of cases. Bleeding requiring alternate procedures was present in 5% of cases. There were no complications in 81% of cases. The need for transfusion and development of infection were seen in 3% of cases each. There was 1 case (1.1%) requiring hysterectomy, and no maternal deaths were reported. Conservative management of cervical pregnancy using local injection has been reported to have a low complication rate and a high efficacy for cure.

17255180
Does sonographic determination of placental location predict fetal birth weight in diamniotic-dichorionic twins?
The purpose of this study was to determine the association between placental location in diamniotic-dichorionic twins as determined at the time of anatomic survey and birth weight. We retrospectively identified all diamniotic-dichorionic twins in our Maternal-Fetal Medicine sonography database between 2000 and 2005 who had an anatomic survey, went on to be delivered at our hospital, and had records available for review (n = 304). Placental location for each twin was determined at the time of anatomic survey and grouped into both anterior or both posterior versus separate anterior and posterior. Maternal and fetal characteristics were collected from chart review. Placental pathologic findings were available for 249 (83%) patients. Outcomes analyzed were percent discordance, small size for gestational age of twin A or B, and difference in birth weight as a continuous variable. Multivariable logistic regression using stepwise backward elimination was used to adjust for potential confounders. There was no difference in discordance of 20% or greater or incidence of small size for gestational age when both placentas were both anterior and both posterior compared with separate anterior and posterior: adjusted odds ratio (AdjOR), 1.38 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.64-2.95); and AdjOR, 1.29 (95% CI, 0.57-2.89). The actual birth weight difference (A - B) was not affected by placental location (P = .36). Opposite sex fetuses and nulliparity were significantly associated with birth weight discordance: AdjOR, 2.68 (95% CI, 1.39-5.17); and AdjOR, 0.34 (95% CI, 0.28-0.94). We did not find a correlation between birth weight and placental location in our cohort analysis. The presence of sex-discordant twins was associated with birth weight discordance of 20% or greater, whereas nulliparity was protective.

