21538048
Establishment of fibrillin-deficient osteoprogenitor cell lines identifies molecular abnormalities associated with extracellular matrix perturbation of osteogenic differentiation.
Fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 are structural components of the extracellular matrix which are also involved in modulating local TGF? and BMP bioavailability. Loss of fibrillin-1 or fibrillin-2 is associated with perturbed osteoblast maturation principally as the result of unbalanced TGF? and BMP signaling. Here, we demonstrated that stable expression of small hairpin RNAs against fibrillin-1(Fbn1) or fibrillin-2 (Fbn2) transcripts in the clonal osteoprogenitor cell line Kusa-A1 led to the same phenotypic and molecular manifestations as germline Fbn1- or Fbn2-null mutations in primary calvarial osteoblast cultures. Proof-of-concept experiments are also presented showing that Fbn1- or Fbn2-silenced Kusa-A1 cell lines are suitable models to identify candidate determinants of osteogenesis which are under the control of extracellular microfibrils. Specific findings included: the inference of a potential role for fibrillin-1-mediated cell-matrix interactions in regulating Kusa-A1 proliferation; the possibility of fibrillin-2 involvement in modulating the activity of transcription factor Runx2 by restricting microRNA expression and/or processing; and the suggestion that fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 influence Notch signaling indirectly by differentially regulating BMP signaling. Collectively, the data reiterated the notion that fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 exert opposite effects on osteoblast differentiation through the discrete modulation of a broad network of interacting signaling molecules.

21362163
Ha-Ras stabilization mediates pro-fibrotic signals in dermal fibroblasts.
ABSTRACT: Scleroderma (systemic sclerosis; SSc) is a clinically heterogeneous and often lethal acquired disorder of the connective tissue that is characterized by vascular, immune/inflammatory and fibrotic manifestations. Tissue fibrosis is the main cause of morbidity and mortality in SSc and an unmet medical challenge, mostly because of our limited understanding of the molecular factors and signalling events that trigger and sustain disease progression. Recent evidence has correlated skin fibrosis in SSc with stabilization of proto-oncogene Ha-Ras secondary to auto-antibody stimulation of reactive oxygen species production. The goal of the present study was to explore the molecular connection between Ha-Ras stabilization and collagen I production, the main read-out of fibrogenesis, in a primary dermal fibroblast culture system that replicates the early stages of disease progression in SSc. Forced expression of proto-oncogene Ha-Ras in dermal fibroblasts demonstrated the promotion of an immediate collagen I up-regulation, as evidenced by enhanced activity of a collagen I-driven luciferase reporter plasmid and increased accumulation of endogenous collagen I proteins. Moreover, normal levels of Tgf? transcripts and active transforming growth factor-beta (TGF?) implied Ha-Ras stimulation of the canonical Smad2/3 signalling pathway independently of TGF? production or activation. Heightened Smad2/3 signalling was furthermore correlated with greater Smad3 phosphorylation and Smad3 protein accumulation, suggesting that Ha-Ras may target both Smad2/3 activation and turnover. Additional in vitro evidence excluded a contribution of ERK1/2 signalling to improper Smad3 activity and collagen I production in cells that constitutively express Ha-Ras. Our study shows for the first time that constitutively elevated Ha-Ras protein levels can directly stimulate Smad2/3 signalling and collagen I accumulation independently of TGF? neo-synthesis and activation. This finding therefore implicates the Ha-Ras pathway with the early onset of fibrosis in SSc and implicitly identifies new therapeutic targets in SSc.

21126338
Fibrillin assemblies: extracellular determinants of tissue formation and fibrosis.
ABSTRACT: The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays a key role in tissue formation, homeostasis and repair, mutations in ECM components have catastrophic consequences for organ function and therefore, for the fitness and survival of the organism. Collagen, fibrillin and elastin polymers represent the architectural scaffolds that impart specific mechanic properties to tissues and organs. Fibrillin assemblies (microfibrils) have the additional function of distributing, concentrating and modulating local transforming growth factor (TGF)-? and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signals that regulate a plethora of cellular activities, including ECM formation and remodeling. Fibrillins also contain binding sites for integrin receptors, which induce adaptive responses to changes in the extracellular microenvironment by reorganizing the cytoskeleton, controlling gene expression, and releasing and activating matrix-bound latent TGF-? complexes. Genetic evidence has indicated that fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 contribute differently to the organization and structural properties of non-collagenous architectural scaffolds, which in turn translate into discrete regulatory outcomes of locally released TGF-? and BMP signals. Additionally, the study of congenital dysfunctions of fibrillin-1 has yielded insights into the pathogenesis of acquired connective tissue disorders of the connective tissue, such as scleroderma. On the one hand, mutations that affect the structure or expression of fibrillin-1 perturb microfibril biogenesis, stimulate improper latent TGF-? activation, and give rise to the pleiotropic manifestations in Marfan syndrome (MFS). On the other hand, mutations located around the integrin-binding site of fibrillin-1 perturb cell matrix interactions, architectural matrix assembly and extracellular distribution of latent TGF-? complexes, and lead to the highly restricted fibrotic phenotype of Stiff Skin syndrome. Understanding the molecular similarities and differences between congenital and acquired forms of skin fibrosis may therefore provide new therapeutic tools to mitigate or even prevent disease progression in scleroderma and perhaps other fibrotic conditions.

20855508
Fibrillin-1 and -2 differentially modulate endogenous TGF-? and BMP bioavailability during bone formation.
Extracellular regulation of signaling by transforming growth factor (TGF)-? family members is emerging as a key aspect of organ formation and tissue remodeling. In this study, we demonstrate that fibrillin-1 and -2, the structural components of extracellular microfibrils, differentially regulate TGF-? and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) bioavailability in bone. Fibrillin-2-null (Fbn2(-/-)) mice display a low bone mass phenotype that is associated with reduced bone formation in vivo and impaired osteoblast maturation in vitro. This Fbn2(-/-) phenotype is accounted for by improper activation of latent TGF-? that selectively blunts expression of osterix, the transcriptional regulator of osteoblast maturation, and collagen I, the structural template for bone mineralization. Cultured osteoblasts from Fbn1(-/-) mice exhibit improper latent TGF-? activation as well, but mature faster because of increased availability of otherwise matrix-bound BMPs. Additional in vitro evidence excludes a direct role of microfibrils in supporting mineral deposition. Together, these findings identify the extracellular microfibrils as critical regulators of bone formation through the modulation of endogenous TGF-? and BMP signaling.

20729550
Extracellular microfibrils control osteoblast-supported osteoclastogenesis by restricting TGF{beta} stimulation of RANKL production.
Mutations in fibrillin-1 or fibrillin-2, the major structural components of extracellular microfibrils, cause pleiotropic manifestations in Marfan syndrome and congenital contractural arachnodactyly, respectively. We recently found that fibrillin-1 and fibrillin-2 control bone formation by regulating osteoblast differentiation through the differential modulation of endogenous TGF? and bone morphogenetic protein signals. Here, we describe in vivo and ex vivo experiments that implicate the fibrillins as negative regulators of bone resorption. Adult Fbn2(-/-) mice display a greater than normal osteolytic response to locally implanted lipopolysaccharide-coated titanium particles. Although isolated cultures of Fbn2(-/-) preosteoclasts exhibited normal differentiation and activity, these features were substantially augmented when mutant or wild-type preosteoclasts were co-cultured with Fbn2(-/-) but not wild-type osteoblasts. Greater osteoclastogenic potential of Fbn2(-/-) osteoblasts was largely accounted for by up-regulation of the Rankl gene secondary to heightened TGF? activity. This conclusion was based on the findings that blockade of TGF? signaling blunts Rankl up-regulation in Fbn2(-/-) osteoblasts and bones and that systemic TGF? antagonism improves locally induced osteolysis in Fbn2(-/-) mice. Abnormally high Rankl expression secondary to elevated TGF? activity was also noted in cultured osteoblasts from Fbn1(-/-) mice. Collectively our data demonstrated that extracellular microfibrils balance local catabolic and anabolic signals during bone remodeling in addition to implying distinct mechanisms of bone loss in Marfan syndrome and congenital contractural arachnodactyly.

20392244
Extracellular regulation of transforming growth factor beta and bone morphogenetic protein signaling in bone.
Systemic and local factors regulate the activity of osteoblasts and osteoclasts during bone growth and remodeling by modulating a complex array of intracellular signaling events. Recent genetic evidence implicates extracellular fibrillin assemblies (microfibrils and elastic fibers) in imparting contextual specificity to endogenous transforming growth factor-beta and bone morphogenetic protein ligands in the forming and mature skeleton. The evidence is based on the characterization of the cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for the unique bone manifestations that characterize mouse models of Marfan syndrome and congenital contractural arachnodactyly. Collectively, the studies indicate that fibrillin assemblies play a key role both in establishing morphogen gradients within the developing limbs and in restricting growth factors activity in remodeling bones. The latter finding is likely to improve the design of more effective therapeutic interventions in osteoporosis and of bioengineering formulations for the repair of bone fractures.

19109253
p38 MAPK is an early determinant of promiscuous Smad2/3 signaling in the aortas of fibrillin-1 (Fbn1)-null mice.
Excessive transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling characterizes the progression of aortic aneurysm in mouse models of Marfan syndrome, a systemic disorder of the connective tissue that is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the extracellular matrix protein fibrillin-1. Fibrillin-1 mutations are believed to promote abnormal Smad2/3 signaling by impairing the sequestration of latent TGF-beta complexes into the extracellular matrix. Here we report that promiscuous Smad2/3 signaling is the cell-autonomous phenotype of primary cultures of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) explanted from the thoracic aortas of Fbn1 mutant mice with either neonatal onset or progressively severe aortic aneurysm. This cellular phenotype was characterized in VSMC isolated from Fbn1-null (mgN/mgN) mice, which recapitulate the most severe form of Marfan syndrome. We found that loss of fibrillin-1 deposition promotes the production of intracellular reactive oxygen species and abnormal accumulation of phosphorylated TGF-beta-activated kinase 1 and p38 MAPK, in addition to increasing the levels of endogenous phospho-Smad2. We showed that improper Smad2/3 signaling in Fbn1-null VSMC is in part stimulated by phospho-p38 MAPK, which is in turn activated in response to signals other than those mediated by the kinase activity of the ALK5 receptor. Consistent with these cell culture data, in vivo analyses documented that phospho-p38 MAPK accumulates earlier than phospho-Smad2 in the aortic wall of mgN/mgN mice and that systemic inhibition of phospho-p38 MAPK activity lowers the levels of phospho-Smad2 in this tissue. Collectively, these findings indicate that improper activation of p38 MAPK is a precursor of constitutive Smad2/3 signaling in the aortic wall of a mouse model of neonatal lethal Marfan syndrome.

