17224751
Noninvasive determination of intraocular pressure (IOP) in nonsedated mice of 5 different inbred strains.
Noninvasive intraocular pressure (IOP) measurement in mice is critically important for understanding the pathophysiology of glaucoma. Rebound tonometry is one of the methods that can be used for obtaining such measurements. We evaluated the ability of the rebound tonometer (RT) to determine IOP differences among various mouse strains and whether differences in corneal thickness may affect IOP measurements in these animals. Five different commonly used mouse strains (BALB/C, CBA/CAHN, AKR/J, CBA/J, and 129P3/J) were used. IOP was measured in eyes from 12 nonsedated animals (6 male and 6 female) from each strain at 2 to 3 months of age using the RT. IOPs were measured in all animals, on 2 different days between 10 AM and 12 PM. Subsequently, a number of eyes from each strain were cannulated to provide a calibration curve specific for that strain. Tonometer readings for all strains were converted to apparent IOP values using the calibration data obtained from the calibration curve of the respective strain. For comparison purposes, IOP values were also obtained using the C57BL/6 calibration data previously reported. IOP for the 5 strains, male and female animals, and the different occasion of measurement were compared using repeat measures analysis of variance. The central corneal thickness (CCT) of another group of 8 male animals from each of the 5 strains was also measured using an optical low coherence reflectometry (OLCR) pachymeter modified for use with mice. CCT values were correlated to mean IOPs of male animals and to the slopes and intercept of individual strain calibration curves. Noninvasive IOP measurements confirm that the BALB/C strain has lower and the CBA/CAHN has higher relative IOPs than other mouse strains while the AKR/J, the CBA/J, and the 129P3/J strains have intermediate IOPs. There is a very good correlation of apparent IOP values obtained by RT with previously reported true IOPs obtained by cannulation. There was a small but statistically significant difference in IOP between male and female animals in 2 strains (129P3/J and AKR/J) with female mice having higher relative IOPs. No correlation between CCT and IOP was detected. CCT did not correlate with any of the constants describing the calibration curves in the various strains. Noninvasive IOP measurement in mice using the RT can be used to help elucidate IOP phenotype, after prior calibration of the tonometer. CCT has no effect on mouse IOP measurements using the RT.

