21320939
Determinants of medical expenditures in the last 6 months of life.
End-of-life medical expenditures exceed costs of care during other years, vary across regions, and are likely to be unsustainable. Identifying determinants of expenditure variation may reveal opportunities for reducing costs. To identify patient-level determinants of Medicare expenditures at the end of life and to determine the contributions of these factors to expenditure variation while accounting for regional characteristics. It was hypothesized that race or ethnicity, social support, and functional status are independently associated with treatment intensity and controlling for regional characteristics, and that individual characteristics account for a substantial proportion of expenditure variation. Using data from the Health and Retirement Study, Medicare claims, and The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care, relationships were modeled between expenditures and patient and regional characteristics. United States, 2000 to 2006. 2394 Health and Retirement Study decedents aged 65.5 years or older. Medicare expenditures in the last 6 months of life were estimated in a series of 2-level multivariable regression models that included patient, regional, and patient and regional characteristics. Decline in function (rate ratio [RR], 1.64 [95% CI, 1.46 to 1.83]); Hispanic ethnicity (RR, 1.50 [CI, 1.22 to 1.85]); black race (RR, 1.43 [CI, 1.25 to 1.64]); and certain chronic diseases, including diabetes (RR, 1.16 [CI, 1.06 to 1.27]), were associated with higher expenditures. Nearby family (RR, 0.90 [CI, 0.82 to 0.98]) and dementia (RR, 0.78 CI, 0.71 to 0.87]) were associated with lower expenditures, and advance care planning had no association. Regional characteristics, including end-of-life practice patterns (RR, 1.09 [CI, 1.06 to 1.14]) and hospital beds per capita (RR, 1.01 [CI, 1.00 to 1.02]), were associated with higher expenditures. Patient characteristics explained 10% of overall variance and retained statistically significant relationships with expenditures after regional characteristics were controlled for. The study limitations include the decedent sample, proxy informants, and a large proportion of unexplained variation. Patient characteristics, such as functional decline, race or ethnicity, chronic disease, and nearby family, are important determinants of expenditures at the end of life, independent of regional characteristics. The Brookdale Foundation.

21167451
Evidence for new standard of care in non-small cell lung cancer patients.


20636149
Determinants of treatment intensity for patients with serious illness: a new conceptual framework.
Research during the past few decades has greatly advanced our understanding of the cost, quality, and variability of medical care at the end of life. The current health-care policy debate has focused considerable attention on the unsustainable rate of spending and wide regional variation associated with medical treatments in the last year of life. New initiatives aim to standardize quality and reduce over-utilization at the end of life. We argue, however, that focusing exclusively on medical treatment at the end of life is not likely to lead to effective health-care policy reform or reduce costs. Specifically, end-of-life policy initiatives face the challenges of political feasibility, inaccurate prognostication, and gaps in the existing literature. With the ultimate aim of improving the quality and efficiency of care, we propose a research and policy agenda guided by a new conceptual framework of factors associated with treatment intensity for patients with serious and complicated medical illness. This model not only expands the population of interest to include all adults with serious illness, but also provides a blueprint for the thorough investigation of the diverse and interconnected determinants of treatment intensity. The new conceptual framework presented in this paper can be used to develop future research and policy initiatives designed to improve the quality and efficiency of care for adults with serious illness.

20487080
Opiniones: end-of-life care preferences and planning of older Latinos.
To measure end-of-life (EOL) care preferences and advance care planning (ACP) in older Latinos and to examine the relationship between culture-based attitudes and extent of ACP. Cross-sectional interview. Twenty-two senior centers in greater Los Angeles. One hundred forty-seven Latinos aged 60 and older. EOL care preferences, extent of ACP, attitudes regarding patient autonomy, family-centered decision-making, trust in healthcare providers, and health and sociodemographic characteristics. If seriously ill, 84% of participants would prefer medical care focused on comfort rather than care focused on extending life, yet 47% had never discussed such preferences with their family or doctor, and 77% had no advance directive. Most participants favored family-centered decision making (64%) and limited patient autonomy (63%). Greater acculturation, education, and desire for autonomy were associated with having an advance directive (P-values <.03). Controlling for sociodemographic characteristics, greater acculturation (adjusted odds ratio (AOR)=1.6, 95% confidence interval (CI)=1.1-2.4) and preferring greater autonomy (AOR=1.6, 95% CI=1.1-2.3) were independently associated with having an advance directive. The majority of older Latinos studied preferred less-aggressive, comfort-focused EOL care, yet few had documented or communicated this preference. This discrepancy places older Latinos at risk of receiving high-intensity care inconsistent with their preferences.

