19031407
Selective neck dissection following adjuvant therapy for advanced head and neck cancer.
In the past, surgeons believed that in order to eradicate regional disease, a radical or modified radical neck dissection was necessary. An evolution in surgical principles and the popularization of primary chemoradiation has raised the questions regarding the role of neck dissection and the extent of neck dissection following therapy. The aim of this study was to determine the efficacy of selective neck dissection (SND) for patients with N2 or N3 disease following treatment with primary radiation therapy or chemoradiation. A retrospective review of 58 patients with stage III or IV head and neck squamous cell carcinoma was conducted. The primary sites included base of tongue (n = 15), hypopharynx (n = 12), tonsil (n = 16), larynx (n = 11), and unknown primary (n = 4). Definitive treatment consisted of either concomitant chemoradiation (67.2%) or external beam radiation therapy (32.8%). In the monotherapy group, all patients received a total curative dose of 66 to 72 Gy in once-daily fractions of 180 to 200 cGy. The combined chemoradiation group received a similar radiation schedule and a 4-day continuous infusion of cisplatin (20 mg/m(2)/day) and 5-fluorouracil (1000 mg/m(2)/day). A planned SND of levels II to IV was performed on all the patients 3 to 6 weeks after completion of definitive medical therapy. Seventy neck dissections were performed on 58 patients with advanced neck disease following radiation or chemoradiation. The median time of follow-up was 34 months (range, 9-71 months) following the neck dissection. Pathologically, 22.4% (13/58) of the patients had viable tumor cells identified in the neck dissection specimen. Seventy-two percent of the patients are currently alive, and 28% died as a result of distant disease, local or regional recurrence, or other causes. Of patients who died from distant disease, 11% had pathological evidence of residual tumor cells identified in the neck dissection specimen. Of patients who died from local or regional disease, 50% had pathological evidence of residual tumor cells identified in the neck dissection specimen. The rate of regional recurrence following SND is similar to reported rates following modified/radical neck dissection. This suggests that SND provides an appropriate surgical option for advanced neck disease in select patients following adjuvant therapy.

17972312
Vessel-depleted neck: techniques for achieving microvascular reconstruction.
In the neck, the recipient vessels most frequently used for microsurgical reconstruction are compromised by prior surgery and radiation. We conducted a retrospective chart review of all patients who underwent microvascular reconstruction between July 2001 and June 2005. Donor vessels, vein grafts, and flap survival were examined. Fourteen of 197 patients (7%) were identified with a vessel-depleted neck. All patients had undergone a prior neck dissection and radiation (100%) or chemoradiation (42%). Free flap revascularization was achieved using the transverse cervical artery with a vein graft and a cephalic vein (4 patients), thoracoacromial artery and cephalic vein (3 patients), internal mammary artery and vein (3 patients), and inferior thyroid artery and cephalic vein (1 case). In 3 patients, the reverse flow thoracodorsal artery and cephalic vein were used to vascularize the scapular flap. The cephalic vein, transverse cervical, internal mammary, and thoracoacromial vessels represent reliable alternatives in the vessel-depleted neck.

17956165
Extended tracheal stenosis secondary to a massive substernal goiter.


17112771
Evolution of the management of laryngeal cancer.
The treatment of laryngeal cancer has evolved through several phases, starting with wide extirpative surgical resection, and evolving through an era of conservation surgery and, finally, planned treatment using modalities of irradiation, chemotherapy and surgery in various combinations. Attempts to extirpate laryngeal cancer date to the nineteenth century, but only by the mid-twentieth century did advances in anesthesia, blood transfusion and antibiotics, make this surgery safe and reliable. Techniques of partial laryngectomy by external approach developed in the second half of the twentieth century, and endoscopic use of the laser refined the concept and provided a new paradigm for surgical treatment, particularly for early lesions. During most of this era, radiation was employed as an alternative method of treatment, with surgery reserved for salvage of radiation failure. By the last decade of the twentieth century, and to the present time, the value of combined modality therapy, using planned combinations of irradiation, chemotherapy and surgery became the standard of care for advanced laryngeal cancer, permitting maximal laryngeal preservation with the highest attainable cure rates.

