21565672
Low-Renin Hypertension of Childhood.
Low-renin hypertension occurs in children as a result of several genetic mutations that cause mineralocorticoid excess or excess stimulation of the mineralocorticoid receptor. This article discusses the genetic disorders that cause low-renin hypertension.

21450983
Final adult height in children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia treated with growth hormone.
Context: Patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency typically reach a final adult height well below their mid-parental target height. Objective: The objective of this study was to examine whether GH alone or in combination with an LHRH analog (LHRHa) improved the final adult height in patients with CAH. Design: The study was a nonrandomized prospective study. Setting: The study was conducted at two university hospitals in New York City, NY. Participants: Thirty-four patients with CAH treated with GH participated in this study. Nineteen males and 15 females who were predicted to be more than 2 sd below their mid-parental target height or more than 2 sd below the population mean received GH until reaching final adult height. In addition to GH, 27 patients (16 males, 11 females) were also treated with an LHRHa. Intervention: The mean duration of GH treatment was 5.6 ± 1.8 yr in males and 4.5 ± 1.6 yr in females. The mean duration of LHRHa therapy was 3.7 ± 1.7 yr for both sexes. Main Outcome Measures: The primary endpoint variables were final adult height, final height discrepancy, and gain in height. Results: Males reached a significantly higher final adult height (172.0 ± 4.8 cm) than their initial predicted height (162.8 ± 7.7 cm) (P < 0.00001). Females also reached a significantly higher final adult height (162.2 ± 5.3 cm) than initially predicted (151.7 ± 5.2 cm) (P < 0.0000001). Mean gain in height was 9.2 ± 6.7 cm in males and 10.5 ± 3.7 cm in females. Conclusion: Our results indicate that GH alone or in combination with LHRHa improves final adult height in patients with CAH.

21164274
Ancient history of congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Although there are many erudite reports on the history of endocrinology and endocrine disorders, the history of congenital adrenal hyperplasia has not been published. I have tried to review ancient as well as modern history of CAH.

20392211
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency: A paradigm for prenatal diagnosis and treatment.
21-Hydroxylase deficiency is the most common cause of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), an inherited disorder of steroidogenesis. In its severe form, CAH causes genital ambiguity in females. Molecular genetic analysis of fetal DNA obtained by amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling is used to diagnose steroid 21-OHD deficiency in utero. Large ongoing studies show that appropriate prenatal treatment of pregnant mothers with dexamethasone is effective and safe for both the fetus and the mother. It reduces ambiguous genitalia in the female affected fetus and thus avoids unnecessary genitoplasty in the newborn female.

19944288
Steroid 21 hydroxylase deficiency congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Steroid 21 hydroxylase deficiency is the most common form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). The severity of this disorder depends on the extent of impaired enzymatic activity, which is caused by various mutations of the 21 hydroxylase gene. This article reviews adrenal steroidogenesis and the pathophysiology of 21 hydroxylase deficiency. The three forms of CAH are then discussed in terms of clinical presentation, diagnosis and treatment, and genetic basis. Prenatal diagnosis and treatment are also reviewed. The goal of therapy is to correct the deficiency in cortisol secretion and suppress androgen overproduction. Glucocorticoid replacement has been the mainstay of treatment for CAH, but new treatment strategies continue to be developed and studied.

19840619
Long-term growth hormone therapy in an adolescent boy with 45,X/46,XidicY(p11).
A 17-year-old boy with chromosomal mosaicism resulting in a 45,X/46,X,idic(Y)(p11) karyotype came to medical attention at the age of 10 years because of short stature. He was treated with recombinant growth hormone for 6.6 years and has achieved a near final adult height of 172.5 cm. His clinical features included second-degree hypospadias, some stigmata of Turner syndrome, and spontaneous progression through puberty. We report long-term use of growth hormone in a male adolescent with isodicentric Yq.

19101608
Prenatal diagnosis and treatment of congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) applies to a group of inherited disorders caused by an enzyme deficiency in steroid biosynthesis. The most common form of CAH is 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21-OHD), which in its severe form can cause genital ambiguity in females. Affected females experience virilization both physically and psychologically. Steroid 21-OHD can be diagnosed in utero through molecular genetic analysis of fetal DNA. Appropriate prenatal treatment by dexamethasone administration to the at-risk pregnant mother is effective in reducing genital virilization in the fetus, thus avoiding unnecessary genitoplasty in affected females. Current data from large human studies show that prenatal diagnosis and treatment are safe in the short term for both the fetus and the mother. Preliminary data from long-term studies support these results.

19021194
Mutation of growth hormone receptor in children with Idiopathic Short Stature.


18574213
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia in adolescents: diagnosis and management.
Adolescent females who have irregular menstrual periods may have the nonclassical form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to a mild deficiency of steroid 21-hydroxylase (NC 21-OHD). Hyperandrogenic signs such as acne, frontal hair loss, hirsutism, and irregular menstrual periods should alert the physician to the diagnosis of NC 21-OHD. An ACTH stimulation test in which serum hormone concentrations of 17-OHP, Delta(4)-androstenedione, and testosterone are determined will assist in the diagnosis of NC 21-OHD, but the definitive diagnostic test is an analysis of the mutations in the CYP21A2 gene. Typical mutations in the CYP21A2 gene in patients with NC 21-OHD are an exon 7 or an exon 1 mutation. Once the genotype establishes the diagnosis of NC 21-OHD, treatment should be initiated. Typical treatment is dexamethasone, 0.25 mg HS, which generally reverses the hyperandrogenic signs.

18353671
WITHDRAWN: Low renin hypertension (LRH): shades of John Laragh.
The Publisher regrets that this article is an accidental duplication of an article that has already been published in Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism, Vol. 19, No. 3, p. 83, doi:10.1016/j.tem.2008.01.008. The duplicate article has therefore been withdrawn.

18306251
Inactivation of the acid labile subunit gene resulting in insulin-like growth factor deficiency.


18294861
Steroid 11beta- hydroxylase deficiency congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to steroid 11beta-hydroxylase deficiency is a genetic disorder of steroidogenesis, transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait. It is associated with low renin hypertension, hypokalemia, hyperandrogenemia and genital ambiguity in affected females. Mutations in the CYP11B1 gene, causing 11beta-hydroxylase deficiency in the zona fasciculata in the adrenal cortex, have been identified. The indicators of congenital adrenal hyperplasia caused by 11beta-hydroxylase deficiency, include increased serum concentrations of desoxycorticosterone, 11 deoxycortisol and delta4-androstenedione, and suppressed plasma renin concentrations. The disorder is treated by administration of glucocorticoids.

18056052
Effects of adrenal steroids on the bone metabolism of children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
The primary treatment for patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21OHD) is glucocorticoid replacement therapy, which at supraphysiologic levels can result in diminished bone accrual and lead to osteopenia and osteoporosis. Unlike other diseases treated with chronic glucocorticoid therapy, previous studies of patients with 21OHD have not demonstrated a detrimental effect of glucocorticoid treatment on bone mineral density (BMD). It has been postulated that the elevated androgens typically found in these patients have a protective effect on bone integrity, but the precise mechanism remains unknown. We propose that the inhibitory effect of corticosteroid therapy on bone formation is counteracted by estrogen's effect on bone resorption through the RANK-L/osteoprotegerin (OPG) system. A better understanding of the mechanism by which patients with 21OHD are protected against bone loss may lead to novel therapeutic measures to prevent or treat osteopenia and osteoporosis in other conditions, including postmenopausal women.

17937061
Growth and pubertal characteristics in patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency.
This retrospective study examined the pubertal characteristics and growth in patients with 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21-OHD). There were 18 males and 31 females with salt wasting (SW), simple virilizing (SV), or non-classical (NC) 21-OHD. Mean ages at onset of puberty (AOP) in SW, SV, and NC males were 9.2 +/- 1.9, 10.3 +/- 1.1, and 10.7 +/- 0.8 years, respectively; while mean AOP in SW, SV, and NC females were 9.3 +/- 1.7, 8.6 +/- 1.6, and 8.5 +/- 1.3 years, respectively. Mean final height (FH) in SW males (159.6 +/- 7.8 cm) was less than in SV (166.8 +/- 7.5 cm, p = 0.06) and NC (173.4 +/- 6.4 cm, p = 0.005) males. Mean FH in SW females (157.1 +/- 5.5 cm) was similar to SV (156.0 +/- 8.4 cm) but less than NC (161.3 +/- 5.4 cm, p = 0.01) females. In conclusion, while the patients as a group entered puberty earlier than the general population, SW males entered puberty the earliest and had the most compromised FH outcome.

17669719
Concomitant secretion of glucocorticoid, androgens, and mineralocorticoid by an adrenocortical carcinoma: case report and review of literature.
To present a case of concomitant secretion of cortisol, androgens, and 11-deoxycorticosterone (DOC) by an adrenocortical carcinoma and review the literature in an attempt to identify similar cases. The patient's medical history, physical examination, laboratory data, computed tomographic scan, and histopathologic results were analyzed and summarized in a case report, and an extensive review of the literature was performed. Endocrinologic data showed excess cortisol production, substantially elevated testosterone and androstenedione levels, and profoundly increased DOC in the setting of suppressed aldosterone. An abdominal computed tomographic scan showed a left adrenal tumor. A left adrenalectomy was performed, and the histopathologic diagnosis was stage II adrenocortical carcinoma. The review of the pertinent literature revealed the absence of any identical cases in the past. Our patient presented with a rare case of cosecretion of cortisol, testosterone, androstenedione, and DOC by an adrenocortical carcinoma, resulting in a clinical picture consistent with Cushing's syndrome, hyperandrogenism, and primary hypermineralocorticoidism. We recommend the routine performance of a DOC assay in the setting of mineralocorticoid excess in association with low plasma aldosterone levels.

17516565
Apparent mineralocorticoid excess manifested in an elderly patient with hypothyroidism.


17342026
Prenatal diagnosis and treatment of congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a group of inherited disorders caused by enzyme deficiencies in steroid biosynthesis, which disrupt the conversion of cholesterol to cortisol. The most common form of CAH is 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21-OHD). In its severe form, 21-OHD causes prenatal virilization of external female genitalia. Through molecular genetic analysis of fetal DNA, defects in 21-OH synthesis can be diagnosed in utero. Genital ambiguity in females can be reduced or eliminated with prenatal dexamethasone treatment, which successfully suppresses fetal androgen production. Data from current, large cohort studies show that prenatal diagnosis and treatment are safe and effective.

17275379
Ethnic-specific distribution of mutations in 716 patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia owing to 21-hydroxylase deficiency.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21OHD) occurs worldwide. The most common mutations in the CYP21A2 gene in 716 unrelated patients were analyzed and the mutations were grouped by ethnicity, as defined through self-declaration corroborated by review of pedigrees extending to two or three generations. Prevalent allelic mutations and genotypes were found to vary significantly among ethnic groups, and the predominance of the prevalent mutations and genotypes in several of these populations was significant. There are ethnic-specific mutations in the CYP21A2 gene. A large deletion is prevalent in the Anglo-Saxons; a V281L (1685 G to T) mutation is prevalent in Ashkenazi Jews; an R356W (2109 G to A) mutation is prevalent in the Croatians; an IVS2 AS -13 (A/C to G) mutation is prevalent in the Iranians and Yupik-speaking Eskimos of Western Alaska; and a Q318X (1994 C to T) mutation is prevalent in East Indians. Genotype/phenotype non-correlation was seen when at least one IVS2 AS -13 (A/C to G) mutation in the CYP21A2 gene was present.

17047340
Prenatal diagnosis and treatment of congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is a group of inherited disorders caused by an enzyme deficiency in steroid biosynthesis. The most common form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia is 21-hydroxylase deficiency, which in its severe form can cause genital ambiguity in females. Steroid 21-hydroxylase deficiency can be diagnosed in utero through molecular genetic analysis of fetal DNA. Prenatal treatment successfully reduces genital ambiguity, and the subsequent problems of sex misassignment and gender confusion. Data from current studies show that prenatal diagnosis and treatment are safe for the mother and the fetus. The evidence also suggests that it is safe over the long term, but all subjects exposed to dexamethasone treatment during embryonic and fetal life should have their physical, cognitive and emotional developments recorded.

17032723
Aldosterone-to-renin ratio as a marker for disease severity in 21-hydroxylase deficiency congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) owing to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21 OHD) is classified clinically in decreasing order of severity into salt-wasting, simple-virilizing, and nonclassical forms. Causative mutations in the CYP21A2 gene dictate the degrees of adrenal enzyme defect. Salt-wasting crises due to aldosterone deficiency are clinically apparent in the salt-wasting form but not in other forms of 21 OHD. This study examined the ratio of serum aldosterone to plasma renin activity as an index of sodium wasting in patients with 21 OHD CAH, heterozygotes, and normal individuals. This was a cross-sectional, retrospective, noninterventional study. A total of 402 individuals were included: 224 patients affected with 21 OHD CAH and 178 unaffected subjects. Classification into each diagnostic group was made primarily on the basis of clinical and hormonal features. Affected or unaffected status was confirmed by genotype of CYP21A2. All subjects were on ad lib diets without restrictions. Salt-wasting status was examined by sodium deprivation testing in 32 salt-wasting subjects and 14 simple virilizing subjects. The ratio of serum aldosterone to plasma renin activity was found to discriminate well between the different groups of disease severity. The lowest ratios, indicative of the least sodium conservation, were seen in the salt-wasting group with increasing ratios in the simple virilizing, nonclassical, and unaffected groups. This ratio remained stable with age. The ratio of serum aldosterone to plasma renin activity provides a simple index to compare groups of patients with varying degrees of 21 OHD.

