20677926
Amniotic fluid cells are more efficiently reprogrammed to pluripotency than adult cells.
Recently, cultured human adult skin cells were reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, which have characteristics similar to human embryonic stem (hES) cells. Patient-derived iPS cells offer genetic and immunologic advantages for cell and tissue replacement or engineering. The efficiency of generating human iPS cells has been very low; therefore an easily and efficiently reprogrammed cell type is highly desired. Here, we demonstrate that terminally differentiated human amniotic fluid (AF) skin cells provide an accessible source for efficiently generating abundant-induced pluripotent stem (AF-iPS) cells. By induction of pluripotency with the transcription factor quartet (OCT3/4, SOX2, KLF4, and c-MYC) the terminally differentiated, cultured AF skin cells formed iPS colonies approximately twice as fast and yielded nearly a two-hundred percent increase in number, compared to cultured adult skin cells. AF-iPS cells were identical to hES cells for morphological and growth characteristics, antigenic stem cell markers, stem cell gene expression, telomerase activity, in vitro and in vivo differentiation into the three germ layers and for their capacity to form embryoid bodies (EBs) and teratomas. Our findings provide a biological interesting conclusion that these fetal AF cells are more rapidly, easily, and efficiently reprogrammed to pluripotency than neonatal and adult cells. AF-iPS cells may have a "young," more embryonic like epigenetic background, which may facilitate and accelerate pluripotency. The ability to efficiently and rapidly reprogram terminally differentiated AF skin cells and generate induced pluripotent stem cells provides an abundant iPS cell source for various basic studies and a potential for future patient-specific personalized therapies.

17980165
Protein kinase X (PRKX) can rescue the effects of polycystic kidney disease-1 gene (PKD1) deficiency.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a common, genetically determined developmental disorder of the kidney that is characterized by cystic expansion of renal tubules and is caused by truncating mutations and haplo-insufficiency of the PKD1 gene. Several defects in cAMP-mediated proliferation and ion secretion have been detected in ADPKD cyst-lining epithelia. Unlike the ubiquitous PKA, the cAMP-dependent CREB-kinase, Protein Kinase X (PRKX) is developmentally regulated, tissue restricted and induces renal epithelial cell migration, and tubulogenesis in vitro as well as branching morphogenesis of ureteric bud in developing kidneys. The possibility of functional interactions between PKD1-encoded polycystin-1 and PRKX was suggested by the renal co-distribution of PRKX and polycystin-1 and the binding and phosphorylation of the C-terminal of polycystin-1 by PRKX at S4166 in vitro. Early consequences of PKD1 mutation include increased tubule epithelial cell-matrix adhesion, decreased migration, reduced ureteric bud branching and aberrant renal tubule dilation. To determine whether PRKX might counteract the adverse effects of PKD1 mutation, human ADPKD epithelial cell lines were transfected with constitutively active PRKX and shown to rescue characteristic adhesion and migration defects. In addition, the co-injection of constitutively active PRKX with inhibitory pMyr-EGFP-PKD1 into the ureteric buds of mouse embryonic kidneys in organ culture resulted in restoration of normal branching morphogenesis without cystic tubular dilations. These results suggest that PRKX can restore normal function to PKD1-deficient kidneys and have implications for the development of preventative therapy for ADPKD.

17475814
Mouse embryonic stem cell-derived embryoid bodies generate progenitors that integrate long term into renal proximal tubules in vivo.
The metanephric kidney is a mesodermal organ that develops as a result of reciprocal interactions between the ureteric bud and the blastema. The generation of embryonic stem (ES) cell-derived progenitors offers potential for regenerative therapies but is often limited by development of tumor formation. Because brachyury (T) denotes mesoderm specification, a mouse ES cell line with green fluorescence protein (GFP) knocked into the functional T locus as well as lacZ in the ROSA26 locus (LacZ/T/GFP) was used in cell selection and lineage tracing. In the absence of leukemia inhibitory factor, mouse ES cells give rise to embryoid bodies that can differentiate into mesoderm. Culture conditions were optimized (4 d, 10 ng/ml Activin-A) to generate maximal numbers of renal progenitor populations identified by expression of the specific combination of renal markers cadherin-11, WT-1, Pax-2, and Wnt-4. LacZ/T/GFP+ cells were further enriched by FACS selection. Five days after injection of LacZ/T/GFP+ cells into embryonic kidney explants in organ culture, beta-galactosidase immunohistochemistry showed incorporation into blastemal cells of the nephrogenic zone. After a single injection into developing live newborn mouse kidneys, co-localization studies showed that the LacZ/T/GFP+ cells were stably integrated into proximal tubules with normal morphology and normal polarization of alkaline phosphatase and aquaporin-1 for 7 mo, without teratoma formation. It is concluded that defined differentiation of ES cells into embryoid bodies with Activin-A and selection for T expression provides a means to isolate and purify renal proximal tubular progenitor cells with the potential for safe use in regenerative therapies.

