20494662
Comparison of frequency of inducible myocardial ischemia in patients presenting to emergency department with typical versus atypical or nonanginal chest pain.
The present study was designed to assess the value of the presenting symptom of "typical" anginal pain, "atypical/nonanginal" pain, or the lack of chest pain in predicting the presence of inducible myocardial ischemia using cardiac stress testing in emergency department patients being evaluated for possible acute coronary syndrome. We performed a retrospective observational study of adult patients who were evaluated for acute coronary syndrome in an emergency department chest pain unit. The presenting symptoms were obtained from a structured questionnaire administered before stress testing. Patient chest pain was categorized according to the presence of substernal chest pain or discomfort that was provoked by exertion or emotional stress and was relieved by rest and/or nitroglycerin. Chest pain was classified as "typical" angina if all 3 descriptors were present and "atypical" or "nonanginal" if <3 descriptors were present. All patients underwent serial biomarker and cardiac stress testing before discharge. A total of 2,525 patients met the eligibility criteria. Inducible ischemia on stress testing was found in 33 (14%, 95% confidence interval 10% to 19%) of the 231 patients who had typical anginal pain, 238 (11%, 95% confidence interval 10% to 13%) of the 2,140 patients presenting with atypical/nonanginal chest pain, and 25 (16%, 95% confidence interval 11% to 22%) of the 153 patients who had no complaint of chest pain on presentation. Compared to patients with atypical or no chest pain, patients with typical chest pain were not significantly more likely to have inducible ischemia on stress testing (likelihood ratio +1.25, 95% confidence interval 0.89 to 1.78). In conclusion, in our study, the patients who presented with "typical" angina were no more likely to have inducible myocardial ischemia on stress testing than patients with other presenting symptoms.

20097504
Portable ultrasound for remote environments, part II: current indications.
With recent advances in ultrasound technology, it is now possible to deploy lightweight portable imaging devices in the field. Techniques and studies initially developed for hospital use have been extrapolated out of the hospital setting in a wide variety of environments in an effort to increase diagnostic accuracy in austere or prehospital environments. This review summarizes current ultrasound applications used in out-of-hospital arenas and highlights existing evidence for such use. The diversity of applications and environments is organized by indication to better inform equipment selection as well as future directions for research and development. Trauma evaluation, casualty triage, and assessment for pneumothorax, acute mountain sickness, and other applications have been studied by field medical teams. A wide range of outcomes have been reported, from alterations in patient care to determinations of accuracy compared to clinical judgment or other diagnostic modalities. The use of lightweight portable ultrasound shows great promise in augmenting clinical assessment for field medical operations. Although some studies of diagnostic accuracy exist in this setting, further research focused on clinically relevant outcomes data is needed.

20097500
Portable ultrasound for remote environments, Part I: Feasibility of field deployment.
In field medical operations, rapid diagnosis and triage of seriously injured patients is critical. With significant bulk and cost constraints placed on all equipment, it is important that any medical devices deployed in the field demonstrate high utility, durability, and ease of use. When medical ultrasound was first used in patient care, machine cost, bulk, and steep learning curves prevented use outside of the radiology department. Now, lightweight portable ultrasound is widely employed at the bedside by emergency physicians. The techniques and equipment have recently been extrapolated out of the hospital setting in a wide variety of environments in an effort to increase diagnostic accuracy in the field. In this review, deployment of lightweight portable ultrasound in the field (by emergency medical services, military operations, disaster relief, medical missions, and expeditions to austere environments) is examined. The feasibility of field deployment and experiences of clinicians using ultrasound in a host of environments are detailed. In addition, special technological considerations such as telemedicine and machine characteristics are reviewed. The use of lightweight portable ultrasound shows great promise in augmenting clinical assessment for field medical operations. Although the feasibility of the technology has been demonstrated in certain medical and trauma applications, further research is needed to determine the utility of ultrasound use for medical illness in the field.

19384639
Use of ultrasound by emergency medical services: a review.
Prehospital ultrasound has been deployed in certain areas of the USA and Europe. Physicians, emergency medical technicians, and flight nurses have utilized a variety of medical and trauma ultrasound assessments to impact patient care in the field. The goal of this review is to summarize the literature on emergency medical services (EMS) use of ultrasound to more clearly define the potential utility of this technology for prehospital providers.

19384520
The utility of cardiac sonography and capnography in predicting outcome in cardiac arrest.
Emergency physicians and intensivists are increasingly utilizing capnography and bedside echocardiography during medical resuscitations. These techniques have shown promise in predicting outcomes in cardiac arrest, and no cases of return of spontaneous circulation in the setting of sonographic cardiac standstill and low end-tidal carbon dioxide have been reported. This case report illustrates an example of such an occurrence. Our aims are to report a case of return of spontaneous circulation in a patient with sonographic cardiac standstill, electrocardiographic pulseless electrical activity, and low end-tidal carbon dioxide tensions and to place the case in the context of previous literature on this topic. Case report and brief review of the literature. In 254 cases reported, no patient has survived in the setting of sonographic cardiac standstill and low end-tidal carbon dioxide tension, making the reported case unique. This case should serve to illustrate the utility and limitations of combined cardiac sonography and end-tidal carbon dioxide measurement in determining prognosis during cardiac arrest.

17512864
Images in emergency medicine. Hemorrhagic pancreatitis.


