21107844
Is a return to baseline sexual function possible? An analysis of sexual function outcomes following laparoscopic radical prostatectomy.
Outcome measures following radical prostatectomy are not standardized. Though excellent potency rates are widely reported, few studies address a return to baseline function. We analyze validated sexual health-related quality-of-life outcomes by a strict definition, a return to baseline function, and compare them to less stringent, yet more frequently referenced, categorical definitions of potency. Patients undergoing laparoscopic radical prostatectomy from April 2001 to September 2007 completed the Expanded Prostate Cancer Index Composite (EPIC) questionnaire at baseline and 3, 6, 12, and 24 months postoperatively. We defined a return to baseline as a recovery to greater than one-half standard deviation of the studied population below the patient's own baseline (clinically detectable threshold). We compared these outcomes to a categorical definition of potency involving intercourse frequency. To limit confounders, we performed subset analyses of preoperatively potent men who received bilateral nerve preservation. Factors predictive of return to baseline function were assessed in multivariable analysis. A total of 568 patients met inclusion criteria. Mean age and follow-up were 57.2 years and 16.9 months, respectively. Using the categorical definition, 85% of preoperatively potent men with bilateral nerve preservation were "potent" at 24 months; however, only 27% returned to their baseline sexual function. In multivariable analyses baseline function, number of nerves spared, and age were independent predictors of a return to baseline function. While most preoperatively potent men who receive bilateral nerve preservation engage in intercourse postoperatively, few return to their baseline sexual function. We believe that these data provide context for the expectations of patients who elect extirpative therapy.

20932557
Unnecessary imaging for the staging of low-risk prostate cancer is common.
To quantify the rate of overuse of preoperative imaging procedures in a referral cohort of low-risk patients. International evidence-based best practice guidelines discourage routine imaging for staging purposes in low-risk patients with newly diagnosed prostate cancer. An institutional database comprised of all patients undergoing robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy was queried for "low-risk" patients between May 2005 and January 2010. "Low-risk" was defined by the most inclusive criteria for imaging recommendations: prostate-specific antigen ?10 ng/mL and Gleason score ?6. We defined staging imaging as a bone scan, computed tomography (CT) of the pelvis or endorectal magnetic resonance imaging performed after the diagnosis of prostate cancer and before prostatectomy for the indication of "prostate cancer." Six-hundred seventy-seven patients were identified as having low-risk disease and comprised our study population. Of the 677 patients identified as low risk, 328 (48%) underwent at least one preoperative imaging procedure despite the guideline recommendations. Two-hundred two of 677 (30%) patients were administered at least 2 of the 3 modalities, and 18/677 (3%) patients received all 3 imaging examinations before prostatectomy. Suspicious results from the CT (7/265%, 2.7%) or bone scan (21/241%, 8.7%) resulted in 27 patients undergoing additional radiographic imaging, none of which resulted in suspicious lesions requiring intervention or biopsy. Despite international evidence-based guidelines for the staging of newly diagnosed prostate cancer patients, many urologists continue to refer low-risk patients for unnecessary imaging studies. This may place the patient at increased risk from radiation or contrast exposure and places an unnecessary financial burden on the patient and health care system.

20202392
Risk stratification and early oncologic outcomes following robotic prostatectomy.
Although the popularity of robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy is assured, little is known about the oncologic outcomes following the procedure. We performed a retrospective cohort study including consecutive patients who underwent the surgery between 2003 and 2007 with at least 6 months of follow-up (n=464). Patients were stratified into low-, intermediate-, and high-risk groups according to D'Amico criteria. Biochemical failure was defined as a PSA > or =0.2 ng/mL. Of study patients, 256 (55%), 171 (37%), and 37 (8%) were classified as low-, intermediate-, and high-risk, respectively. Over a mean follow-up of 14.1 months (range, 6.0 to 55.3), 7.3% experienced biochemical failure. Biochemical disease-free survival at 30 months was 94%, 79%, and 73% among patients in the low-, intermediate-, and high-risk groups, respectively, (P<0.001). Preoperative risk stratification was strongly associated with biochemical failure, with hazard ratios of 5.04 (95%: 1.52 to 16.7; P<0.001) and 7.04 (95%: 1.39 to 35.6; P < 0.001) for intermediate- and high- over low-risk groups, respectively. The ability of risk stratification to predict biochemical failure had an area under the receiver operator characteristic curve of 0.74. Robotic prostatectomy provides excellent cancer control outcomes for clinically localized disease.

