21377656
Tryptophan depletion and emotional processing in healthy volunteers at high risk for depression.
Studies in depressed patients have demonstrated the presence of emotional bias toward negative stimuli, as well as dysregulated brain serotonin function. The present study compared the effects of acute tryptophan depletion (ATD) on both an emotional processing and a planning task in never-depressed healthy volunteers at high and low familial risk for depression. Young adults with no personal psychiatric history were stratified into two groups based on family history (n = 25). Participants were enrolled in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover ATD study and completed the affective go/no-go and Tower of London tasks once during each condition. There was a significant treatment by valence by group interaction on the affective go/no-go, driven primarily by a greater frequency of inappropriate responses to sad than to happy distracters in the high-risk group during ATD. No group differences were observed on the Tower of London. Asymptomatic individuals at high familial risk for depression showed abnormalities in emotional processing while undergoing experimentally induced tryptophan depletion. These findings support emotional processing disturbances as potential trait-level abnormalities associated with the risk of mood disorder.

21194898
A selective neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist in chronic PTSD: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, proof-of-concept trial.
The substance P-neurokinin-1 receptor (SP-NK(1)R) system has been extensively studied in experimental models of stress, fear, and reward. Elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) SP levels were reported previously in combat-related PTSD. No medication specifically targeting this system has been tested in PTSD. This proof-of-concept randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial evaluated the selective NK(1)R antagonist GR205171 in predominately civilian PTSD. Following a 2-week placebo lead-in, 39 outpatients with chronic PTSD and a Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS) score ?50 were randomized to a fixed dose of GR205171 (N=20) or placebo (N=19) for 8weeks. The primary endpoint was mean change from baseline to endpoint in the total CAPS score. Response rate (?50% reduction in baseline CAPS) and safety/tolerability were secondary endpoints. CSF SP concentrations were measured in a subgroup of patients prior to randomization. There was significant improvement in the mean CAPS total score across all patients over time, but no significant difference was found between GR205171 and placebo. Likewise, there was no significant effect of drug on the proportion of responders [40% GR205171 versus 21% placebo (p=0.30)]. An exploratory analysis showed that GR205171 treatment was associated with significant improvement compared to placebo on the CAPS hyperarousal symptom cluster. GR205171 was well-tolerated, with no discontinuations due to adverse events. CSF SP concentrations were positively correlated with baseline CAPS severity. The selective NK(1)R antagonist GR205171 had fewer adverse effects but was not significantly superior to placebo in the short-term treatment of chronic PTSD. (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT 00211861, NCT 00383786).

20661876
Increased ventricular lactate in chronic fatigue syndrome measured by 1H MRS imaging at 3.0 T. II: comparison with major depressive disorder.
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), a complex illness characterized by fatigue, impaired concentration, and musculoskeletal pain, is often misdiagnosed as a psychiatric illness due to the overlap of its symptoms with mood and anxiety disorders. Using proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging ((1)H MRSI), we previously measured levels of the major brain metabolites in CFS, in generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), and in healthy control subjects, and found significantly higher levels of ventricular cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) lactate in CFS compared to the other two groups. In the present study, we sought to assess the specificity of this observation for CFS by comparing ventricular lactate levels in a new cohort of 17 CFS subjects with those in 19 healthy volunteers and in 21 subjects with major depressive disorder (MDD), which, like GAD, is a neuropsychiatric disorder that has significant symptom overlap with CFS. Ventricular CSF lactate was significantly elevated in CFS compared to healthy volunteers, replicating the major result of our previous study. Ventricular lactate measures in MDD did not differ from those in either CFS or healthy volunteers. We found a significant correlation between ventricular CSF lactate and severity of mental fatigue that was specific to the CFS group. In an exploratory analysis, we did not find evidence for altered levels of the amino acid neurotransmitters, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamate + glutamine ('Glx'), in CFS compared to MDD or healthy controls. Future (1)H MRS studies with larger sample sizes and well-characterized populations will be necessary to further clarify the sensitivity and specificity of neurometabolic abnormalities in CFS and MDD.

19897179
Safety and efficacy of repeated-dose intravenous ketamine for treatment-resistant depression.
A single subanesthetic (intravenous) IV dose of ketamine might have rapid but transient antidepressant effects in patients with treatment-resistant depression (TRD). Here we tested the tolerability, safety, and efficacy of repeated-dose open-label IV ketamine (six infusions over 12 days) in 10 medication-free symptomatic patients with TRD who had previously shown a meaningful antidepressant response to a single dose. On day 1, patients received a 40-min IV infusion of ketamine (.5 mg/kg) in an inpatient setting with continuous vital-sign monitoring. Psychotomimetic effects and adverse events were recorded repeatedly. The primary efficacy measure was change from baseline in the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) score. If patients showed a > or =50% reduction in MADRS scores on day 2, they received five additional infusions on an outpatient basis (days 3, 5, 8, 10, and 12). Follow-up visits were conducted twice-weekly for > or =4 weeks or until relapse. Ketamine elicited minimal positive psychotic symptoms. Three patients experienced significant but transient dissociative symptoms. Side effects during and after each ketamine infusion were generally mild. The response criterion was met by nine patients after the first infusion as well as after the sixth infusion. The mean (SD) reduction in MADRS scores after the sixth infusion was 85% (12%). Postketamine, eight of nine patients relapsed, on average, 19 days after the sixth infusion (range 6 days-45 days). One patient remained antidepressant-free with minimal depressive symptoms for >3 months. These pilot findings suggest feasibility of repeated-dose IV ketamine for the acute treatment of TRD.

19545857
Effects of intravenous ketamine on explicit and implicit measures of suicidality in treatment-resistant depression.
Intravenous ketamine has shown rapid antidepressant effects in early trials, making it a potentially attractive candidate for depressed patients at imminent risk of suicide. The Implicit Association Test (IAT), a performance-based measure of association between concepts, may have utility in suicide assessment. Twenty-six patients with treatment-resistant depression were assessed using the suicidality item of the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS-SI) 2 hours before and 24 hours following a single subanesthetic dose of intravenous ketamine. Ten patients also completed IATs assessing implicit suicidal associations at comparable time points. In a second study, nine patients received thrice-weekly ketamine infusions over a 12-day period. Twenty-four hours after a single infusion, MADRS-SI scores were reduced on average by 2.08 points on a 0 to 6 scale (p < .001; d = 1.37), and 81% of patients received a rating of 0 or 1 postinfusion. Implicit suicidal associations were also reduced following ketamine (p = .003; d = 1.36), with reductions correlated across implicit and explicit measures. MADRS-SI reductions were sustained for 12 days by repeated-dose ketamine (p < .001; d = 2.42). These preliminary findings support the premise that ketamine has rapid beneficial effects on suicidal cognition and warrants further study.

19288975
Riluzole for relapse prevention following intravenous ketamine in treatment-resistant depression: a pilot randomized, placebo-controlled continuation trial.
The N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor antagonist ketamine may have rapid, albeit transient, antidepressant properties. This study in patients with treatment-resistant major depression (TRD) aimed to (1) replicate the acute efficacy of single-dose intravenous (i.v.) ketamine; (2) test the efficacy of the glutamate-modulating agent riluzole in preventing post-ketamine relapse; and (3) examine whether pretreatment with lamotrigine would attenuate ketamine's psychotomimetic effects and enhance its antidepressant activity. Twenty-six medication-free patients received open-label i.v. ketamine (0.5 mg/kg over 40 min). Two hours prior to infusion, patients were randomized to lamotrigine (300 mg) or placebo. Seventeen patients (65%) met response criterion (50% reduction from baseline on the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale) 24 h following ketamine. Lamotrigine failed to attenuate the mild, transient side-effects associated with ketamine and did not enhance its antidepressant effects. Fourteen patients (54%) met response criterion 72 h following ketamine and proceeded to participate in a 32-d, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, flexible-dose continuation trial of riluzole (100-200 mg/d). The main outcome measure was time-to-relapse. An interim analysis found no significant differences in time-to-relapse between riluzole and placebo groups [log-rank chi(2) = 0.17, d.f. = 1, p = 0.68], with 80% of patients relapsing on riluzole vs. 50% on placebo. The trial was thus stopped for futility. This pilot study showed that a sub-anaesthetic dose of i.v. ketamine is well-tolerated in TRD, and may have rapid and sustained antidepressant properties. Riluzole did not prevent relapse in the first month following ketamine. Further investigation of relapse prevention strategies post-ketamine is necessary.

19188629
Neurobiological mechanisms in major depressive disorder.


19188290
Publication bias and the efficacy of antidepressants.


19058788
Amino acid neurotransmitters assessed by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy: relationship to treatment resistance in major depressive disorder.
Significant alterations in gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamate levels have been previously reported in major depressive disorder (MDD); however, no studies to date have investigated associations between these amino acid neurotransmitters and treatment resistance. The objective of this study was to compare occipital cortex (OCC) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) GABA and glutamate+glutamine (Glx) levels measured by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy ((1)H MRS) in 15 medication-free treatment-resistant depression (TRD) patients with those in 18 nontreatment-resistant MDD (nTRD) patients and 24 healthy volunteers (HVs). Levels of OCC GABA relative to voxel tissue water (W) were decreased in TRD patients compared with both HV (20.2% mean reduction; p = .001; Cohen's d = 1.3) and nTRD subjects (16.4% mean reduction; p = .007; Cohen's d = 1.4). There was a similar main effect of diagnosis for ACC GABA/W levels (p = .047; Cohen's d = .76) with TRD patients exhibiting reduced GABA in comparison with the other two groups (22.4% to 24.5% mean reductions). Group differences in Glx/W were not significant in either brain region. Only GABA results in OCC survived correction for multiple comparisons. Our findings corroborate previous reports of decreased GABA in MDD and provide initial evidence for a distinct neuronal amino acid profile in patients who have failed to respond to several standard antidepressants, possibly indicative of abnormal glutamate/glutamine/GABA cycling. Given interest in novel antidepressant mechanisms in TRD that selectively target amino acid neurotransmitter function, the translational relevance of these findings awaits further study.

19058261
Treatment-resistant depression: recent developments and future directions.


18942064
Ventricular cerebrospinal fluid lactate is increased in chronic fatigue syndrome compared with generalized anxiety disorder: an in vivo 3.0 T (1)H MRS imaging study.
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is a controversial diagnosis because of the lack of biomarkers for the illness and its symptom overlap with neuropsychiatric, infectious, and rheumatological disorders. We compared lateral ventricular volumes derived from tissue-segmented T(1)-weighted volumetric MRI data and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) lactate concentrations measured by proton MRS imaging ((1)H MRSI) in 16 subjects with CFS (modified US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention criteria) with those in 14 patients with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and in 15 healthy volunteers, matched group-wise for age, sex, body mass index, handedness, and IQ. Mean lateral ventricular lactate concentrations measured by (1)H MRSI in CFS were increased by 297% compared with those in GAD (P < 0.001) and by 348% compared with those in healthy volunteers (P < 0.001), even after controlling for ventricular volume, which did not differ significantly between the groups. Regression analysis revealed that diagnosis accounted for 43% of the variance in ventricular lactate. CFS is associated with significantly raised concentrations of ventricular lactate, potentially consistent with recent evidence of decreased cortical blood flow, secondary mitochondrial dysfunction, and/or oxidative stress abnormalities in the disorder.

18840371
Short-term tolerability of a nonazapirone selective serotonin 1A agonist in adults with generalized anxiety disorder: a 28-day, open-label study.
The serotonin 1A (5-hydroxytryptamine 1A [5-HT1A]) receptor likely plays a critical role in anxiety pathophysiology. In this proof-of-concept investigation, we tested the short-term tolerability of PRX-00023, a nonazapirone 5-HT1A selective partial agonist, in outpatients with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). Patients with a diagnosis of GAD, as defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, and Hamilton Anxiety (HAM-A) Rating Scale scores > or =20 were recruited. A 1-week, single-blind placebo run-in was followed by a 28-day,open-label treatment with PRX-00023 QD in a forced-titration protocol: 40 mg (days 1-4), 80 mg (days 5-14), and 120 mg (days 15-28). The primary outcome measures were tolerability and rate of completion of the study. Tolerability was recorded using a table of adverse events (AEs), and measured using laboratory tests, vital signs, and electrocardiogram (ECG) readings. Secondary outcomes included the baseline-to-end point change in HAM-A total score, percentage meeting remission (HAM-A< or =7), and response criteria (> or =50% reduction in HAM-A total score). Twenty-three patients (56.5% female, 65.2% white; mean age, 37.4 years) were enrolled in the study. A total of 21 patients (91.3%) received study medication and 18 (78.3%) completed the study. Two patients withdrew for personal reasons, 1 was discontinued for noncompliance, and 1 was lost to follow-up. One patient was discontinued from the study due to a history of premature ventricular contractions deemed unrelated to the study drug. AEs were reported in 15 patients, with the most common being back pain (3 patients), influenza-like symptoms (without fever) (2), diarrhea (2), dyspepsia (2), and nausea (2). No serious AEs, withdrawal symptoms, ataxia/ dizziness, or sexual dysfunction were reported; there were no clinically significant laboratory, vital sign, or ECG abnormalities. Mean HAM-A total scores were significantly lower at study end point compared with enrollment (13.9 vs 22.9; P < 0.001), with 32% of patients achieving remission and 52% meeting response criteria. In this preliminary, short-term study, PRX-00023 appeared to be generally well tolerated in this sample of patients with GAD.

18704983
Anxiety disorders: a comprehensive review of pharmacotherapies.
This article reviews the evidence from randomized, placebo-controlled trials and meta-analyses of pharmacological treatments of the following anxiety disorders: generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, and post-traumatic stress disorder. There is evidence from multiple randomized, placebo-controlled trials to support the use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors as first-line pharmacotherapy in these disorders, and a number of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have received US Food and Drug Administration approval for these indications. Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors are now emerging as first-line treatments for these anxiety disorders alongside the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and have been US Food and Drug Administration-approved for some of these indications as well. Benzodiazepines are also effective treatments for anxiety disorders, and although this medication class has the advantage of a rapid onset of action, their use is limited by their potential for abuse and lack of antidepressant properties. In addition to reviewing the clinical trials that have investigated the anxiolytic effects of these commonly used medications, we review the evidence for novel uses of other agents, including anticonvulsants and atypical antipsychotics, in anxiety disorders.

18704979
Neurostimulatory therapeutics in management of treatment-resistant depression with focus on deep brain stimulation.
Treatment-resistant depression continues to pose a major medical challenge, as up to one-third of patients with major depressive disorder fail to have an adequate response to standard pharmacotherapies. An improved understanding of the complex circuitry underlying depressive disorders has fostered an explosion in the development of new, nonpharmacological approaches. Each of these treatments seeks to restore normal brain activity via electrical or magnetic stimulation. In this article, the authors discuss the ongoing evolution of neurostimulatory treatments for treatment-resistant depression, reviewing the methods, efficacy, and current research on electroconvulsive therapy, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation, magnetic seizure therapy, focal electrically administered stimulated seizure therapy, transcranial direct current stimulation, chronic epidural cortical stimulation, and vagus nerve stimulation. Special attention is given to deep brain stimulation, the most focally targeted approach. The history, purported mechanisms of action, and current research are outlined in detail. Although deep brain stimulation is the most invasive of the neurostimulatory treatments developed to date, it may hold significant promise in alleviating symptoms and improving the quality of life for patients with the most severe and disabling mood disorders.

18412102
Recent advances in the neurobiology of anxiety disorders: implications for novel therapeutics.
Anxiety disorders are a highly prevalent and disabling class of psychiatric disorders. This review focuses on new directions in neurobiological research and implications for the development of novel psychopharmacological treatments. Neuroanatomical and neuroimaging research in anxiety disorders has centered on the role of the amygdala, reciprocal connections between the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex, and, most recently, alterations in interoceptive processing by the anterior insula. Anxiety disorders are characterized by alterations in a diverse range of neurochemical systems, suggesting ample novel targets for drug therapies. Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) concentrations are elevated in a subset of anxiety disorders, which suggests the potential utility of CRF receptor antagonists. Pharmacological blockade of the memory-enhancing effects of stress hormones such as glucocorticoids and noradrenaline holds promise as a preventative approach for trauma-related anxiety. The glutamatergic system has been largely overlooked as a potential pharmacological target, although convergent preclinical, neuroimaging, and early clinical findings suggest that glutamate receptor antagonists may have potent anxiolytic effects. Glutamatergic receptor agonists (e.g., D-cycloserine) also have an emerging role in the treatment of anxiety as facilitators of fear extinction during concurrent behavioral interventions. The neuropeptides substance P, neuropeptide Y, oxytocin, orexin, and galanin are each implicated in anxiety pathways, and neuropeptide analogs or antagonists show early promise as anxiolytics in preclinical and/or clinical research. Each of these active areas of research holds promise for expanding and improving evidence-based treatment options for individuals suffering with clinical anxiety.

18172433
Novel drugs and therapeutic targets for severe mood disorders.
Monoaminergic-based drugs remain the primary focus of pharmaceutical industry drug discovery efforts for mood disorders, despite serious limitations regarding their ability to achieve remission. The quest for novel therapies for unipolar depression and bipolar disorder has generally centered on two complementary approaches: (1) understanding the presumed therapeutically relevant biochemical targets of currently available medications, and using that knowledge to design new drugs directed at both direct biochemical targets and downstream targets that are regulated by chronic drug administration; and (2) developing pathophysiological models of the illness to design therapeutics to attenuate or prevent those pathological processes. This review describes several promising drugs and drug targets for mood disorders using one or both of these approaches. Agents interacting with non-catecholamine neurotransmitter systems with particular promise for unipolar and bipolar depression include excitatory amino acid neurotransmitter modulators (eg, riluzole, N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonists, and AMPA receptor potentiators) and neuropeptide antagonists (targeting corticotropin releasing factor-1 and neurokinin receptors). Potential antidepressant and mood-stabilizing agents targeting common intracellular pathways of known monoaminergic agents and lithium/mood stabilizers are also reviewed, such as neurotrophic factors, extracellular receptor-coupled kinase (ERK) mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase and the bcl-2 family of proteins, and inhibitors of phosphodiesterase, glycogen synthase kinase-3, and protein kinase C. A major thrust of drug discovery in mood disorders will continue efforts to identify agents with rapid and sustained onsets of action (such as intravenous administration of ketamine), as well as identify drugs used routinely in non-psychiatric diseases for their antidepressant and mood-stabilizing properties.

18028881
Hippocampal N-acetylaspartate concentration and response to riluzole in generalized anxiety disorder.
Previous research has suggested the therapeutic potential of glutamate-modulating agents for severe mood and anxiety disorders, potentially resulting from enhancement of neuroplasticity. We used proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging ((1)H MRSI) to examine the acute and chronic effects of the glutamate-release inhibitor riluzole on hippocampal N-acetylaspartate (NAA), a neuronal marker, in patients with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and examined the relationship between changes in NAA and clinical outcome. Fourteen medication-free GAD patients were administered open-label riluzole and then evaluated by (1)H MRSI before drug administration, and 24 hours and 8 weeks following treatment. Patients were identified as responders (n = 9) or nonresponders (n = 5). Seven untreated, medically healthy volunteers, comparable in age, sex, IQ, and body mass index to the patients, received scans at the same time intervals. Molar NAA concentrations in bilateral hippocampus, and change in anxiety ratings were the primary outcome measures. A group-by-time interaction was found, with riluzole responders showing mean increases in hippocampal NAA across the three time points, whereas nonresponders had decreases over time. In GAD patients at Week 8, hippocampal NAA concentration and proportional increase in NAA from baseline both were positively associated with improvements in worry and clinician-rated anxiety. These preliminary data support a specific association between hippocampal NAA and symptom alleviation following riluzole treatment in GAD. Placebo-controlled investigations that examine hippocampal NAA as a viable surrogate endpoint for clinical trials of neuroprotective and plasticity-enhancing agents are warranted.

19204062
A pilot study of the effects of chronic paroxetine administration on hippocampal N-acetylaspartate in generalized anxiety disorder.
The neural basis of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is poorly characterized. The effect of chronic administration (12 weeks) of paroxetine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, on N-acetylaspartate (NAA), a marker of neuronal viability, was evaluated in adults with GAD using proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging ((1)H MRSI) at 1.5 T. We hypothesized that, pretreatment abnormalities in hippocampal NAA/creatine (NAA/Cr) would normalize with symptomatic improvement. Nine GAD patients (mean age = 41.7 year; 4 females) received 12 weeks of open-label paroxetine treatment, flexibly dosed up to 60 mg/day. Clinical outcome was assessed with the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HAM-A). Multislice ( 1)H MRSI scans were performed at unmedicated baseline and following 6 and 12 weeks of treatment. Ten untreated healthy volunteers (HVs) (mean age = 37.1 year; 4 females) received scans at the same intervals. All patients achieved remission (HAM-A <or= 7) by week 12. Compared to HVs, GAD patients showed persistently lower levels of bilateral hippocampal NAA/Cr (17.7% mean decrease; Cohen's d = 1.29) that were maintained across all three time points, despite marked symptom improvement. This pilot study failed to support an association between a hippocampal neuronal marker and anxiolytic response to paroxetine, and suggests further investigation of potential trait-like hippocampal abnormalities in GAD.

