21598257
Global health delivery and implementation research: a new frontier for global health.


21502585
Promoting global cardiovascular health: moving forward.


21045785
Urgent need for human resources to promote global cardiovascular health.
The World Health Organization estimates the existence of a global shortage of over 4 million health-care workers. Given the growing global burden of cardiovascular disease (CVD), the shortfall in global human resources for health (HRH) is probably even greater than predicted. A critical challenge going forward is to determine how to integrate CVD-related human resource needs into the overall global HRH agenda. We describe the CVD implications of core HRH objectives, including coverage, motivation, and competence, in addition to issues such as health-care worker migration and the need for input from multiple stakeholders to successfully address the current problems. We emphasize gaps in knowledge regarding HRH for global CVD-related care and research opportunities. In light of the current global epidemiologic transition from communicable to noncommunicable diseases, now is the time for the global health community to focus on CVD-related human resource needs.

19679243
Bicuspid pulmonic valve.


18607395
Cardiovascular disease in Sub-Saharan Africa: a complex picture demanding a multifaceted response.
A debate has emerged as to what should be the 'appropriate' cardiovascular agenda for sub-Saharan Africa. This Clinical Advance article reviews a recent study by Sliwa et al., which describes patients with newly diagnosed cardiovascular disease (CVD) presenting to a tertiary-care center in South Africa. The most common conditions among these patients were hypertension, heart failure, valvular heart disease, and coronary artery disease. Atherosclerotic risk factors were widely prevalent--only 13% of patients had no risk factors at all. Furthermore, a substantial proportion of patients presented at an advanced stage of disease. This study, which used state-of-the-art diagnostic technology, is an important addition to the growing database of information indicating that CVD in sub-Saharan Africa spans the spectrum from 'traditional', nonischemic etiologies to 'modern' diseases of lifestyle. The societal response to this diverse epidemiology should be similarly multifaceted. Moreover, efforts should be made to improve primary-care screening, early detection and treatment of CVD, and prompt referral of patients at early stages of disease.

