20920644
Aspirin adherence, aspirin dosage, and C-reactive protein in the first 3 months after acute coronary syndrome.
Persistent elevation of inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein (CRP) has been associated with an increased risk of recurrent cardiac events after acute coronary syndromes (ACS). Conflicting evidence is available regarding whether aspirin can reduce CRP after ACS. We investigated whether the dosage and adherence to aspirin was associated with the CRP level 3 months after ACS. Adherence to aspirin was monitored for 3 months in a cohort of 105 patients enrolled within 1 week of an ACS using an electronic chip stored in the pill bottle cap. The CRP level was measured at baseline and 3 months. Logistic regression analysis was used to test whether poor adherence to aspirin and a lower aspirin dosage were associated with increased CRP levels, controlling for age, ACS type, disease co-morbidity, baseline CRP level, use of clopidogrel and statins, depressive symptoms, smoking, and adherence to other medications. Aspirin adherence was inversely correlated with the CRP level at 3 months (Spearman's r = -0.36, p < 0.001). In the adjusted model, every 10% decrease in aspirin adherence was associated with a 1.7 increased risk (95% confidence interval 1.2 to 2.4) of a CRP level of ? 3.0 mg/L at 3 months. Low-dose aspirin was associated with a 7.1 increased risk (95% confidence interval 1.5 to 33.3) of a CRP level of ? 3.0 mg/L. The Charlson co-morbidity index, depressive symptoms, and baseline CRP level were also predictive of a CRP level of ? 3.0 mg/L at 3 months. The association between aspirin adherence and CRP level was not attenuated by controlling for other risk-reducing behaviors. In conclusion, a strong association was found between aspirin adherence and the CRP level after an ACS.

20185971
Persistent depressive symptoms after acute coronary syndrome are associated with compromised white matter integrity in the anterior cingulate: a pilot study.
Persistent depressive symptoms after acute coronary syndrome (ACS) are common and increase the risk of recurrent cardiac events and mortality. However, the neurobiological correlates of post-ACS depressive symptoms have not yet been studied. Three months after ACS, 22 patients were scanned for the presence of cerebral deep white matter changes and microstructural abnormalities in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. We used the Coffey Rating Scale of deep white matter changes and measures of fractional anisotropy derived from diffusion tensor imaging. Patients also completed the Beck Depression Inventory, and the number of cardiovascular comorbidities as well as modifiable cardiovascular risk factors were assessed. Controlling for cardiovascular comorbidity, depressive symptom severity at 3 months was negatively related to fractional anisotropy in the ACC (r = -0.72, p < 0.001), but this association disappeared when controlling for cardiovascular risk factors (p = 0.21). In comparison to patients who were non-depressed at 3 months after hospitalization (n = 14), patients with persistent depressive symptoms (n = 8) exhibited more advanced deep white matter changes overall (p < 0.02), but not when controlling for cardiovascular comorbidity. Persistently depressed patients also had lower fractional anisotropy in the ACC (p < 0.05), but this effect disappeared when controlling for modifiable cardiovascular risk factors. This study provides the first evidence that persistent depressive symptoms after ACS are associated with vascular brain changes. Longitudinal studies are needed to determine whether depressive symptoms precede these changes or vice versa.

20097703
Anxiety is a better predictor of platelet reactivity in coronary artery disease patients than depression.
Depression and anxiety are linked to coronary events but the mechanism(s) remains unclear. We investigated the associations of depression and anxiety with serotonin-mediated platelet hyperactivity in coronary artery disease (CAD) patients in a cross-sectional study. Three months after an acute coronary event, stable CAD patients (n = 83) on aspirin and clopidogrel were evaluated for depression (beck depression inventory) and anxiety (hospital anxiety and depression scale), and their platelet reactivity was measured (optical aggregometry and flow cytometric fibrinogen binding in response to adenosine diphosphate (ADP = 5 microM) and two serotonin + epinephrine doses [5HT:E (L) = 4 microM + 4 microM and 5HT:E (H) = 10 microM + 4 microM]. Platelet reactivity was significantly higher in depressed and anxious than in depressed only or non-depressed-and-non-anxious patients. Aggregation (mean +/- SE) was 41.9 +/- 2.6% vs. 32.2 +/- 2.6% vs. 30.4 +/- 3.7% with 5HT:E (L) and 46.9 +/- 2.7% vs. 35.6 +/- 2.7% vs. 31.7 +/- 3.8% with 5HT:E (H) (P < 0.05 for both). Differences in ADP aggregations were not significant, perhaps because of clopidogrel therapy. Flow cytometry findings were similar. In a multivariate linear regression model adjusted for age, body mass index, and each other, anxiety symptoms independently predicted all 5HT:E-mediated platelet reactivity measures, whereas depression predicted none. Anxiety is associated with elevated serotonin-mediated platelet reactivity in stable CAD patients and symptoms of anxiety show strong, independent correlations with platelet function.

19592517
Is depression after an acute coronary syndrome simply a marker of known prognostic factors for mortality?
Controversy remains over whether the association between depression and mortality in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is confounded by incomplete adjustment for measures of known prognostic markers. We assessed a) whether depression was associated with the most comprehensive empirically derived index of clinical mortality predictors: the Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE) risk score for predicting 6-month mortality after discharge for ACS; and b) whether depression remained an independent predictor of all-cause mortality after adjustment for the GRACE score and left ventricular dysfunction. We surveyed prospectively 457 patients with ACS (aged 25-92 years; 41% women, 13% black, and 11% Hispanic), hospitalized between May 2003 and June 2005. Depressive symptoms were assessed with the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) and diagnosis of major depressive disorder (MDD) was made by a structured psychiatric interview, within 1 week of hospitalization. Despite differences in individual components of the GRACE score between depressed and nondepressed participants, neither depression measure was associated with overall GRACE score. For participants with MDD, the mean +/- standard deviation GRACE score was 84 +/- 33, compared with 92 +/- 31 for those without MDD (p = .09). Using Cox proportional hazards regression analysis, MDD and depressive symptom severity each predicted mortality after controlling for GRACE score and left ventricular dysfunction (adjusted hazard ratio for MDD = 2.51; 95% Confidence Interval = 1.45-4.37). Depression is not simply a marker of clinical indicators that predict all-cause mortality after ACS. This strengthens the assertion that there is something unique in the association between depression and post-ACS prognosis, independent of known prognostic markers.

18540140
Emotional predictors and behavioral triggers of acute coronary syndrome.
Mounting evidence suggests that depression, anxiety, and hostility/anger may each be an independent risk factor for acute coronary syndrome (ACS) occurrence. Data specific to the role of these negative emotional states in predisposing to imminent ACS risk are limited, however. Additionally, a number of studies have indicated that certain situational triggers (such as intense physical exertion) and behavioral triggers (such as acute anxiety or anger) are predictive of imminent occurrence of an ACS. Despite these findings, the use of emotional or behavioral information to identify persons at high risk for imminent ACS to facilitate such patient identification.

17709116
Incident and recurrent major depressive disorder and coronary artery disease severity in acute coronary syndrome patients.
There is recent evidence that acute coronary syndrome (ACS) patients with first time incident major depressive disorder (MDD) and those with recurrent MDD represent different subtypes among individuals with ACS and comorbid depression. However, few studies have examined whether or not these subtypes differ in coronary artery disease (CAD) severity. We assessed whether those with incident MDD (in-hospital MDD and negative for history of MDD) or recurrent MDD (in-hospital MDD and a positive history of MDD) differ in angiographically documented CAD severity. Within 1 week of admission for ACS, 88 patients completed a clinical interview to assess current and past diagnosis of MDD. CAD severity was assessed in all patients by coronary angiography. A hierarchical regression analysis showed that neither in-hospital MDD status, nor history of MDD were significant predictors of CAD severity, but the interaction term between in-hospital MDD status and history of MDD was a significant predictor of CAD severity, after controlling for age, sex and ethnicity. Follow-up analyses showed that patients with first time, incident MDD had significantly more severe CAD compared to patients with recurrent MDD (p=0.043). To conclude, our study adds to the growing evidence that patients with incident MDD should be considered as a clinically distinct subtype from those with recurrent MDD. Possible mechanisms for differing CAD severity by angiogram between these two subtypes are proposed and implications for prognosis and treatment are discussed.

