21443409
The association between first trimester micronutrient intake, MTHFR genotypes, and global DNA methylation in pregnant women.
Objective.?Our aim was to evaluate possible associations between consumption of micronutrients involved in one-carbon metabolism, MTHFR genotypes, and global DNA methylation in pregnant women. Methods.?A semi-quantitative dietary questionnaire was administered to 195 women during their first trimester in Morelos, Mexico. Two functional polymorphisms of the key folate-metabolizing gene, i.e. MTHFR 677 C>T and 1298 A>C, as well as global DNA methylation were assessed in peripheral blood drawn during the interview. Results.?Independent of maternal age and caloric intake, vitamin B(6) deficiency was associated with 1.8 fold increased risk of hypomethylation in women carrying the MTHFR 677 T allele. Conclusions.?There exists a subpopulation that is more susceptible to B vitamin deficiencies.

21273692
Comparing genetic ancestry and self-reported race/ethnicity in a multiethnic population in New York City.
Self-reported race/ethnicity is frequently used in epidemiological studies to assess an individual's background origin. However, in admixed populations such as Hispanic, self-reported race/ethnicity may not accurately represent them genetically because they are admixed with European, African and Native American ancestry. We estimated the proportions of genetic admixture in an ethnically diverse population of 396 mothers and 188 of their children with 35 ancestry informative markers (AIMs) using the STRUCTURE version 2.2 program. The majority of the markers showed significant deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in our study population. In mothers self-identified as Black and White, the imputed ancestry proportions were 77.6% African and 75.1% European respectively, while the racial composition among self-identified Hispanics was 29.2% European, 26.0% African, and 44.8% Native American. We also investigated the utility of AIMs by showing the improved fitness of models in paraoxanase-1 genotype-phenotype associations after incorporating AIMs; however, the improvement was moderate at best. In summary, a minimal set of 35 AIMs is sufficient to detect population stratification and estimate the proportion of individual genetic admixture; however, the utility of these markers remains questionable.

20967607
Linking emulsion PCR haplotype analysis.
The experimental measurement of haplotype requires the determination of two or more genotypes on the same DNA molecule. Because such measurements are much more complicated than measurements of genotypes, haplotypes are typically inferred using population data for linkage disequilibrium between the markers of interest. We have developed a method for molecular haplotyping, linking emulsion PCR (LE-PCR), and have demonstrated that the method is sufficiently robust to determine haplotypes for multiple markers in a population setting. LE-PCR uses emulsion PCR to isolate single template molecules for simultaneous PCR of widely spaced markers and uses linking PCR to fuse these amplicons into one short amplicon, which maintains the phase of the markers. LE-PCR is illustrated for polymorphisms in human paraoxonase 1 (PON1) that have been shown to affect transcriptional activity and substrate specificity in the detoxification of organophosphates.

20933131
Diet, epigenetic, and cancer prevention.
Disruption of the epigenome has been a hallmark of human cancers and has been linked with tumor pathogenesis and progression. Since epigenetic changes can be reversed in principle, studies have been carried out to identify modifiable (such as diet and lifestyle) factors, which possess epigenetic property, in hope for developing epigenetically based prevention/intervention strategies. The goal is to achieve some degree of epigenetic reprogramming, which would maintain normal gene expression status and reverse tumorigenesis through chemoprevention or lifestyle intervention such as diet modification. The ability of dietary compounds to act epigenetically in cancer cells has been studied and evidence continues to surface for constituents in food and dietary supplements to influence the epigenome and ultimately individual's risk of developing cancer. In this chapter, we summarized the existing data, both from animal and human studies, on the capacity of natural food products to influence three key epigenetic processes: DNA methylation, histone modification, and microRNA expression. As discussed in the perspective, while diet-based intervention that targets epigenetic pathways is promising, significant challenges remain in translating these scientific findings into clinical or public health practices in the context of cancer prevention.

20350649
Genomic loss of imprinting in first-trimester human placenta.
The purpose of this study was to investigate imprinting patterns in first-trimester human placentas. Using samples of 17 first-trimester and 14 term placentas from uncomplicated pregnancies, we assessed loss of imprinting (LOI) at the RNA level in a panel of 14 genes that are known to be imprinted in the placenta with the use of a quantitative allele-specific reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analysis of those genes that contained readout single nucleotide polymorphisms in their transcripts. There is significant LOI (ie, biallelic expression) in all 14 genes in first-trimester placentas. LOI was more variable and generally at lower levels at term. Although there is little difference in gene expression, the level of LOI is higher in the first-trimester placentas, compared with term placentas. Genomic imprinting appears to be a dynamic maturational process across gestation in human placenta. In contrast with prevailing theories, epigenetic imprints may continue to evolve past 12 weeks of gestation.

19921426
Gene promoter methylation is associated with increased mortality among women with breast cancer.
To better understand breast cancer etiology and progression, we explored the association between promoter methylation status of three breast cancer-related genes (BRCA1, APC, and p16) and survival in a large cohort of women with breast cancer. About 800 archived tumor tissues were collected from women diagnosed with a first primary invasive or in situ breast cancer in 1996-1997. The vital status of the participants was followed through the end of year 2005 with a mean follow-up time of 8.0 years. Promoter methylation was assessed by methylation-specific PCR (for BRCA1) and MethyLight (for APC and p16). The association of promoter methylation and breast cancer mortality was evaluated by Cox-proportional hazards models. Methylated promoters were found in 59.0, 48.4, and 3.6% of the tumor samples for BRCA1, APC, and p16, respectively. Breast cancer-specific mortality was strongly associated with promoter methylation of p16 [HR and 95% CI: 3.53 (1.83-6.78)], whereas the associations with of BRCA1 and APC were less pronounced [HR and 95% CI: 1.81 (1.18-2.78) and 1.46 (0.98-2.17), respectively]. Similar associations were observed with all-cause mortality. As the number of methylated genes increased, the risk of breast cancer-specific mortality also increased in a dose-dependent manner (P, trend = 0.01). Importantly, even with our results stratified by hormone receptor status, promoter methylation of the three genes remained predictive of mortality. Our results suggest that promoter methylation could be promising epigenetic markers to be considered for breast cancer survival.

19767614
Demonstration of all-or-none loss of imprinting in mRNA expression in single cells.
Loss of imprinting (LOI) is the reactivation of the silenced allele of an imprinted gene, leading to perturbation of monoallelic expression. We tested the hypothesis that LOI of PLAGL1, a representative maternally imprinted gene, occurs through an all-or-none process leading to a mixture of fully imprinted and nonimprinted cells. Herein using a quantitative RT-PCR-based experimental approach, we measured LOI at the single cell level in human trophoblasts and demonstrated a broad distribution of LOI among cells exhibiting LOI, with the mean centered at approximately 100% LOI. There was a significant (P < 0.01) increase in expression after 2 days of 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (AZA) treatment and a significant (P < 0.01) increase in LOI after both 1 and 2 days of AZA treatment, while the distribution remained broad and centered at approximately 100% LOI. We propose a transcriptional pulsing model to show that the broadness of the distribution reflects the stochastic nature of expression between the two alleles in each cell. The mean of the distribution of LOI in the cells is consistent with our hypothesis that LOI occurs by an all-or-none process. All-or-none LOI could lead to a second distinct cell population that may have a selective advantage, leading to variation of LOI in normal tissues, such as the placenta, or in neoplastic cells.

19483473
Differential expression of imprinted genes in normal and IUGR human placentas.
Genomic imprinting refers to silencing of one parental allele in the zygotes of gametes depending upon the parent of origin. Loss of imprinting (LOI) is the gain of function from the silent allele that can have a maximum effect of doubling the gene dosage. LOI may play a significant role in the etiology of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Using placental tissue from ten normal and seven IUGR pregnancies, we conducted a systematic survey of the expression of a panel of 74 "putatively" imprinted genes using quantitative RT-PCR. We found that 52/74 ( approximately 70%) of the genes were expressed in human placentas. Nine of the 52 (17%) expressed genes were significantly differentially expressed between normal and IUGR placentas; five were upregulated (PHLDA2, ILK2, NNAT, CCDC86, PEG10) and four downregulated (PLAGL1, DHCR24, ZNF331, CDKAL1). We also assessed LOI profile of 14 imprinted genes in 14 normal and 24 IUGR placentas using a functional and sensitive assay developed in our laboratory. Little LOI was observed in any placentas for five of the genes (PEG10, PHLDA2, MEG3, EPS15, CD44). With the 149 heterozygosities examined, 40 (26.8%) exhibited LOI >3%. Some genes exhibited frequent LOI in placentas regardless of the disease status (IGF2, TP73, MEST, SLC22A18, PEG3), while others exhibited LOI only in IUGR placentas (PLAGL1, DLK1, H19, SNRPN). Importantly, there was no correlation between gene expression and LOI profile. Our study suggests that genomic imprinting may play a role in IUGR pathogenesis, but mechanisms other than LOI may contribute to dysregulation of imprinted genes.

19447375
Gene expression profiles of the one-carbon metabolism pathway.
One-carbon metabolism plays a critical role in both DNA methylation and DNA synthesis. Accumulating evidence has shown that interruptions of this pathway are associated with many disease outcomes including cardiovascular diseases and cancers. Mechanistic studies have been performed on genetic polymorphisms involved in one-carbon metabolism. However, expression profiles of these inter-related genes are not well-known. In this study, we examined the gene expression profiles of 11 one-carbon metabolizing genes by quantifying the mRNA level of the lymphocyte among 54 healthy individuals and explored the correlations of these genes. We found these genes were expressed in lymphocytes at moderate levels and showed significant inter-person variations. We also applied principle component analysis to explore potential patterns of expression. The components identified by the program agreed with existing knowledge about one-carbon metabolism. This study helps us better understand the biological functions of one-carbon metabolism.

19376481
One-carbon metabolism and breast cancer: an epidemiological perspective.
One-carbon metabolism is a network of biological reactions that plays critical role in DNA methylation and DNA synthesis, and in turn, facilitates the cross-talk between genetic and epigenetic processes. Genetic polymorphisms and supplies of cofactors (e.g. folate, vitamins B) involved in this pathway have been shown to influence cancer risk and even survival. In this review, we summarized the epidemiological evidence for one-carbon metabolism, from both genetics and lifestyle aspects, in relation to breast cancer risk. We also discussed this pathway in relation to breast cancer survival and the modulation of one-carbon polymorphism in chemotherapy. Emerging evidence on modulation of DNA methylation by one-carbon metabolism suggests that disruption of epigenome might have been the underlying mechanism. More results are expected and will be translated to guidance to the general population for disease prevention as well as to clinicians for treatment and management of the disease.

18769151
A sensitive functional assay reveals frequent loss of genomic imprinting in human placenta.
Loss of imprinting (LOI) is the gain of expression from the silent allele of an imprinted gene normally expressed from only one parental copy. LOI has been associated with neurodevelopmental disorders and reproductive abnormalities. The mechanisms of imprinting are varied, with DNA methylation representing only one. We have developed a functional transcriptional assay for LOI that is not limited to a single mechanism of imprinting. The method employs allele-specific PCR analysis of RT-PCR products containing common readout polymorphisms. With this method, we are able to measure LOI at the sensitivity of 1%. The method has been applied to measurement of LOI in human placentas. We found that RNA was stable in placentas stored for more than one hour at 4 degrees C following delivery. We analyzed a test panel of 26 genes known to be imprinted in the human genome. We found that 18 genes were expressed in placenta. Fourteen of the 18 expressed genes contained common readout polymorphisms in the transcripts with a minor allele frequency >20%. We found that 5 of the 14 genes were not imprinted in placenta. Using the remaining nine genes, we examined 93 heterozygosities in 27 samples. The range of LOI was 0%-96%. Among the 93 heterozygosities, we found 23 examples (25%) had LOI >3% and eight examples (9%) had LOI 1-3%. Our results indicate that LOI is common in human placentas. Because LOI in placenta is common, it may be an important new biomarker for influences on prenatal epigenetics.

18708404
B-vitamin intake, one-carbon metabolism, and survival in a population-based study of women with breast cancer.
Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer mortality among women. Given its important role in DNA methylation and synthesis, one-carbon metabolism may affect breast cancer mortality. We used a population-based cohort of 1,508 women with breast cancer to investigate possible associations of dietary intake of B vitamins before diagnosis as well as nine polymorphisms of one-carbon metabolizing genes and subsequent survival. Women newly diagnosed with a first primary breast cancer in 1996 to 1997 were followed for vital status for an average of 5.6 years. Kaplan-Meier survival and Cox proportional hazard regression analyses were used to evaluate the association between dietary intakes of B vitamins (1,479 cases), genotypes ( approximately 1,065 cases), and all-cause as well as breast cancer-specific mortality. We found that higher dietary intake of vitamin B(1) and B(3) was associated with improved survival during the follow-up period (P(trend) = 0.01 and 0.04, respectively). Compared with the major genotype, the MTHFR 677 T allele carriers have reduced all-cause mortality and breast cancer-specific mortality in a dominant model [hazard ratio (95% confidence interval): 0.69 (0.49-0.98) and 0.58 (0.38-0.89), respectively]. The BHMT 742 A allele was also associated with reduced all-cause mortality [hazard ratio, 0.70 (0.50-1.00)]. Estrogen receptor/progesterone receptor status modified the association between the MTHFR C677T polymorphism and survival (P = 0.05). The survival associations with one-carbon polymorphisms did not differ with the use of chemotherapy, although study power was limited for examining such effect modification. Our results indicate that one-carbon metabolism may be an important pathway that could be targeted to improve breast cancer survival.

18642608
An emulsion polymerase chain reaction-based method for molecular haplotyping.
Genotypes are easily measured using a variety of experimental methods. However, experimental methods for measuring haplotypes, i.e., molecular haplotyping, are limited. Instead, haplotypes often are statistically inferred from genotype data with varying degrees of confidence, depending on the extent of linkage disequilibrium (LD) between markers. We have developed a method for molecular haplotyping, linking-emulsion polymerase chain reaction (LE-PCR), that should find application in studies where LD is limited, especially when the polymorphisms in question affect the function of a single gene product. We have illustrated this technology with the human paraoxonase 1 gene (PON1), where polymorphisms affecting transcription and enzymatic activity show incomplete LD. PON1 is an enzyme with multiple activities, including detoxification of organophosphates.

18521744
BRCA1 promoter methylation is associated with increased mortality among women with breast cancer.
Promoter-CpG island hypermethylation has been proposed as an alternative mechanism to inactivate BRCA1 in the breast where somatic mutations of BRCA1 are rare. To better understand breast cancer etiology and progression, we explored the association between BRCA1 promoter methylation status and prognostic factors as well as survival among women with breast cancer. Promoter methylation of BRCA1 was assessed in 851 archived tumor tissues collected from a population-based study of women diagnosed with invasive or in situ breast cancer in 1996-1997, and who were followed for vital status through the end of 2002. About 59% of the tumors were methylated at the promoter of BRCA1. The BRCA1 promoter methylation was more frequent in invasive cancers (P = 0.02) and among premenopausal cases (P = 0.05). BRCA1 promoter methylation was associated with increased risk of breast cancer-specific mortality (age-adjusted HR 1.71; 95% CI: 1.05-2.78) and all-cause mortality (age-adjusted HR 1.49; 95% CI: 1.02-2.18). Neither dietary methyl intakes in the year prior to the baseline interview nor the functional polymorphisms in one-carbon metabolism were associated with BRCA1 methylation status. Our study is the first epidemiological investigation on the prognostic value of BRCA1 promoter methylation in a large population-based cohort of breast cancer patients. Our results indicate that BRCA1 promoter methylation is an important factor to consider in predicting breast cancer survival.

17372271
Polymorphisms of one-carbon-metabolizing genes and risk of breast cancer in a population-based study.
One-carbon metabolism facilitates the crosstalk between genetic and epigenetic processes and plays critical roles in both DNA methylation and DNA synthesis, making it a good candidate for studying the risk of breast cancer. We previously reported that polymorphisms in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) in one-carbon pathway were associated with breast cancer risk in the population-based Long Island Breast Cancer Study Project. Herein, we systematically investigated putatively functional polymorphisms of seven other one-carbon-metabolizing genes in relation to the breast cancer risk in the same population. Except for a slight indication of increased risk of breast cancer associated with the double repeat (2R) allele in the thymidylate synthase (TYMS) 5'-untranslated region (UTR) (P, trend = 0.07), polymorphisms in the other six genes did not substantially modify the risk of breast cancer, or did they modify the risk associated with dietary intakes of folate and related B vitamins. However, we observed a significant multiplicative interaction between the MTHFR 677C>T and the TYMS 5'-UTR polymorphisms (P = 0.02). We used a recursive partitioning method, RTREE, in an attempt to tease out important or rate-limiting genes encoding these intricately related enzymes. Results from RTREE analyses indicate that MTHFR and TYMS are the two leading rate-limiting enzymes in the pathway, consistent with our epidemiological findings. Our findings underscore the importance of one-carbon metabolism in breast cancer etiology. Although the pathway is a network of interrelated enzymes, redundancy exists; evaluating the rate-limiting enzyme and its interaction with environment and other genes within the same pathway is critical in assessing breast cancer risk.

