21412429
BMP-12 treatment of adult mesenchymal stem cells in vitro augments tendon-like tissue formation and defect repair in vivo.
We characterized the differentiation of rat bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) into tenocyte-like cells in response to bone morphogenetic protein-12 (BMP-12). BM-MSCs were prepared from Sprague-Dawley rats and cultured as monolayers. Recombinant BMP-12 treatment (10 ng/ml) of BM-MSCs for 12 hours in vitro markedly increased expression of the tenocyte lineage markers scleraxis (Scx) and tenomodulin (Tnmd) over 14 days. Treatment with BMP-12 for a further 12-hour period had no additional effect. Colony formation assays revealed that ~80% of treated cells and their progeny were Scx- and Tnmd-positive. BM-MSCs seeded in collagen scaffolds and similarly treated with a single dose of BMP-12 also expressed high levels of Scx and Tnmd, as well as type I collagen and tenascin-c. Furthermore, when the treated BM-MSC-seeded scaffolds were implanted into surgically created tendon defects in vivo, robust formation of tendon-like tissue was observed after 21 days as evidenced by increased cell number, elongation and alignment along the tensile axis, greater matrix deposition and the elevated expression of tendon markers. These results indicate that brief stimulation with BMP-12 in vitro is sufficient to induce BM-MSC differentiation into tenocytes, and that this phenotype is sustained in vivo. This strategy of pretreating BM-MSCs with BMP-12 prior to in vivo transplantation may be useful in MSC-based tendon reconstruction or tissue engineering.

20956337
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells prevent type 1 diabetes in murine models.
Effective immunotherapy for type 1 diabetes (T1D) relies on active induction of peripheral tolerance. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) play a critical role in suppressing immune responses in various pathologic settings via multiple mechanisms, including expansion of regulatory T cells (Tregs). In this study, we investigated whether MDSCs could act as APCs to induce expansion of Ag-specific Tregs, suppress T cell proliferation, and prevent autoimmune T1D development. We found that MDSC-mediated expansion of Tregs and T cell suppression required MHC-dependent Ag presentation. A murine T1D model was established in INS-HA/RAG(-/-) mice in which animals received CD4-HA-TCR transgenic T cells via adoptive transfer. We found a significant reduction in the incidence of diabetes in recipients receiving MDSC plus HA, but not OVA peptide, leading to 75% diabetes-free mice among the treated animals. To test further whether MDSCs could prevent diabetes onset in NOD mice, nondiabetic NOD/SCID mice were injected with inflammatory T cells from diabetic NOD mice. MDSCs significantly prevented diabetes onset, and 60% of MDSC-treated mice remained diabetes free. The pancreata of treated mice showed significantly lower levels of lymphocyte infiltration in islet and less insulitis compared with that of the control groups. The protective effects of MDSCs might be mediated by inducing anergy in autoreactive T cells and the development of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) Tregs. Thist study demonstrates a remarkable capacity of transferred MDSCs to downregulate Ag-specific autoimmune responses and prevent diabetes onset, suggesting that MDSCs possess great potential as a novel cell-based tolerogenic therapy in the control of T1D and other autoimmune diseases.

20826544
Physiological loading of joints prevents cartilage degradation through CITED2.
Both overuse and disuse of joints up-regulate matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in articular cartilage and cause tissue degradation; however, moderate (physiological) loading maintains cartilage integrity. Here, we test whether CBP/p300-interacting transactivator with ED-rich tail 2 (CITED2), a mechanosensitive transcriptional coregulator, mediates this chondroprotective effect of moderate mechanical loading. In vivo, hind-limb immobilization of Sprague-Dawley rats up-regulates MMP-1 and causes rapid, histologically detectable articular cartilage degradation. One hour of daily passive joint motion prevents these changes and up-regulates articular cartilage CITED2. In vitro, moderate (2.5 MPa, 1 Hz) intermittent hydrostatic pressure (IHP) treatment suppresses basal MMP-1 expression and up-regulates CITED2 in human chondrocytes, whereas high IHP (10 MPa) down-regulates CITED2 and increases MMP-1. Competitive binding and transcription assays demonstrate that CITED2 suppresses MMP-1 expression by competing with MMP transactivator, Ets-1 for its coactivator p300. Furthermore, CITED2 up-regulation in vitro requires the p38? isoform, which is specifically phosphorylated by moderate IHP. Together, these studies identify a novel regulatory pathway involving CITED2 and p38?, which may be critical for the maintenance of articular cartilage integrity under normal physical activity levels.

20569237
Tendon-derived stem/progenitor cell aging: defective self-renewal and altered fate.
Aging is a major risk factor for tendon injury and impaired tendon healing, but the basis for these relationships remains poorly understood. Here we show that rat tendon- derived stem ? progenitor cells (TSPCs) differ in both self-renewal and differentiation capability with age. The frequency of TSPCs in tendon tissues of aged animals is markedly reduced based on colony formation assays. Proliferation rate is decreased, cell cycle progression is delayed and cell fate patterns are also altered in aged TSPCs. In particular, expression of tendon lineage marker genes is reduced while adipocytic differentiation increased. Cited2, a multi-stimuli responsive transactivator involved in cell growth and senescence, is also downregulated in aged TSPCs while CD44, a matrix assembling and organizing protein implicated in tendon healing, is upregulated, suggesting that these genes participate in the control of TSPC function.

20073041
Development and function of myeloid-derived suppressor cells generated from mouse embryonic and hematopoietic stem cells.
Emerging evidence suggests that myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) have great potential as a novel immune intervention modality in the fields of transplantation and autoimmune diseases. Thus far, efforts to develop MDSC-based therapeutic strategies have been hampered by the lack of a reliable source of MDSCs. Here we show that functional MDSCs can be efficiently generated from mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells and bone marrow hematopoietic stem (HS) cells. In vitro-derived MDSCs encompass two homogenous subpopulations: CD115(+)Ly-6C(+) and CD115(+)Ly-6C(-) cells. The CD115(+)Ly-6C(+) subset is equivalent to the monocytic Gr-1(+)CD115(+)F4/80(+) MDSCs found in tumor-bearing mice. In contrast, the CD115(+)Ly-6C(-) cells, a previously unreported population of MDSCs, resemble the granulocyte/macrophage progenitors developmentally. In vitro, ES- and HS-MDSCs exhibit robust suppression against T-cell proliferation induced by polyclonal stimuli or alloantigens via multiple mechanisms involving nitric oxide synthase-mediated NO production and interleukin (IL)-10. Impressively, they display even stronger suppressive activity and significantly enhance ability to induce CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T-cell development compared with tumor-derived MDSCs. Furthermore, adoptive transfer of ES-MDSCs can effectively prevent alloreactive T-cell-mediated lethal graft-versus-host disease, leading to nearly 82% long-term survival among treated mice. The successful in vitro generation of MDSCs may represent a critical step toward potential clinical application of MDSCs.

