20053777
Astrocyte elevated gene-1: a novel target for human glioma therapy.
Malignant gliomas including glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and anaplastic astrocytomas are the most common primary brain tumors. Despite multimodal treatment including surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation, median survival for patients with GBMs is only 12 to 15 months. Identifying molecules critical for glioma progression is crucial for devising effective targeted therapy. In the present study, we investigated the potential contribution of astrocyte elevated gene-1 (AEG-1) in gliomagenesis and explored the possibility of AEG-1 as a therapeutic target for malignant glioma. We analyzed the expression levels of AEG-1 in 9 normal brain tissues and 98 brain tumor patient samples by Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry. AEG-1 expression was significantly elevated in >90% of diverse human brain tumor samples including GBMs and astrocytic tumors, and also in human glioma cell lines compared with normal brain tissues and normal astrocytes. Knockdown of AEG-1 by small interfering RNA inhibited cell viability, cloning efficiency, and invasive ability of U87 human glioma cells and 9L rat gliosarcoma cells. We also found that matrix metalloproteases (MMP-2 and MMP-9) are involved in AEG-1-mediated invasion of glioma cells. In an orthotopic nude mouse brain tumor model using primary human GBM12 tumor cells, AEG-1 small interfering RNA significantly suppressed glioma cell growth in vivo. Taken together, these provocative results indicate that AEG-1 may play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of glioma and that AEG-1 could represent a viable potential target for malignant glioma therapy.

19940250
Astrocyte elevated gene-1 (AEG-1) functions as an oncogene and regulates angiogenesis.
Astrocyte-elevated gene-1 (AEG-1) expression is increased in multiple cancers and plays a central role in Ha-ras-mediated oncogenesis through the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathway. Additionally, overexpression of AEG-1 protects primary and transformed human and rat cells from serum starvation-induced apoptosis through activation of PI3K/Akt signaling. These findings suggest, but do not prove, that AEG-1 may function as an oncogene. We now provide definitive evidence that AEG-1 is indeed a transforming oncogene and show that stable expression of AEG-1 in normal immortal cloned rat embryo fibroblast (CREF) cells induces morphological transformation and enhances invasion and anchorage-independent growth in soft agar, two fundamental biological events associated with cellular transformation. Additionally, AEG-1-expressing CREF clones form aggressive tumors in nude mice. Immunohistochemistry analysis of tumor sections demonstrates that AEG-1-expressing tumors have increased microvessel density throughout the entire tumor sections. Overexpression of AEG-1 increases expression of molecular markers of angiogenesis, including angiopoietin-1, matrix metalloprotease-2, and hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha. In vitro angiogenesis studies further demonstrate that AEG-1 promotes tube formation in Matrigel and increases invasion of human umbilical vein endothelial cells via the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. Tube formation induced by AEG-1 correlates with increased expression of angiogenesis markers, including Tie2 and hypoxia-inducible factor-alpha, and blocking AEG-1-induced Tie2 with Tie2 siRNA significantly inhibits AEG-1-induced tube formation in Matrigel. Overall, our findings demonstrate that aberrant AEG-1 expression plays a dominant positive role in regulating oncogenic transformation and angiogenesis. These findings suggest that AEG-1 may provide a viable target for directly suppressing the cancer phenotype.

19276652
Historical perspective and recent insights into our understanding of the molecular and biochemical basis of the antitumor properties of mda-7/IL-24.
A subtraction hybridization approach combined with a differentiation therapy model of human melanoma identified melanoma differentiation associated gene-7 (mda-7) as a gene upregulated during induction of terminal differentiation. Based on conserved structure, chromosomal location and cytokine-like properties, mda-7, has now been classified as a member of the expanding interleukin (IL)-10 gene family and designated as mda-7/IL-24. Extensive in vitro and in vivo human tumor xenograft studies confirm that mda-7/IL-24 induces apoptosis specifically in tumor cells without harming normal cells. Unique properties of mda-7/IL-24 action also include potent "bystander antitumor" activity, an ability to exert anti-angiogenic effects, immune modulating ability and a capacity to enhance the sensitivity of tumor cells to radiotherapy, chemotherapy and monoclonal antibody therapy. Very recent studies from our groups further reveal autocrine regulation and chemoprevention facilitating properties of mda-7/IL-24. Based on these remarkable antitumor attributes, mda-7/IL-24 was evaluated by intratumoral injection with a replication incompetent adenovirus expressing this gene (Ad.mda-7; INGN 241) in a phase I clinical trial in patients with metastatic melanomas and other advanced solid cancers. mda-7/IL-24 was well tolerated with significant clinical activity. This review highlights our current understanding of the molecular and biochemical basis of mda-7/IL-24 antitumor properties and highlights its potential as a viable gene-based therapy for a wide spectrum of primary and advanced cancers.

20523363
Embryonic stem cell (ESC)-mediated transgene delivery induces growth suppression, apoptosis and radiosensitization, and overcomes temozolomide resistance in malignant gliomas.
High-grade gliomas are among the most lethal of all cancers. Despite considerable advances in multimodality treatment, including surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the overall prognosis for patients with this disease remains dismal. Currently available treatments necessitate the development of more effective tumor-selective therapies. The use of gene therapy for malignant gliomas is promising, as it allows in situ delivery and selectively targets brain tumor cells while sparing the adjacent normal brain tissue. Viral vectors that deliver proapoptotic genes to malignant glioma cells have been investigated. Although tangible results on patients' survival remain to be further documented, significant advances in therapeutic gene transfer strategies have been made. Recently, cell-based gene delivery has been sought as an alternative method. In this paper, we report the proapoptotic effects of embryonic stem cell (ESC)-mediated mda-7/IL-24 delivery to malignant glioma cell lines. Our data show that these are similar to those observed using a viral vector. In addition, acknowledging the heterogeneity of malignant glioma cells and their signaling pathways, we assessed the effects of conventional treatment for high-grade gliomas, ionizing radiation and temozolomide, when combined with ESC-mediated transgene delivery. This combination resulted in synergistic effects on tumor cell death. The mechanisms involved in this beneficial effect included activation of both apoptosis and autophagy. Our in vitro data support the concept that ESC-mediated gene delivery might offer therapeutic advantages over standard approaches to malignant gliomas. Our results corroborate the theory that combined treatments exploiting different signaling pathways are needed to succeed in the treatment of malignant gliomas.

