21034775
Cross-genotypic polyclonal anti-HCV antibodies from human ascitic fluid.
Many anti-HCV antibodies are available, but more are needed for research and clinical applications. This study examines whether ascitic fluid from cirrhotic patients could be a source of reagent-grade antibodies. Ascitic fluid from 29 HCV patients was screened by ELISA for anti-HCV antibodies against three viral proteins: core, NS4B, and NS5A. Significant patient-to-patient variability in anti-HCV antibody titers was observed. Total ascitic fluid IgG purified by Protein-A chromatography reacted with HCV proteins in immunoblots, cell extracts, and replicon-expressing cells. Affinity-purification using synthetic peptides as bait allowed the preparation of cross-genotypic antibodies directed against pre-selected regions of HCV core, NS4B, and NS5A proteins. The performance of the polyclonal antibodies was comparable to that of monoclonal antibodies. Anti-NS4B antibody preparations reacted with genotype 1a, 1b, and 2a NS4B proteins in immunoblots and allowed NS4B to be localized in replicon-expressing cells. Ascitic fluid is an abundant source of human polyclonal cross-genotypic antibodies that can be used as an alternative to blood. This study shows the utility of selectively purifying human polyclonal antibodies from ascitic fluid. Affinity purification allows antibodies to be selected that are comparable to monoclonal antibodies in their ability to react with targeted regions of viral proteins.

20974502
Insulin resistance predicts re-treatment failure in an efficacy study of peginterferon-?-2a and ribavirin in HIV/HCV co-infected patients.
Few studies evaluated the efficacy of HCV re-treatment and the predictors of response in HIV/HCV co-infected patients. The role of insulin resistance as a predictor of response in this population is unknown. The aim of this study is to evaluate the safety and efficacy of pegylated interferon-?-2a and ribavirin in re-treatment of HIV/HCV co-infected patients, predictors of sustained virological response, including insulin resistance, and the relationship between insulin resistance and liver histology. This prospective, multi-centered study included HIV/HCV co-infected patients with prior interferon-based treatment failure. Patients received pegylated interferon-?-2a and ribavirin for 48 weeks. Serum HCV RNA was measured 24 weeks post treatment to assess sustained virological response. Insulin resistance was defined as HOMA-IR >2. Correlations between baseline insulin resistance and steatosis, and/or cirrhosis were determined. Sustained virological response was achieved in 14/96 (15%) patients. 35% of patients with HOMA-IR < 2 (6/17) achieved sustained virological response vs 14% (5/36) of those with HOMA-IR between 2-4, and 7% (3/41) of those with HOMA-IR > 4 (p = 0.01). In multivariable analysis, insulin resistance and log?? HCV RNA were negatively associated with sustained virological response [AOR 0.17; 95% CI 0.05-0.64, p = 0.009, and AOR 0.36; 95% CI 0.14-0.93, p = 0.04, respectively]. Steatosis and cirrhosis correlated with insulin resistance (p = 0.02 and 0.03, respectively) but neither independently predicted sustained virological response. Discontinuations due to severe adverse events occurred in 8% of cases, and 2 patients died of unrelated causes. In HIV/HCV co-infected patients undergoing re-treatment, sustained virological response rate is low; those patients without insulin resistance are significantly more likely to achieve sustained virological response.

20672993
Short communication: Inadequate vitamin D exacerbates parathyroid hormone elevations in tenofovir users.
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) elevations are associated with reduced bone mineral density and adverse health outcomes and have been reported in patients with HIV infection. We aimed to examine the impact of vitamin D status and tenofovir (TDF) use on PTH levels among HIV-infected patients receiving combination antiretroviral therapy (cART). Demographics, medication and supplement use, and clinical data, including 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] and PTH, were collected on 45 HIV-infected men on ART. Suboptimal vitamin D status was defined as 25(OH)D < 30 ng/ml. The relationship between antiretroviral agents, suboptimal 25(OH)D, and PTH levels was examined. Among subjects with suboptimal vitamin D status, PTH values greater than or equal to the ULN (87 pg/ml) were more common among TDF users than nonusers: 41% versus 0% (p = 0.018); and median PTH was higher in TDF users: 80 pg/ml versus 55 pg/ml (p = 0.02). Among TDF users, PTH was higher in the group with suboptimal 25(OH)D (p = 0.045). Multivariable linear regression showed that PTH was independently and directly related to TDF use (p = 0.017) and inversely related to 25(OH)D (p = 0.017). PTH was not related to the estimated glomerular filtration rate (p = 0.9). In this cross-sectional study of HIV-infected men on ART, the use of TDF and the level of 25(OH)D were independently associated with PTH levels. Because TDF is a potent and widely used antiretroviral drug, information about cofactors that may exacerbate its side effects is of significant clinical value.

20371461
Antisense gets a grip on miR-122 in chimpanzees.
Innovations in antisense drug design have enhanced potency and selectivity, as demonstrated in a recent study by Lanford and colleagues, who treated hepatitis C virus (HCV)-infected chimpanzees with SPC3649. This compound is a second-generation antisense RNA molecule that is complementary to the microRNA miR-122, a major regulatory RNA in liver that fine-tunes the expression of over 100 cellular genes and enhances HCV replication. Serum concentrations of cholesterol and HCV RNA were reduced in chimpanzees treated with 12 weekly intravenous infusions of SPC3649, and no major side effects were noted, paving the way for clinical trials of SPC3649 and other antisense drugs directed against microRNAs. Potential therapeutic uses of SPC3649 include the treatment of HCV infection and liver cancer.

19666142
The quasispecies nature and biological implications of the hepatitis C virus.
Many RNA viruses exist as a cloud of closely related sequence variants called a quasispecies, rather than as a population of identical clones. In this article, we explain the quasispecies nature of RNA viral genomes, and briefly review the principles of quasispecies dynamics and the differences with classical population genetics. We then discuss the current methods for quasispecies analysis and conclude with the biological implications of this phenomenon, focusing on the hepatitis C virus.

19383824
Mutations in the hepatitis C virus core gene are associated with advanced liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection can promote the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Published data implicate the HCV core gene in oncogenesis. We tested the hypothesis that core gene sequences from HCC patients differ from those of patients without cirrhosis/HCC. Full-length HCV sequences from HCC patients and controls were obtained from the investigators and GenBank and compared with each other. A logistic regression model was developed to predict the HCC risk of individual point mutations and other sequence features. Mutations in partial sequences (bases 36-288) from HCC patients and controls were also analyzed. The first base of the AUG start codon was designated position 1. A logistic regression model developed through analysis of full-length core gene sequences identified seven polymorphisms significantly associated with increased HCC risk (36G/C, 209A, 271U/C, 309A/C, 435A/C, 481A, and 546A/C) and an interaction term (for 209A-271U/C) that had an odds ratio <1.0. Three of these polymorphisms could be analyzed in the partial sequences. Two of them, 36G/C and 209A, were again associated with increased HCC risk, but 271U/C was not. The odds ratio of 209A-271U/C was not significant. HCV core genes from patients with and without HCC differ at several positions. Of interest, 209A has been associated with IFN resistance and HCC in previous studies. Our findings suggest that HCV core gene sequence data might provide useful information about HCC risk. Prospective investigation is needed to establish the temporal relationship between appearance of the viral mutations and development of HCC.

19129450
Internal initiation stimulates production of p8 minicore, a member of a newly discovered family of hepatitis C virus core protein isoforms.
The hepatitis C virus (HCV) core gene is more conserved at the nucleic acid level than is necessary to preserve the sequence of the core protein, suggesting that it contains information for additional functions. We used a battery of anticore antibodies to test the hypothesis that the core gene directs the synthesis of core protein isoforms. Infectious viruses, replicons, and RNA transcripts expressed a p8 minicore containing the C-terminal portion of the p21 core protein and lacking the N-terminal portion. An interferon resistance mutation, U271A, which creates an AUG at codon 91, upregulated p8 expression in Con1 replicons, suggesting that p8 is produced by an internal initiation event and that 91-AUG is the preferred, but not the required, initiation codon. Synthesis of p8 was independent of p21, as shown by the abundant production of p8 from transcripts containing an UAG stop codon that blocked p21 production. Three infectious viruses, JFH-1 (2a core), J6/JFH (2a core), and H77/JFH (1a core), and a bicistronic construct, Bi-H77/JFH, all expressed both p8 and larger isoforms. The family of minicores ranges in size from 8 to 14 kDa. All lack the N-terminal portion of the p21 core. In conclusion, the core gene contains an internal signal that stimulates the initiation of protein synthesis at or near codon 91, leading to the production of p8. Infectious viruses of both genotype 1 and 2 HCV express a family of larger isoforms, in addition to p8. Minicores lack significant portions of the RNA binding domain of p21 core. Studies are under way to determine their functions.

18627270
Liver fibrosis during an outbreak of acute hepatitis C virus infection in HIV-infected men: a prospective cohort study.
Outbreaks of acute hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection are occurring in HIV-infected men who have sex with men. We evaluated risk factors and liver histopathology in 11 consecutively enrolled men with newly acquired HCV infection that was diagnosed on the basis of antibody seroconversion, new elevations in alanine aminotransferase level, and wide fluctuations in HCV RNA level. Ten patients reported unprotected anal intercourse, and 7 reported "club-drug" use, including methamphetamine. Liver biopsy showed moderately advanced fibrosis (Scheuer stage 2) in 9 patients (82%). No cause of liver damage other than acute HCV infection was identified. The specific pathways leading to periportal fibrosis in HIV-infected men with newly acquired HCV infection require investigation.

18300072
Clinicopathologic correlates of hepatitis C virus in brain: a pilot study.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) has been detected in the brain tissues of 10 individuals reported to date; it is unclear what clinical factors are associated with this, and with what frequency it occurs. Accordingly, a pilot analysis utilizing reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT- PCR) to detect and sequence HCV in premortem plasma and postmortem brain and liver from 20 human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected and 10 HIV-naive individuals was undertaken. RNA encoding the first 126 amino acids of the HCV E1 envelope protein and the majority of the E1 signal sequence was analyzed in parallel with an 80-base-long segment of the 5' untranslated region (UTR). Liver HCV was detected only in subjects with premortem HCV viremia (10 HIV-infected and 3 HIV-naive). Brain HCV was detected in 6/10 HCV/HIV-coinfected and 1/3 HCV-monoinfected subjects. In the setting of HIV, the magnitude of plasma HCV load did not correlate with the presence of brain HCV. However, coinfected patients with brain HCV were more often off antiretroviral therapy and tended to have higher plasma HIV loads than those with HCV restricted to liver. Furthermore, premortem cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed that HCV/HIV-coinfected patients with brain HCV had detectable CSF HIV, whereas those without brain HCV had undetectable CSF HIV loads (P = .0205). Neuropsychologic tests showed a trend for hierarchical impairment of abstraction/executive functioning in HIV/HCV coinfection, with mean T scores for HIV monoinfected patients 43.2 (7.3), for liver-only HCV 39.5 (9.0), and for those with HCV in brain and liver 33.2 (5.1) (P = .0927). Predominant brain HCV sequences did not match those of the plasma or liver in 4 of the 6 coinfected patients analyzed. We conclude that in the setting of HIV/HCV coinfection, brain HCV is a common phenomenon unrelated to the magnitude of HCV viremia, but related to active HIV disease and detectable CSF HIV. Furthermore, there is sequence evidence of brain compartmentalization. Differences in abstraction/executive function of HCV/HIV coinfected patients compared to HIV monoinfected warrant further studies to determine if neuropsychiatric effects are predicated upon brain infection.

18275278
Molecular and bioinformatic evidence of hepatitis C virus evolution in brain.
Neurocognitive deficits in patients with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection prompted a search for HCV in brain. HCV was present in the brains of 7 (54%) of 13 patients with viremia, as determined by 5' UTR and E1 (envelope 1) gene analysis. Brain HCV RNA consensus sequences differed from those in plasma and liver in 4 (57%) of 7 patients. The quality of HCV RNA from postmortem brain and liver was assessed and demonstrated to be suitable for sequence analysis. Quasispecies analysis revealed that several mutations present in clones from >1 brain region were absent in clones from liver and plasma. Brain-specific mutations defined several families of related sequences. The patterns of brain-specific mutations in these families were consistent with the evolution of HCV RNA from a common ancestor. Single-nucleotide-polymorphism analysis confirmed that a prominent brain-specific mutation constituted approximately 10% of HCV RNA in cerebellum and medulla but that this mutation was undetectable in the liver and plasma of the same patient. This study introduces novel methods for assessing RNA from postmortem samples. It increases the reported cases of HCV in the brain, provides the first E1 sequences from the brain, and contributes to the growing evidence that HCV replicates and evolves within the brain.

