20386940
Antenatal reports of pre-pregnancy abuse is associated with symptoms of depression in the postpartum period.
The purpose of this study is to estimate characteristics predictive of postpartum mood change symptoms among urban women. Women receiving prenatal care at The Mount Sinai Hospital OB/GYN Diagnostic and Treatment Center and who delivered over one calendar year (2007; n?=?884) were evaluated for psychosocial risk factors at their first prenatal visit and then subsequently for postpartum mood symptomatology (n?=?510) at 6 weeks postpartum. Symptoms associated with postpartum depression (PPD) were best predicted by a pre-pregnancy history of physical or sexual abuse, a history of psychiatric problems, or psychiatric diagnosis at the time of first prenatal visit. This study provides the first large sample evidence that PPD is associated with the report of sexual or physical abuse. Screening for a history of abuse, a history of psychiatric problems, or having a psychiatric illness at the time of the first prenatal visit may be an efficient means to identify women at risk for developing PPD. Early identification of women at risk would provide an opportunity to provide a selective prevention intervention to reduce the likelihood of PPD symptomatology.

19718457
The impact of socioeconomic status on the neural substrates associated with pleasure.
Low socio-economic status (SES) is associated with increased morbidity and premature mortality. Because tonic adversity relates to a diminished ability to experience pleasure, we hypothesized that subjects living in poverty would show diminished neural responsivity to positive stimuli in regions associated with positive experience and reward. Visual images were presented to twenty-two subjects in the context of a EPI-BOLD fMRI paradigm. Significant differences in neural responses between SES groups to poverty vs. neutral images were assessed, examining group, condition, and interaction effects. The data suggest that persons living in low-SES have neural experiences consistent with diminished interest in things generally enjoyed and point toward a possible explanation for the relationship between socioeconomic inequalities and mood disorders, such as depression, by SES.

17984858
Neural dysfunction in postpartum depression: an fMRI pilot study.
With approximately 4 million births each year in the United States, an estimated 760,000 women annually suffer from a clinically significant postpartum depressive illness. Yet even though the relationship between psychiatric disorders and the postpartum period has been documented since the time of Hippocrates, fewer than half of all these cases are recognized. Because postpartum depression (PPD), the most common complication of childbearing, remains poorly characterized, and its etiology remains unclear, we attempted to address a critical gap in the mechanistic understanding of PPD by probing its systems-level neuropathophysiology, in the context of a specific neurobiological model of fronto-limbic-striatal function. Using emotionally valenced word probes, with linguistic semantic specificity within an integrated functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) protocol, we investigated emotional processing, behavioral regulation, and their interaction (functions of clinical relevance to PPD), in the context of fronto-limbic-striatal function. We observed attenuated activity in posterior orbitofrontal cortex for negative versus neutral stimuli with greater PPD symptomatology, increased amygdala activity in response to negative words in those without PPD symptomotology, and attenuated striatum activation to positive word conditions with greater PPD symptomotology. Identifying the functional neuroanatomical profile of brain systems involved in the regulation of emotion and behavior in the postpartum period will not only assist in determining whether the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition psychiatric diagnostic specifier of PPD has an associated, unique, functional neuroanatomical profile, but a neurobiological characterization in relation to asymptomatic (postpartum non-depressed) control subjects, will also increase our understanding of the affective disorder spectrum, shed additional light on the possible mechanism(s) responsible for PPD and provide a necessary foundation for the development of more targeted, biologically based diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for PPD.

