19944287
Imaging of pediatric pituitary abnormalities.
Evaluation of the sella and surrounding structures in pediatric endocrinopathies is best performed with high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging. Adequate assessment relies not only on determining the size and shape of the gland but also on confirming normal signal characteristics and homogeneous parenchymal enhancement. Surrounding structures, including the hypothalamus-infundibulum-stalk and the skull base and midline structures about the cerebral hemispheres, warrant careful attention to identify any associated abnormalities. Tumors, whether they arise in the gland or affect gland function through mass effect, are usually well resolved on today's scanners and imaging provides accurate characterization of these lesions.

18951498
Imaging the paranasal sinuses: where we are and where we are going.
As has happened in all facets of neuroimaging, cross-sectional imaging has dramatically changed our approach and understanding of the anatomy and pathology of paranasal sinuses. We have moved away from plain film radiographs to modern high-resolution sinus computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that helps us better depict underlying normal anatomy and evaluate pathology. Recent advances in PET/CT imaging have introduced a physiologic aspect to anatomical imaging and holds promise to better stage and restage head and neck tumors. In this article, we describe the various imaging techniques, concerns, advantages and disadvantages of the individual techniques, and provide an overview of the various pathologies involving the paranasal sinuses.

18317442
Neuroimaging for the pediatric endocrinologist.
Imaging of the sella and surrounding structures has become essential in the evaluation of pituitary dysfunction and its causes. This article begins with a review of the normal anatomy of the sella and the imaging patterns in and about the normal pituitary gland. There exists considerable variability in the size and configuration of the normal gland in all age groups, and absolute determination of a 'large' or 'small' gland can prove difficult and problematic. Absence of the posterior bright-spot may indicate disruption of the normal stalk transport mechanisms. Microadenomas are well-resolved by magnetic resonance imaging as areas with reduced or delayed enhancement relative to the normal gland. Among hormonally active tumors, adrenocorticotropic hormone-releasing adenomas are most common in the first 11 years of life, while prolactinomas become more common into the teenage years. Macroadenomas tend to present clinically because of mass-effect on adjacent structures, such as the bitemporal hemianopsia seen with optic chiasm compression. Cystic lesions such as Rathke's cleft cysts are commonly seen in the gland, even in healthy children, and their presence need not correlate with any functional abnormality; however, such cysts can cause mass effect on the remaining gland, reflect hemorrhage into adenoma, or actually comprise the central portion of a more worrisome tumor such as craniopharyngioma. Solid tumors of the suprasellar region include optic pathway gliomas, hamartomas, and germinomas. Among inflammatory conditions, granulomatous diseases such as sarcoidosis have predilection for involvement of the suprasellar regions and can spread along perivascular spaces deep within the parenchyma. Because of the association of pituitary endocrinopathies with midline anomalies, one should pay careful attention to midline structures included on a sellar survey.

20699197
Ischemic stroke in an adult with glycogen storage disease type I.
Glycogen Storage Disease Type I (GSD-I) is a metabolic disorder characterized by deficiency of glucose-6-phosphatase resulting in ineffective glycogen metabolism to glucose. These patients frequently have hyperlipidemia, among many other metabolic derangements. There is no consensus regarding the risk of developing atherosclerosis. We report an adult male with GSD-I who presented with cerebral infarction and a history of prior ischemic stroke and multiple coronary stent placements. We suggest that patients with GSD-I do have an increased risk of atherosclerosis and its complications and predict that these complications will be seen more frequently since patients with GSD-I are living longer as a result of better treatment.

