21308508
Epidemic of Sexually Transmitted Hepatitis C Virus Infection Among HIV-Infected Men.
Sexual contact is thought to be an inefficient mode of hepatitis C virus (HCV) transmission. However, reports of sexually transmitted HCV infection among HIV-infected men who have sex with men (MSM) began to appear in 2004. The patients were of early middle age with well-controlled HIV infection, participated in unprotected receptive sex, and frequently used noninjection recreational drugs. Molecular studies showed evidence of clusters of transmission between patients in different countries in Europe. Spontaneous clearance was relatively rare, but treatment with pegylated interferon and ribavirin resulted in cure in about two thirds of patients. Of concern was the finding of moderately advanced fibrosis during the early stages of HCV infection. HIV-infected MSM are a new risk group for HCV infection and so should be screened regularly for HCV infection.

18627270
Liver fibrosis during an outbreak of acute hepatitis C virus infection in HIV-infected men: a prospective cohort study.
Outbreaks of acute hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection are occurring in HIV-infected men who have sex with men. We evaluated risk factors and liver histopathology in 11 consecutively enrolled men with newly acquired HCV infection that was diagnosed on the basis of antibody seroconversion, new elevations in alanine aminotransferase level, and wide fluctuations in HCV RNA level. Ten patients reported unprotected anal intercourse, and 7 reported "club-drug" use, including methamphetamine. Liver biopsy showed moderately advanced fibrosis (Scheuer stage 2) in 9 patients (82%). No cause of liver damage other than acute HCV infection was identified. The specific pathways leading to periportal fibrosis in HIV-infected men with newly acquired HCV infection require investigation.

17624845
Absence of erythrocyte-associated HIV-1 in vivo.
A recent study found high levels of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) bound to erythrocytes in HIV-1-infected patients with long-term undetectable plasma HIV-1 loads, potentially representing a novel and important reservoir of HIV-1 infection. To attempt to confirm this finding, we purified erythrocytes from 13 HIV-1-infected patients with long-term undetectable plasma viral load and depleted contaminating CD3(+)CD4(+) lymphocytes using magnetic beads. HIV-1 load of the purified erythrocyte fraction was <20 copies/mL in 11 of 13 patients and 42 and 52 copies/mL in 2 patients. Contrary to the prior report, therefore, erythrocytes do not represent a novel reservoir of HIV-1 infection in these patients.

19372794
Kidney and central nervous system as reservoirs of HIV infection.
To summarize recent investigations into the establishment and maintenance of the kidney and central nervous system as reservoirs of HIV infection and the resultant pathogenesis of HIV infection in these organs. Significant progress has been made in understanding the pathogenesis of HIV-associated nephropathy with the demonstration that HIV gene expression within podocytes was sufficient to recapitulate HIV-associated nephropathy -like renal disease in mouse models. Little progress has been made, however, in understanding how the HIV reservoir in the kidney is established and maintained. Studies of the central nervous system reservoir have further characterized the compartmentalization of HIV between the central nervous system and lymphoid organs and within brain regions. The relationship between HIV in the cerebrospinal fluid and in the brain and the utility of cerebrospinal fluid as a surrogate for the brain have been reevaluated in patients receiving antiretroviral medication and in patients at different stages of HIV infection and neurologic impairment. Finally, nonproductive infection of astrocytes in vivo has been demonstrated and mechanisms to explain viral entry and the block to productive infection of these cells have been described. Although much progress has been made in the understanding of the pathogenesis of HIV-associated nephropathy, much work remains to be done to better understand the establishment and maintenance of the HIV reservoir in both the kidney and the brain, and in particular, the mechanisms of neurologic dysfunction resulting from HIV infection of the brain.

