20720183
Dose-dependent regulation of primitive erythroid maturation and identity by the transcription factor Eklf.
The primitive erythroid (EryP) lineage is the first to differentiate during mammalian embryogenesis. Eklf/Klf1 is a transcriptional regulator that is essential for definitive erythropoiesis in the fetal liver. Dissection of the role(s) of Eklf within the EryP compartment has been confounded by the simultaneous presence of EryP and fetal liver-derived definitive erythroid (EryD) cells in the blood. To address this problem, we have distinguished EryP from their definitive counterparts by crossing Eklf(+/-) mutant and ?-globin::histone H2B-GFP transgenic mice. Eklf-deficient EryP exhibit membrane ruffling and a failure to acquire the typical discoidal erythroid shape but they can enucleate. Flow cytometric analyses of H2B-GFP(+) EryP revealed that Eklf heterozygosity results in the loss of Ter119 surface expression on EryP but not on EryD. Null mutation of Eklf resulted in abnormal expression of a range of surface proteins by EryP. In particular, several megakaryocyte markers were ectopically expressed by maturing Eklf-null EryP. Unexpectedly, the platelet tetraspanin CD9 was detected on nucleated wild-type EryP but not on mature EryD and thus provides a useful marker for purifying circulating EryP. We conclude that Eklf gene dosage is crucial for regulating the surface phenotype and molecular identity of maturing primitive erythroid cells.

20691878
Use of transgenic fluorescent reporter mouse lines to monitor hematopoietic and erythroid development during embryogenesis.
The use of fluorescent reporter proteins such as GFP, RFP, and their variants to tag and track cells within the embryo has revolutionized developmental biology. Expression of these proteins within restricted populations has been achieved through the use of lineage-specific regulatory elements. This approach has proven especially powerful in the hematopoietic system, where it has been possible to monitor the generation, expansion, maturation, and migration of primitive erythroid cells, macrophages, and megakaryocytes during embryogenesis at unprecedented resolution. Such analyses have provided novel insights into the development of these lineages. In this chapter, we discuss the design considerations and methodologies involved in the production and analysis of transgenic mouse lines in which fluorescent reporters are expressed in the hematopoietic system of the mouse embryo.

20181503
Developmental niches for embryonic erythroid cells.
Primitive erythroid cells (EryP) are the first differentiated cell type to be specified during mammalian embryogenesis. EryP arise from a pool of lineage-restricted progenitors in the yolk sac (YS) and then enter the newly formed embryonic circulation to mature in a stepwise, synchronous fashion. Numbering in the millions in the mid-gestation mouse embryo, EryP are the dominant circulating blood cell prior to the rapid generation of adult-type definitive erythroid (EryD) cells in the fetal liver. The identification of maturational events in this lineage presented a significant challenge, as EryD begin to outnumber EryP in the bloodstream from approximately E14.5 onwards. We used human epsilon-globin gene regulatory elements to drive lineage-specific expression of a histone-H2B::EGFP fusion protein, allowing us to label the chromatin of EryP during their development and to track and quantify EryP nuclei following their expulsion from the cell. Using this transgenic fluorescent reporter mouse line, we have monitored primitive erythropoiesis in three distinct niches: the YS, where EryP progenitors arise; the circulation, where EryP continue to divide and mature; and the fetal liver, where EryP complete the terminal stages of their differentiation.

19415688
Embryonic fates for extraembryonic lineages: New perspectives.
The prevailing view of the functions of the extraembryonic lineages of the mammalian embryo has been that they serve solely to support its intrauterine development. In recent years, a number of studies have suggested that the extraembryonic mesoderm and visceral endoderm in fact contribute cells to tissues of the developing animal. In this mini-review, we discuss evidence that the yolk sac is an early source of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells and that the cells of the visceral endoderm, once thought to be segregated solely to the yolk sac, constitute a subpopulation of cells within the developing gut tube and perhaps other endodermal structures. Fascinating questions remain to be addressed and are likely to establish a new paradigm for studying early mammalian development. Understanding the processes that give rise to stem cell populations in development may lead to advances in stem cell therapies and regenerative medicine.

18445648
The fetal liver is a niche for maturation of primitive erythroid cells.
Primitive erythroid cells (EryP) are the earliest differentiated cell type of the mammalian embryo. They appear in the yolk sac by embryonic day 7.5, begin to enter the embryonic circulation 2 days later and continue to mature in a stepwise and synchronous fashion. Like their adult counterparts, EryP enucleate. However, EryP circulate throughout the embryo for several days before the first enucleated forms can be identified in the blood. We have used transgenic mouse lines in which GFP marks EryP to investigate this seemingly long lag and have identified a previously unrecognized developmental niche for EryP maturation. After exiting the yolk sac, EryP begin to express cell adhesion proteins, including alpha4, alpha5, and beta1 integrins, on their surface and migrate into the fetal liver (FL), where they interact with macrophages within erythroblastic islands. Binding of EryP to FL macrophages in vitro is stage-specific and partly depends on VCAM-1. The ability to tag and track EryP nuclei using a transgenic mouse line expressing an H2B-EGFP fusion allowed us to identify and characterize extruded EryP nuclei and to demonstrate that molecules such as alpha4, alpha5, and beta1 integrins are redistributed onto the plasma membrane surrounding the extruding nucleus. FL macrophages engulf extruded EryP nuclei in cocultures and in the native FL in vivo. We conclude that EryP home to, complete their maturation, and enucleate within the FL, a tissue that is just developing as EryP begin to circulate. Our observations suggest a simple solution for a puzzling aspect of the development of the primitive erythroid lineage.

17620605
Vertebrate Ctr1 coordinates morphogenesis and progenitor cell fate and regulates embryonic stem cell differentiation.
Embryogenesis involves two distinct processes. On the one hand, cells must specialize, acquiring fates appropriate to their positions (differentiation); on the other hand, they must physically construct the embryo through coordinated mechanical activity (morphogenesis). In early vertebrate development, fibroblast growth factor (FGF) regulates multiple embryonic events, including germ layer differentiation and morphogenesis; the cellular components that direct FGF signaling to evoke these different responses remain largely unknown. We show here that the copper transporter 1 (Ctr1) protein is a critical router of FGF signals during early embryogenesis. Ctr1 both promotes the differentiation and inhibits the morphogenesis of mesoderm and neurectoderm in embryos of the frog Xenopus laevis, thereby coordinating normal development. Signal sorting by Ctr1 involves the activation of the Ras-MAP kinase cascade and appears to be independent of its role in copper transport. Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells deficient for Ctr1 (Ctr1(-/-)) retain characteristics of pluripotency under conditions that favor differentiation in wild-type ES cells, indicating a conserved role for Ctr1 during amphibian and mammalian cell fate determination. Our studies support a model in which vertebrate Ctr1 functions as a key regulator of the differentiation capacity of both stem and progenitor cell populations.

