20844004
Neutral antibodies to the TSH receptor are present in Graves' disease and regulate selective signaling cascades.
TSH receptor (TSHR) antibodies (Abs) may be stimulating, blocking, or neutral in their functional influences and are found in patients with autoimmune thyroid disease, especially Graves' disease (GD). Stimulators are known to activate the thyroid epithelial cells via both Gs- and Gq-coupled signaling pathways, whereas blockers inhibit the action of TSH and may act as weak agonists. However, TSHR neutral Abs do not block TSH binding and are unable to induce cAMP via Gs?. The importance of such neutral Abs in GD remains unclear because their functional consequence has been assumed to be zero. We hypothesized that: 1) neutral TSHR Abs are more common to GD than generally recognized; 2) they may induce distinct signaling imprints at the TSHR not seen with TSH itself; and 3) these signaling events may alter cellular function. To evaluate these hypotheses, we first confirmed the presence of neutral TSHR Abs in sera from patients with GD and then, using mouse and hamster neutral TSHR monoclonal Abs (N-mAbs) performed detailed signaling studies, including a proteomic Ab array, with rat thyrocytes (FRTL-5) as targets. This allowed us to examine a battery of signaling cascades and their downstream effectors. Neutral TSHR Abs were indeed frequently present in sera from patients with GD. Sixteen of 27 patients (59%) had detectable neutral TSHR Abs by competition assay with N-mAbs. On examining signaling cascades, we found that N-mAbs induced signal transduction, primarily via the protein kinase A II cascade. In addition to the activation of phosphatidylinositol 3K/Akt, N-mAbs, unlike TSH, had the ability to exclusively activate the mammalian target of rapamycin/p70 S6K, nuclear factor-?B, and MAPK-ERK1/2/p38? signaling cascades and their downstream effectors p90 ribosomal kinase/MAPK-interacting kinase-1/mitogen and stress-activated kinase-1 and N-mAbs activated all forms of protein kinase C isozymes. To define the downstream effector mechanisms produced by these signaling cascades, cytokine production, proliferation, and apoptosis in thyrocytes were investigated. Although N-mAbs produced less cytokines and proliferation compared with TSH, they had the distinction of inducing thyroid cell apoptosis under the experimental conditions used. When dissecting out possible mechanisms of apoptosis, we found that activation of multiple oxidative stress markers was the primary mechanism orchestrating the death signals. Therefore, using oxidative stress-induced apoptosis, N-mAbs may be capable of exacerbating the autoimmune response in GD via apoptotic cells inducing antigen-driven mechanisms. This may help explain the inflammatory nature of this common disorder.

20719860
Subunit interactions influence TSHR multimerization.
The TSH receptor (TSHR) is the key molecule influencing thyroid growth and development and is an antigenic target in autoimmune thyroid disease. The TSHR exists in monomeric and multimeric forms, and it has been shown previously that multimeric complexes of the TSHR preferentially localize in lipid rafts. However, unlike other glycoprotein hormone receptors, the TSHR exists in several forms on the cell membrane due to intramolecular cleavage of its ectodomain, which causes the production of ?- and ?-subunits of various lengths. After cleavage and reduction of disulfide bonds, ?-subunits consisting of the receptor ectodomain may be lost from the cell surface by receptor shedding, leading to accumulation of excess ?-subunits within the membrane. Because cell surface expression of these various forms of the TSHR is critical to receptor signaling and autoimmune responses, we set out to model the influence of ?-subunits on full-length TSHRs. To study this interaction, we generated three truncated ectodomain ?-subunits linked to green fluorescent protein (named ?-316, -366, and -409) as examples of native cleaved forms of the TSHR. These constructs were transfected into human embryonic kidney 293 cells in the presence and absence of the full-length receptor. Whereas the ?-316 and ?-366 forms showed cell surface expression, the expression of ?-409 was primarily intracellular. Cotransfection of the ?-subunits with a full-length hemagglutinin-tagged wild-type (WT) receptor (HT-WT-TSHR) in both transient and stable systems caused a significant decrease in surface expression of the full-length WT receptors. This decrease was not seen with control plasmid consisting of a plasma membrane-targeted protein tagged to red fluorescent protein. To ascertain if this response was due to homointeraction of the truncated ?-constructs with the WT-TSHRs, we immunoprecipitated membranes prepared from the cotransfected cells using antihemagglutinin and then probed with anti-green fluorescent protein. These studies confirmed dimerization of the ?-subunits with the WT full-length receptor, and this interaction was further observed in vivo by fluorescence resonance energy transfer. We then studied the functional consequences of this interaction on TSHR signaling by examining G?s-mediated signals. The well-expressed truncated constructs, when coexpressed with full-length TSHR, did not alter constitutive cAMP levels, but there was a significant decrease in TSH-induced cAMP generation. Furthermore, we observed that truncated ?-316 and ?-366 had faster internalization rate, which may lead to a significant decrease in the expression of the full-length receptor on the cell surface, thus contributing to the decreased signaling response. However, the decrease in surface receptors may also be due to inhibition of newly formed receptors reaching the surface as result of receptor-receptor interaction. It is well known that under normal physiological conditions both cleaved and uncleaved TSHR forms coexist on the cell surface of normal thyrocytes. Our studies allow us to conclude, therefore, that multimerization of cleaved/ truncated forms of the ?-subunits with the full-length TSHR has a profound influence on TSHR internalization and signaling. Hence, the degree of intramolecular cleavage must also modulate TSHR signaling.

20615129
Increased postpartum thyroxine replacement in Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
The thyroidal response of pregnant patients with established Hashimoto's thyroiditis remains poorly described. The aim of this study was to determine the impact of pregnancy on Hashimoto's thyroiditis as revealed by changes in postpregnancy levothyroxine requirements. We performed a retrospective study of 799 hypothyroid patients in a university hospital. We reviewed the clinical records and selected a group of well-documented pregnant (n = 34) and nonpregnant (n = 32) hypothyroid women for study. We reviewed levothyroxine intake and serum thyrotropin (TSH) levels during three consecutive 9-month time intervals that were immediately before, during, and after pregnancy. We compared the percent change in levothyroxine dose between the prepregnancy level and each trimester during and after pregnancy. There were two patterns of levothyroxine supplementation during gestation. In pattern 1 (n = 11) there was either no change or a single levothyroxine dose increase with no subsequent changes in each trimester (T1 = T2 = T3). In pattern 2 (n = 18), multistep levothyroxine dose increases were required throughout pregnancy (T1 < T2 < T3) to maintain desired TSH levels (<2.0 mU/L). Women with pattern 2 had mean TSH levels during gestation that differed significantly from pattern 1 (2.8 +/- 0.5 vs. 1.3 +/- 0.1 mU/L respectively; p < 0.03). Further, in multivariate logistic regression, women with pattern 2 were 62 times more likely than women with pattern 1 to have a levothyroxine dose at least 20% above baseline at 3 months postpartum (p = 0.04). We showed that >50% of hypothyroid women with Hashimoto's thyroiditis experienced an increase in levothyroxine requirements in the postpartum compared to pregestational doses. This pattern of enhanced levothyroxine need was most likely dependent on the preexisting thyroid functional reserve and postpartum progression of autoimmune destruction.

20578897
The genetics of the thyroid stimulating hormone receptor: history and relevance.
The thyroid stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR) is the key regulator of thyrocyte function. The gene for the TSHR on chromosome 14q31 has been implicated as coding for the major autoantigen in the autoimmune hyperthyroidism of Graves' disease (GD) to which T cells and autoantibodies are directed. The TSHR is a seven-transmembrane domain receptor that undergoes complex posttranslational processing. In this brief review, we look at the genetics of this important autoantigen and its influence on a variety of tissue functions in addition to its role in the induction of GD. There is convincing evidence that the TSH receptor gene confers increased susceptibility for GD, but not Hashimoto's thyroiditis. GD is associated with polymorphisms in the intron 1 gene region. How such noncoding nucleotide changes influence disease susceptibility remains uncertain, but is likely to involve TSHR splicing variants and/or microRNAs arising from this gene region. Whether such influences are confined to the thyroid gland or whether they influence cell function in the many extrathyroidal sites of TSHR expression remains unknown.

20195479
A tyrosine residue on the TSH receptor stabilizes multimer formation.
The thyrotropin stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR) is a G protein coupled receptor (GPCR) with a large ectodomain. The ligand, TSH, acting via this receptor regulates thyroid growth and thyroid hormone production and secretion. The TSH receptor (TSHR) undergoes complex post-translational modifications including intramolecular cleavage and receptor multimerization. Since monomeric and multimeric receptors coexist in cells, understanding the functional role of just the TSHR multimers is difficult. Therefore, to help understand the physiological significance of receptor multimerization, it will be necessary to abrogate multimer formation, which requires identifying the ectodomain and endodomain interaction sites on the TSHR. Here, we have examined the contribution of the ectodomain to constitutive multimerization of the TSHR and determined the possible residue(s) that may be involved in this interaction. We studied ectodomain multimer formation by expressing the extracellular domain of the TSHR linked to a glycophosphotidyl (GPI) anchor in both stable and transient expression systems. Using co-immunoprecipitation and FRET of tagged receptors, we established that the TSH receptor ectodomain was capable of multimerization even when totally devoid of the transmembrane domain. Further, we studied the effect of two residues that likely made critical contact points in this interaction. We showed that a conserved tyrosine residue (Y116) on the convex surface of the LRR3 was a critical residue in ectodomain multimer formation since mutation of this residue to serine totally abrogated ectodomain multimers. This abrogation was not seen with the mutation of cysteine 176 on the inner side of the LRR5, demonstrating that inter-receptor disulfide bonding was not involved in ectodomain multimer formation. Additionally, the Y116 mutation in the intact wild type receptor enhanced receptor degradation. These data establish the TSH receptor ectodomain as one site of multimerization, independent of the transmembrane region, and that this interaction was primarily via a conserved tyrosine residue in LRR3.

19951221
Autoimmune thyroid disease in pregnancy: a review.
The maternal physiological changes that occur in normal pregnancy induce complex endocrine and immune responses. During a normal pregnancy, thyroid gland volume may enlarge, and thyroid hormone production increases. Hence, the interpretation of thyroid function during gestation needs to be adjusted according to pregnancy-specific ranges. The elevated prevalence of gestation-related thyroid disorders (10%-15%) and the important repercussions for both mother and fetus reported in multiple studies throughout the world denote, in our opinion, the necessity for routine thyroid function screening both before and during pregnancy. Once thyroid dysfunction is suspected or confirmed, management of the thyroid disorder necessitates regular monitoring in order to ensure a successful outcome. The aim of treating hyperthyroidism in pregnancy with antithyroid drugs is to maintain serum thyroxine (T(4)) in the upper normal range of the assay used with the lowest possible dose of drug, whereas in hypothyroidism, the goal is to return serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) to the range between 0.5 and 2.5 mU/L.

19816170
Role of the pituitary-bone axis in skeletal pathophysiology.
Embedded within textbooks for decades is the hard fact that releasing hormones from the anterior pituitary, namely, follicle-stimulating hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone and adrenocorticotropic hormone, stimulate master hormone secretion from target endocrine organs. We propose a paradigm shift in endocrine physiology, which is that these hormones act by design on bone directly, also now considered an endocrine organ. Complementary investigations using mouse genetic and cell biological approaches reveal that follicle-stimulating hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone act on bone cells directly to regulate bone remodeling and bone mass. Thyroid-stimulating hormone inhibits bone remodeling, whereas follicle-stimulating hormone stimulates it. We also find that the posterior pituitary hormone oxytocin is anabolic to the skeleton. An ambitious extrapolation is that a plurality of pituitary hormones acts in concert as part of a 'pituitary-bone' axis to regulate skeletal integrity in health and disease. When dysregulated master hormone levels during hypogonadism and hyperthyroidism cause altered pituitary hormone secretion through hypothalamic feedback, the latter hormones contribute to the skeletal loss.

19675158
CCR7 deficiency in NOD mice leads to thyroiditis and primary hypothyroidism.
CCR7 is involved in the initiation of immune responses and has been recently implicated in the control of tolerance. To analyze the role of CCR7 in autoimmunity, we backcrossed CCR7(ko/ko) mice (in which ko signifies deficient) onto the autoimmune-prone NOD background. Surprisingly, NODCCR7(ko/ko) mice never developed diabetes, but showed severe inflammation in multiple tissues including thyroid, lung, stomach, intestine, uterus, and testis. NODCCR7(ko/ko) mice had a marked enlargement of the thyroid gland (goiter) that was associated with circulating autoantibodies against thyroglobulin, and development of primary hypothyroidism (decreased levels of serum thyroxin, and augmented levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone in the pituitary gland), features found in Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Cells isolated from diseased thyroids and activated splenocytes from NODCCR7(ko/ko) animals induced goiter in NOD.SCID recipients, demonstrating that autoreactive cells were generated in the absence of CCR7. Moreover, thyroid disease could be accelerated in young NODCCR7(ko/ko) mice by immunization with thyroglobulin. These results demonstrate the complexity in the generation of multiple autoimmune phenotypes in NOD mice and indicate that CCR7 is a key molecule in their development.

19631028
Thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroid hormones, and bone loss.
It has become accepted by virtue of rich anecdotal experience and clinical research that thyrotoxicosis is associated with high-turnover osteoporosis. The bone loss, primarily due to accelerated resorption that is not compensated by a coupled increase in bone formation, has been attributed solely to elevated thyroid hormone levels. Evidence using mice lacking the thyroid hormone receptors alpha and beta establishes a role for thyroid hormones in regulating bone remodeling but does not exclude an independent action of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), levels of which are low in hyperthyroid states, even when thyroid hormones are normal, as after thyroxine supplementation and in subclinical hyperthyroidism. We show that TSH directly suppresses bone remodeling and that TSH receptor null mice have profound bone loss, suggesting that reduced TSH signaling contributes to hyperthyroid osteoporosis. TSH and its receptor could become valuable drug targets in treating bone loss.

19604463
New insights: elevated follicle-stimulating hormone and bone loss during the menopausal transition.
We hypothesize that a rising follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) level during the menopausal transition, even in the face of a normal estrogen level, contributes to increased bone resorption and profound bone loss that is accompanied by trabecular perforation and diminished bone strength. FSH has been shown to directly stimulate osteoclast formation and bone resorption, and our murine genetic studies indicate that the absence of FSH can, in part, protect against hypogonadal hyperresorption that causes bone loss. Furthermore, carefully conducted human studies, such as the Study of Women Across Nations (SWAN), indicate strong correlations between serum FSH levels and bone loss. Potential therapeutic implications include the development of antagonists to circulating FSH and its osteoclastic receptor.

19482685
Skeletal morphofunctional considerations and the pituitary-thyroid axis.
The past decade has unraveled novel molecular mechanisms not only of skeletal remodeling, which is the process by which the skeleton is restructured throughout adult life, but also the precision by which the skeleton is put together during embryogenesis and later modeled during growth. It is now possible to delete single genes in individual cells and during specified periods of life. This has allowed us to pin down specific molecular events that underlie individual cellular processes, and also importantly, to identify molecular defects underlying disorders of skeletal morphogenesis and remodeling. Particularly novel has been the demonstration of cross-talk, some of which is humoral, between the skeleton and organs as diverse as the brain, pituitary, and even adipose tissue and pancreas. The current review describes these molecular mechanisms in relation to the way thyroid hormones, and the pituitary hormone thyrotropin (TSH), regulate skeletal morphogenesis and remodeling.

19332151
TSH receptor autoantibodies.
Thyrotropin receptor autoantibodies (TSHR-Abs) of the stimulating variety are the hallmark of Graves' disease. The presence of immune defects leading to synthesis of TSHR-Abs causes hyperthyroidism and is associated with other extrathyroidal manifestations. Further characterization of these antibodies has now been made possible by the generation of monoclonal antibodies with this unique stimulating capacity as well as similar TSHR-Abs not associated with hyperthyroidism. Their present classification divides TSHR-Abs into stimulating, blocking (competing with TSH binding) and neutral (no signaling). Recent studies using monoclonal TSHR-Abs has revealed that stimulating and blocking antibodies bind to the receptor using mostly conformational epitopes, whilst neutral antibodies utilize exclusively linear peptides. Subtle differences in epitopes for stimulating and blocking antibodies account for the diversity of their biological actions. Recently non-classical signaling elicited by neutral antibodies has also been described, raising the need for a new classification of TSHR-Abs.

19328414
The thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor: impact of thyroid-stimulating hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibodies on multimerization, cleavage, and signaling.
The thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR) has a central role in thyrocyte function and is also one of the major autoantigens for the autoimmune thyroid diseases. We review the post-translational processing, multimerization, and intramolecular cleavage of TSHR, all of which may modulate its signal transduction. The recent characterization of monoclonal antibodies to the TSHR, including stimulating, blocking, and neutral antibodies, have also revealed unique biologic insights into receptor activation and the variety of these TSHR antibodies may help explain the multiple clinical phenotypes seen in autoimmune thyroid diseases. Knowledge of the structure/function relationship of the TSHR is beginning to provide a greater understanding of thyroid physiology and thyroid autoimmunity.

19211403
Inheriting autoimmune thyroid disease.


19074581
Thyrotropin-independent induction of thyroid endoderm from embryonic stem cells by activin A.
To model the differentiation of thyroid epithelial cells, we examined embryoid bodies derived from undifferentiated murine embryonic stem cells treated with activin A to induce endoderm differentiation, the germ layer from which thyroid cells occur. The resulting endodermal cells were then further exposed to TSH and/or IGF-I for up to 21 d. Oct-4 and REX1 expression, required to sustain stem cell self-renewal and pluripotency, were appropriately down-regulated, whereas GATA-4, and alpha-fetoprotein, both endodermal-specific markers, increased as the embryonic stem cells were exposed to activin A. By d 5 culture, TSH receptor (TSHR) and sodium iodide symporter (NIS) gene and protein expression were markedly induced. Cells isolated by the fluorescence-activated cell sorter simultaneously expressed not only TSHR and NIS proteins but also PAX8 mRNA, an expression pattern unique to thyroid cells and expected in committed thyroid progenitor cells. Such expression continued until d 21 with no influence seen by the addition of TSH or IGF-I. The sequence of gene expression changes observed in these experiments demonstrated the emergence of definitive thyroid endoderm. The activin A induction of thyroid-specific markers, NIS and TSHR, occurred in the absence of TSH stimulation, and, therefore, the emergence of thyroid endoderm in vitro paralleled the emergence of thyroid cells in TSHR-knockout mice. Activin A is clearly a major regulator of thyroid endoderm.

18925838
Influence of the TSH receptor gene on susceptibility to Graves' disease and Graves' ophthalmopathy.
A large gene region, called GD-1, was first described by this laboratory as linked to Graves' disease (GD) and included the gene for the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR). Recent studies have now suggested an association of TSHR intronic polymorphisms with GD. We have taken the opportunity to examine a population of well-characterized patients with autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) typed for an additional thyroid susceptibility gene, the immunoregulatory gene for cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4), to examine its relationship with the susceptibility to GD endowed by TSHR gene polymorphisms. We used TSHR-SNP-rs2268458, located in intron 1 of the TSHR gene, measured using standard PCR-RFLP procedures, as our marker for the TSHR gene association. We genotyped 200 patients with GD, 83 patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT), and 118 healthy controls (all female Caucasians). The allele and genotype frequencies from GD patients, but not HT patients, were significantly different from controls. The frequency of the combined genotype (allele) CC + TC was significantly higher in GD patients versus controls, suggesting that the C-containing genotype increased the risk for GD in a dominant manner (p = 0.018, odds ratio [OR] = 1.8). When compared with CTLA-4 (A/G)(49) single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), we were unable to demonstrate additive risk in patients with established AITD. Further, subsetting the patients (n = 120) into those with clinically significant Graves' ophthalmopathy (GO) showed no association with the TSHR SNP. These results demonstrated that the intronic TSHR-SNP-rs2268458 was associated with GD, but not with HT, thus indicating that the TSHR gene has the potential to increase susceptibility to GD. However, we were not able to demonstrate any additive risk with the CTLA-4 (A/G)(49) SNP, which is, therefore, an independent risk factor for AITD. This suggested that, within the limits of the study population, each of these two genes provided a small contribution to GD susceptibility and that neither was essential. In addition, there was no evidence for the TSHR gene association adding to the risk of developing GO. Direct functional analyses are now needed to help explain the mechanisms of this TSHR gene susceptibility to GD.

18719020
Characterization of thyrotropin receptor antibody-induced signaling cascades.
The TSH receptor (TSHR) is constitutively active and is further enhanced by TSH ligand binding or by stimulating TSHR antibodies (TSHR-Abs) as seen in Graves' disease. TSH is known to activate the thyroid epithelial cell via both Galphas-cAMP/protein kinase A/ERK and Galphaq-Akt/protein kinase C coupled signaling networks. The recent development of monoclonal antibodies to the TSHR has enabled us to investigate the hypothesis that different TSHR-Abs may have unique signaling imprints that differ from TSH ligand itself. We have, therefore, performed sequential studies, using rat thyrocytes (FRTL-5, passages 5-20) as targets, to examine the signaling pathways activated by a series of monoclonal TSHR-Abs in comparison with TSH itself. Activation of key signaling molecules was estimated by specific immunoblots and/or enzyme immunoassays. Continuing constitutive TSHR activity in thyroid cells, deprived of TSH and serum for 48 h, was demonstrated by pathway-specific chemical inhibition. Under our experimental conditions, TSH ligand and TSHR-stimulating antibodies activated both Galphas and Galphaq effectors. Importantly, some TSHR-blocking and TSHR-neutral antibodies were also able to generate signals, influencing primarily the Galphaq effectors and induced cell proliferation. Most strikingly, antibodies that used the Galphaq cascades used c-Raf-ERK-p90RSK as a unique signaling cascade not activated by TSH. Our study demonstrated that individual TSHR-Abs had unique molecular signatures which resulted in sequential preferences. Because downstream thyroid cell signaling by the TSHR is both ligand dependent and independent, this may explain why TSHR-Abs are able to have variable influences on thyroid cell biology.

18704984
Evaluation and treatment of thyroid nodules: a clinical guide.
Thyroid nodules are inexplicably frequent and affect approximately one-third of the adult population. The appropriate clinical management is focused primarily on excluding thyroid cancer and also on evaluating thyroid dysfunction and mechanical obstruction. There remains no evidence that a benign thyroid nodule, once diagnosed appropriately, will progress to a malignant lesion. The initial evaluation should include a complete clinical review, a thyroid sonogram by an experienced sonographer, a laboratory assessment of thyroid function, and, where indicated, a cytological assessment of the nodule(s) by fine needle aspiration under ultrasound guidance. Only patients with suppressed serum thyroid-stimulating hormone levels, indicating hyperthyroidism, may need further evaluation by radioactive iodine uptake and scanning. Optimal treatment depends on the patient as well as the nodule characteristics. The usual options remain a simple annual follow-up to detect changes in nodule size and thyroid function and surgical removal. Levothyroxine therapy is now seldom indicated because of poor efficacy in nodule suppression and its inability to differentiate benign lesions from thyroid carcinoma. Clinical guidelines have a very arbitrary recommendation of aspiration biopsy in all lesions greater than 1 cm in size, but this proposal has no scientific basis and should always be viewed in the clinical context.

18332426
Intermittent recombinant TSH injections prevent ovariectomy-induced bone loss.
We recently described the direct effects of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) on bone and suggested that the bone loss in hyperthyroidism, hitherto attributed solely to elevated thyroid hormone levels, could at least in part arise from accompanying decrements in serum TSH. Recent studies on both mice and human subjects provide compelling evidence that thyroid hormones and TSH have the opposite effects on the skeleton. Here, we show that TSH, when injected intermittently into rodents, even at intervals of 2 weeks, displays a powerful antiresorptive action in vivo. By virtue of this action, together with the possible anabolic effects shown earlier, TSH both prevents bone loss and restores the lost bone after ovariectomy. Importantly, the osteoclast inhibitory action of TSH persists ex vivo even after therapy is stopped for 4 weeks. This profound and lasting antiresorptive action of TSH is mimicked in cells that genetically overexpress the constitutively active ligand-independent TSH receptor (TSHR). In contrast, loss of function of a mutant TSHR (Pro --> Leu at 556) in congenital hypothyroid mice activates osteoclast differentiation, confirming once again our premise that TSHRs have a critical role in regulating bone remodeling.

18083940
Bone loss in thyroid disease: role of low TSH and high thyroid hormone.
More than 10% of postmenopausal women in the United States receive thyroid hormone replacement therapy and up to 20% of these women are over-replaced inducing subclinical hyperthyroidism. Because hyperthyroidism and post menopausal osteoporosis overlap in women of advancing age, it is urgent to understand the effect of thyroid hormone excess on bone. We can now provide results that not thyroid hormones but also TSH itself has an equally important role to play in bone remodeling.

17911434
Thyroid epigenetics: X chromosome inactivation in patients with autoimmune thyroid disease.
The autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITDs) are female-predominant diseases with a ratio of approximately seven females to each male. X chromosome inactivation (XCI), an epigenetic phenomenon, has been suggested to be skewed in many such female patients with AITD. We analyzed female genomic DNA from 87 patients with Graves' disease (GD), 47 patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT), and 69 healthy controls. Using an XCI assay based on Hpa II digestion and PCR and DNA sequencing, we found skewed heterozygous XCI (>or=80%) in 20 of 70 GD patients (28.6%) and 11 of 43 HT patients (25.6%), giving a total of 31 of 113 AITD patients (27.4%) with skewed XCI. In contrast, only 5 of 58 healthy controls had skewed XCI (8.6%). Statistical analysis confirmed that XCI skewing was significantly associated with AITD (P = 0.004, OR = 4.0), demonstrating that the degree of XCI is an important contributor to the increased risk of females in developing AITD.

17911409
Antibody-induced modulation of TSH receptor post-translational processing.
The post-translational processing of the TSH receptor (TSHR) includes intra-molecular cleavage with the loss of a 50 amino acid ectodomain region and the formation of two subunits (alpha and beta), followed by likely alpha subunit shedding. TSHR antibodies (TSHR-Abs), which are directed at the ectodomain, may influence thyroid function by stimulating or inhibiting TSHR signaling or may bind without any such influence (the neutral group of antibodies). When we examined the characteristics of a series of monoclonal TSHR-Abs, we found that many were able to inhibit receptor cleavage and enhance TSHR expression. This was especially apparent with the neutral type of TSHR-Abs directed to the cleaved region of the ectodomain (aa 316-366). Indeed, such inhibition appeared to be epitope dependent with TSHR-Abs directed to regions after residues 335-354 showing no such activity. We propose that this aberrant process, whereby TSHR-Abs influence antigen processing, is a novel mechanism for the maintenance and exacerbation of autoimmune thyroid disease.

17412816
Lipid rafts are triage centers for multimeric and monomeric thyrotropin receptor regulation.
The TSH receptor (TSHR), a heptahelical G protein-coupled receptor on the surface of thyrocytes, is a major autoantigen and physiological regulator of the thyroid gland. Unlike other G protein-coupled receptors, the TSHR undergoes posttranslational cleavage of its ectodomain, leading to the existence of several forms of the receptor on the plasma membrane. We previously hypothesized that to achieve high fidelity and specificity of TSH ligand or TSHR autoantibody signaling, the TSHR may compartmentalize into microdomains within the plasma membrane. In support of this hypothesis we have shown previously that TSHRs reside in GM1 ganglioside-enriched lipid rafts in the plasma membrane of TSHR-expressing cells. In this study, we further explored the different forms of TSHRs that reside in lipid rafts. We studied both TSHR-transfected cells and rat thyrocytes, using both nondetergent biochemical analyses and receptor-lipid raft colocalization. Using the biochemical approach, we observed that monomeric receptors existed in both raft and nonraft fractions of the cell surface in the steady state. We also demonstrated that the multimeric forms of the receptor were preferentially partitioned into the lipid microdomains. Different TSHR forms, including multimers, were dynamically regulated both by receptor-specific and postreceptor-specific modulators. TSH ligand and TSHR antibody of the stimulating variety induced a decrease of multimeric forms in the raft fractions. In addition, multimeric and monomeric forms of the receptor were both associated with Gsalpha within and without the rafts. Although failure to achieve total lipid raft disruption prevented a conclusion regarding the relative power of TSHR signaling within and without the raft domains, these data showed clearly that not only were a significant proportion of TSHRs residing within lipid microdomains but that constitutive multimerization of TSHRs was actually regulated within the lipid rafts.

18406788
The immunogenetics of autoimmune diabetes and autoimmune thyroid disease.
Although medical genetics is a well-developed area of interest, relatively little is known about the diseases caused by the combination of many genes. These multiinfluenced diseases include the autoimmune endocrine diseases. Recent advances in the techniques for whole-genome screening have shown a variety of loci that are linked to the development of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and similar data are likely to be soon generated in autoimmune thyroid disease. Here, the authors survey the current state of genetic knowledge in these two areas and describe the investigative and analytical techniques that are now available. (Trends Endocrinol Metab 1997;8:63-70). (c) 1997, Elsevier Science Inc.

18411130
Human autoimmune thyroid disease A mechanistic update.
Autoimmune thyroid disease refers to a group of common, often familial, disorders of thyroid function, which are associated with disturbances in both cellular and humoral immunity. Current research into autoimmune thyroid disease is characterizing specific target antigens and the cellular and molecular events that lead to tissue-specific immune dysfunction. The thyroid gland is an accessible and useful model for the study of human autoimmune disease. This review highlights some of the more active research areas.

