21597374
Nutritional supplements for dry eye syndrome.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Essential fatty acids have been of interest in the treatment of systemic and ocular diseases, and is most recently of interest in the area of dry eye disease. RECENT FINDINGS: Systemic and topical omega-3 fatty acids and omega-6 fatty acids have been used recently as an adjunctive treatment for patients with dry eye disease. They appear to have efficacy against the symptoms of dry eye that many patients experience. This symptom is postulated to be secondary to the anti-inflammatory effects that have been previously described. Although this effect is promising, more investigation is warranted in order to standardize indication for use, and composition and dosing for treatment. SUMMARY: The use of essential fatty acids as a nutritional supplement is a novel treatment for patients with dry eye syndrome.

21519031
sPLA2-IIa Amplifies Ocular Surface Inflammation in the Experimental Dry Eye (DE) BALB/c Mouse Model.
Purpose. sPLA2-IIa is a biomarker for many inflammatory diseases in humans and is found at high levels in human tears. However, its role in ocular surface inflammation remains unclear. An experimentally-induced BALB/c mouse dry eye (DE) model was utilized to elucidate the role of sPLA2-IIa in ocular surface inflammation. Methods. BALB/c mice were subcutaneously injected with scopolamine and placed in a daytime air-drying device for 5 to 10 days. Control mice received no treatment. DE status was evaluated with tear production by the Pheno-Red Thread METHOD: Tear inflammatory cytokines were quantified by multiplex immunoassays. Ocular surface inflammation and sPLA2-IIa expression were examined by immune-staining and quantitative (q)RT(2)-PCR. Conjunctiva (CNJ) of the mice was cultured for prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) production induced by sPLA2-IIa with various amount of sPLA2-IIa inhibitor, S-3319. Results. Treated mice produced less tears and heavier corneal (CN) fluorescein staining than the un-treated controls (p<0.001). They also revealed lower goblet cell density (p<0.001) with greater inflammatory cell infiltration within the conjunctiva, and higher concentration of tear inflammatory cytokines than the controls. Moreover, treated mice showed heavier sPLA2-IIa immune-staining than the controls in the CNJ epithelium, but not in the CN epithelium or the lacrimal gland (LG). Treated mice exhibited up-regulated sPLA2-IIa and cytokine gene transcription. Furthermore, CNJ cultures treated with sPLA2-IIa inhibitor showed significantly reduced sPLA2-IIa-induced inflammation. Conclusions. This is the first report regarding sPLA2-IIa in the regulation of ocular surface inflammation. The findings may therefore lead to new therapeutic strategies for ocular surface inflammation, such as DE disease.

21450920
The international workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of the clinical trials subcommittee.


20506992
Changes in higher order wavefront aberrations after contact lens corneal refractive therapy and LASIK surgery.
To compare ocular higher order aberrations induced by corneal refractive therapy (CRT, Paragon Vision) to those produced by LASIK for patients with comparable levels of myopia. A retrospective chart review of 11 patients who used CRT lenses and 12 patients who underwent LASIK for correction of low to moderate myopia was performed. Uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA), best spectacle-corrected visual acuity (BSCVA), manifest refraction, and optical higher order aberrations were recorded before and 1 month after treatment for each patient. The CRT group consisted of 11 patients (4 men, 7 women) with a mean age of 29.1+/-5.2 years (range: 23 to 40 years), and the LASIK group consisted of 12 patients (3 men, 9 women) with a mean age of 39.2+/-12.0 years (range: 23 to 60 years). Manifest refraction decreased statistically significantly from -2.81+/-1.05 diopters (D) at baseline to -0.77+/-0.64 D following CRT treatment at 1 month (P<.0001) and from -3.11+/-1.21 D at baseline to -0.43+/-0.27 D at 1 month after LASIK (P<.0001). Both CRT and LASIK exhibited no significant changes in total higher order aberrations for 4-mm pupils but induced statistically significant increases in total higher order aberrations for 6-mm pupils. Corneal refractive therapy and LASIK both exhibited statistically similar factors of change for total higher order aberrations and coma-like higher order aberrations for 6-mm pupils. Corneal refractive therapy demonstrated a statistically significant greater factor of increase in spherical-like higher order aberrations for 6-mm pupils (P=.01). Contact lens corneal refractive therapy and LASIK can effectively correct myopia, but both increase higher order aberrations for 6-mm pupils to a similar degree. However, spherical-like aberrations were statistically significantly greater after CRT than after LASIK.

20393114
Tear osmolarity as a biomarker for dry eye disease severity.
To study the association between tear osmolarity and dry eye severity grade, based on a modified Dry Eye Workshop (DEWS) scale, and between osmolarity and the signs and symptoms that determine dry eye disease severity. Nineteen patients with dry eye disease were asked to complete an evaluation of dry eye signs and symptoms composed of the Ocular Surface Disease Index (OSDI) questionnaire, corneal staining with fluorescein, conjunctival staining with lissamine green, tear-film breakup time (TFBUT), Schirmer's test with anesthesia, and tear sample collection. Tear samples were collected in 5-microL microcapillaries. Tear osmolarity was measured in the right eye with a tear osmometer. Tear osmolarity correlated significantly with dry eye severity grade (modified DEWS). Schirmer's test and tear osmolarity correlated significantly at r=-0.52, with Schirmer's test result, with adjustment for age, contributing significantly to the independent estimate of tear osmolarity. Tear osmolarity correlates with dry eye severity and therefore could provide a biomarker for disease severity.

20162838
Analysis of inflammatory cytokines in the tears of dry eye patients.
To determine the levels of 8 important cytokines and 1 chemokine in tears of patients with dry eye disease. Tear samples were collected from 7 patients with dry eye disease and 7 healthy volunteers, and impression cytology samples were collected from 3 of the dry eye patients and 3 of the normal controls. Tears were analyzed for the presence of 8 cytokines [interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, interferon (IFN)-gamma, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, IL-1 beta] and 1 chemokine (IL-8). The cytokines and chemokine in each tear sample were measured using Invitrogen's Multiplex Bead Immunoassays. The impression cytology samples were analyzed for IL-1 beta, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-alpha mRNA expression using real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analysis. All cytokines and the chemokine measured were significantly increased in the tears of dry eye patients as compared to normal controls. mRNA of all four markers was increased, and the fold increase correlated well with the fold increase of the cytokine concentration found in the tear samples. Tears from dry eye patients contain significantly increased concentrations of cytokines that show correlation to severity of the disease. The upregulation of their respective genes in the conjunctiva suggests that the concentration increase is not the result of evaporative effects, but of overproduction. These findings suggest that cytokines may play an important role in dry eye disease and topical cytokine modulators may be explored as a therapeutic approach to dry eye disease.

20126496
Ophthalmologist perceptions regarding treatment of moderate to severe dry eye: results of a physician survey.
To understand ophthalmologists' current perceptions and treatment of patients with moderate to severe dry eye syndrome (DED). An online survey was distributed to 7,882 ophthalmologists, including 51 corneal specialists, throughout the United States from October 9 to 21, 2008. The response rate was 3.1% (n = 245), typical for this type of survey. Those who treated 4 or more patients with moderate to severe DED per month (235 of 245 [96%]) were asked to complete the survey. Ninety-four percent of respondents agreed that more treatment options are needed for moderate to severe DED. Corneal specialists were more likely to strongly agree (63%) than general ophthalmologists (54%). Only 33% overall felt that current therapies were extremely or very effective for moderate DED, and only 5% for severe disease. Ninety-two percent agreed that multiple therapeutic agents are needed to manage moderate to severe DED. The respondents reported prescribing, recommending, or suggesting a mean of 3.2 different treatment approaches over the course of a year for patients with moderate DED and 4.9 for patients with severe DED. The most highly ranked goals in treatment of moderate to severe DED were maintaining and protecting the ocular surface (ranked 1 or 2 by 74%) and lubricating and hydrating the ocular surface (ranked 1 or 2 by 67%). Corneal specialists ranked maintaining and protecting the ocular surface even higher (ranked 1 or 2 by 82%). Results reflected the difficulty of treating more serious moderate to severe cases, the importance of using multiple treatment approaches, the limitations of current treatment options, and the need for additional treatment options.

20105404
Essential fatty acids in the treatment of dry eye.
Essential fatty acids (EFAs) play many important roles in human biology, affecting organ systems and cellular and intracellular function. Omega-3 and omega-6 EFAs are the precursors of eicosanoids, locally acting hormones involved in mediating inflammatory processes. It is largely via the production of these eicosanoids that the essential fatty acids influence human health and disease. In general, the omega-3 derived eicosanoids are anti-inflammatory while the n-6 pathway eicosanoids promote inflammation. To date, EFAs have been primarily studied with regard to systemic diseases, particularly cardiovascular disease. Currently, no dietary recommendations of EFAs for the prevention or treatment of eye disease exist. The majority of studies concerning EFAs and eye disease have focused on diseases of the retina. This article provides an overview of the current literature regarding EFAs and dry eye disease (DED). Eight studies were identified, including six randomized controlled trials. All the studies preliminarily confirmed that there is a relationship between EFA supplementation and improvement in DED. However, strong conclusions cannot be made yet because of limitations in the research reported. The role of essential fatty acids is an important topic that would benefit from a large, multicenter, randomized clinical trial powered to reach a conclusion regarding the efficacy of essential fatty acids in the treatment of dry eye disease.

20009946
Ophthalmologist perceptions regarding treatment of moderate-to-severe dry eye: results of a physician survey.
To understand ophthalmologists' current perceptions and treatment of patients with moderate-to-severe dry eye disease (DED). Online survey. The online survey was sent to 7,882 ophthalmologists, including 51 corneal specialists, throughout the United States from October 9 to 21, 2008. The response rate was 3.1% (n = 245), typical for this type of survey. Only ophthalmologists who treated four or more moderate-to-severe DED patients per month (235 of 245 [96%]) were asked to complete the survey. Ninety-four percent of respondents agreed that more treatment options are needed for moderate-to-severe DED. Corneal specialists were more likely to strongly agree (63%) than general ophthalmologists (54%). Only 33% overall felt that current therapies were extremely or very effective for moderate DED and only 5% for severe disease. Ninety-two percent agreed that multiple therapeutic agents are needed to manage moderate-to-severe DED. The respondents prescribed or recommended a mean of 3.2 different treatments (standard deviation = 1.2) for moderate DED patients over the course of a year and 4.9 (standard deviation = 2.2) for patients with severe DED. The most highly ranked goals for treatment of moderate-to-severe DED patients were maintaining and protecting the ocular surface (ranked 1 or 2 x 74%) and lubricating and hydrating the ocular surface (ranked 1 or 2 x 67%). Corneal specialists ranked maintaining and protecting the ocular surface even more highly (ranked 1 or 2 x 82%). Results reflected the difficulty of treating moderate-to-severe DED, the importance of using multiple treatment approaches, the limitations of current treatment options, and the need for additional treatment options.

19857103
Evaluation of biomarkers of inflammation in response to benzalkonium chloride on corneal and conjunctival epithelial cells.
Most eye drops contain preservatives; benzalkonium chloride (BAK) is most common. Recent data demonstrated BAK adding to toxicity. BAK is degraded into hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)), which in even small amounts is known to be an irritant. Increased toxicity should cause localized inflammation with increased elaboration of inflammatory biomarkers. To evaluate the inflammation BAK causes to the ocular surface, enzyme linked immunosorbant assays (ELISAs) were utilized to quantify the levels of inflammatory biomarkers in response to BAK and/or H(2)O(2). Immortalized human conjunctival and corneal epithelial cells were exposed to: BAK (0.001%-0.1%), hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) (0.01%-0.1%), and cell media for 1 h. Cytokine quantification was performed via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays [ELISAs]). Additional experimentation was performed in which testing solutions were replaced with media after 1 h and the resulting supernatants quantified after 24 h. BAK induced significant amounts of interleukin (IL-) 1 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), but only moderate amounts of C-reactive protein (CRP), IL- 10 and 12, and H(2)O(2). Lower concentrations of BAK induced proportionally less elaboration. Replacing the test solutions with media and providing 23 h for cytokine elaboration significantly increased TNF, but not IL-1. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) positive controls induced substantial elaboration/release of both IL-1 and TNF as did in increasing the exposure to the full 24 h. After 1 h of exposure, BAK increased quantities of all biomarkers. The biomarkers in decreasing order of induction/upregulation were: TNF > or = IL-1 > or = IL-12 > or = IL-10 > or = CRP. Even low concentrations caused some degree of inflammation. Replacing the testing solution with media and providing 23 h for cytokine elaboration, significantly increased the elaboration/release of TNF, but not IL-1, as compared to the 1-h BAK exposure. Whereas increasing the exposure to the full 24 h by not removing the testing solution at the 1-h time point significantly increased the elaboration/release of both IL-1 and TNF.

19724208
Analysis of inflammatory cytokines in the tears of dry eye patients.
To determine the levels of 8 important cytokines and 1 chemokine in tears of patients with dry eye disease. Tear samples were collected from 7 patients with dry eye disease and 7 healthy volunteers, and impression cytology samples were collected from 3 of the dry eye patients and 3 of the normal controls. Tears were analyzed for the presence of 8 cytokines [interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, interferon (IFN)-gamma, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, IL-1beta] and 1 chemokine (IL-8). The cytokines and chemokine in each tear sample were measured using Invitrogen's Multiplex Bead Immunoassays. The impression cytology samples were analyzed for IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-alpha mRNA expression using real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction anlaysis. All cytokines and the chemokine measured were significantly increased in the tears of dry eye patients as compared to normal controls. mRNA of all four markers was increased, and the fold increase correlated well with the fold increase of the cytokine concentration found in the tear samples. Tears from dry eye patients contain significantly increased concentrations of cytokines that show correlation to severity of the disease. The upregulation of their respective genes in the conjunctiva suggests that the concentration increase is not the result of evaporative effects, but of overproduction. These findings suggest that cytokines may play an important role in dry eye disease and topical cytokine modulators may be explored as a therapeutic approach to dry eye disease.

19512902
Evaluation of a new tear osmometer for repeatability and accuracy, using 0.5-microL (500-Nanoliter) samples.
To evaluate the repeatability and accuracy of a new tear osmometer that measures the osmolality of 0.5-microL (500-nanoliter) samples. Four standardized solutions were tested with 0.5-microL (500-nanoliter) samples for repeatability of measurements and comparability to standardized technique. Two known standard salt solutions (290 mOsm/kg H2O, 304 mOsm/kg H2O), a normal artificial tear matrix sample (306 mOsm/kg H2O), and an abnormal artificial tear matrix sample (336 mOsm/kg H2O) were repeatedly tested (n = 20 each) for osmolality with use of the Advanced Instruments Model 3100 Tear Osmometer (0.5-microL [500-nanoliter] sample size) and the FDA-approved Advanced Instruments Model 3D2 Clinical Osmometer (250-microL sample size). Four standard solutions were used, with osmolality values of 290, 304, 306, and 336 mOsm/kg H2O. The respective precision data, including the mean and standard deviation, were: 291.8 +/- 4.4, 305.6 +/- 2.4, 305.1 +/- 2.3, and 336.4 +/- 2.2 mOsm/kg H2O. The percent recoveries for the 290 mOsm/kg H2O standard solution, the 304 mOsm/kg H2O reference solution, the normal value-assigned 306 mOsm/kg H2O sample, and the abnormal value-assigned 336 mOsm/kg H2O sample were 100.3, 100.2, 99.8, and 100.3 mOsm/kg H2O, respectively. The repeatability data are in accordance with data obtained on clinical osmometers with use of larger sample sizes. All 4 samples tested on the tear osmometer have osmolality values that correlate well to the clinical instrument method. The tear osmometer is a suitable instrument for testing the osmolality of microliter-sized samples, such as tears, and therefore may be useful in diagnosing, monitoring, and classifying tear abnormalities such as the severity of dry eye disease.

19431927
Fluorophotometry to evaluate the corneal epithelium in eyes undergoing contact lens corneal reshaping to correct myopia.
To determine whether use of Corneal Refractive Therapy (CRT, Paragon Vision Sciences) lenses have an adverse effect on the health of corneal epithelium by monitoring epithelial permeability by fluorophotometry. Eight patients with healthy eyes and whose refractive error was between -0.50 and -4.00 diopters (D) sphere and up to -1.75 D of astigmatism were enrolled. On the day of the fitting, two baseline fluorometric scans of the right eye were taken using the Ocumetrics Fluorotron Master. After 15 minutes, another two scans were taken of the right eye. The same fluorophotometry technique was repeated on day 1, 1 week, 1 month, and 3 months after the patient began overnight wear of the lenses. Patients' baseline corneal fluorescein levels and peak corneal fluorescence values after rinsing were compared to initial pre-fitting values to determine changes in corneal epithelial permeability. After patients used orthokeratology, uncorrected visual acuity was 20/20 or better in 9/16 eyes and 100% had achieved 20/40 or better by day 7. No adverse events were seen in patients utilizing orthokeratology, and eye examinations for these patients continued to be within normal limits. After nightly use of orthokeratology for 1 month, baseline fluorescence of the cornea (15.64 +/- 2.29 ng/mL vs 17.31 +/-5.43 ng/mL, P = .80) remained stable, and the post-15 minute scan peak corneal fluorescence values did not show significant changes from the pre-fitting (51.46 +/- 17.28 ng/mL) after use of orthokeratology (63.80 +/- 41.25 ng/mL) (P = .78). Reshaping of the cornea through the use of orthokeratology does not have adverse effects on corneal epithelium as evaluated by changes in corneal epithelial permeability.

19383278
Impression cytology: recent advances and applications in dry eye disease.
Impression cytology (IC) allows cells to be harvested from the ocular surface noninvasively. Superficial layers of the epithelium are removed by application of cellulose acetate filters or Biopore membranes, and the cells can be subsequently analyzed by various methods, depending on the objective of the investigation or pathology involved. IC techniques are easily learned, can be performed in an outpatient setting, and cause virtually no discomfort to the patient. IC facilitates the diagnosis of ocular surface disorders, including, among others, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, ocular surface squamous neoplasia, and ocular surface infections. During the past decade, IC has been used increasingly to assist in diagnosis of ocular surface disease, improve our understanding of the pathophysiology of ocular surface disease, and provide biomarkers to be used as outcome measures in clinical trials. Dry eye disease is one area in which IC has contributed to significant advances.

19284328
Comparative toxicity of preservatives on immortalized corneal and conjunctival epithelial cells.
Nearly all eye drops contain preservatives to decrease contamination. Nonpreservatives such as disodium-ethylene diamine tetra-acetate (EDTA) and phosphate-buffered saline are also regularly added as buffering agents. These components can add to the toxicity of eye drops and cause ocular surface disease. To evaluate the potential toxicity of these common components and their comparative effects on the ocular surface, a tissue culture model utilizing immortalized corneal and conjunctival epithelial cells was utilized. Immortalized human conjunctival and corneal epithelial cells were grown. At confluency, medium was replaced with 100 microL of varying concentrations of preservatives: benzalkonium chloride (BAK), methyl paraben (MP), sodium perborate (SP), chlorobutanol (Cbl), and stabilized thimerosal (Thi); varying concentrations of buffer: EDTA; media (viable control); and formalin (dead control). After 1 h, solutions were replaced with 150 microL of MTT (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl tetrazonium bromide). After 4 h, solutions decanted, 100 microL of acid isopropanol added, and the optical density determined at 572 nm to evaluate cell viability. Conjunctival and corneal cell toxicity was seen with all preservatives. Depending upon concentration, BAK exhibited from 56% to 89% toxicity. In comparison, Cbl exhibited from 50% to 86%, MP from 30% to 76%, SP from 23% to 59%, and Thi from 70% to 95%. EDTA with minimal toxicity (from 6% to 59%) was indistinguishable from SP. Generally, the order of decreasing toxicity at the most commonly used concentrations: Thi (0.0025%) > BAK (0.025%) > Cbl (0.25%) > MP (0.01%) > SP (0.0025%) approximately EDTA (0.01%). Even at low concentration, these agents will cause some degree of ocular tissue damage.

18724156
Evaluation of toxicity of commercial ophthalmic fluoroquinolone antibiotics as assessed on immortalized corneal and conjunctival epithelial cells.
To evaluate the toxicity of a variety of the fluoroquinolone antibiotics on the ocular surface by using tissue culture models of corneal epithelial cells and conjunctival epithelial cells. Immortalized conjunctival (CCC) and human corneal (HCE) epithelial cells were grown and when confluent the cells allowed to air dry for 1 hour. Medium was then replaced with 100 microL of one of the following: 1) Vigamox [moxifloxacin (0.5%: MX)]; (2) Zymar [gatifloxacin (0.3%: GA)]; 3) Quixin [levofloxacin (0.5%: LE)]; 4) Ocuflox [ofloxacin (0.3%: OF)]; 5) Ciloxan [ciprofloxacin (0.3%: CP)]; 6) medium (viable control); 7) "normal"/physiologic saline; 8) formalin (dead control). After one hour, 150 microL of MTT (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl tetrazonium bromide was added and incubated for 4 hours. After decanting, precipitate was dissolved in 150 microL of isopropanol. Absorbance was determined at 572 nm. The lowest amount of cell death was associated with the viable control. All ophthalmic preparations showed both corneal and conjunctival cell toxicity. Aside from the viable control, normal saline showed the next lowest amount of toxicity. Of the topical ocular antibiotics tested, MX showed the least amount of toxicity. All of the other antibiotics tested were statistically indistinguishable from each other. All of the topical ocular antibiotics tested showed evidence of both corneal and conjunctival toxicity (MX < OF < or = LE < or = CP < or = GA), although only MX was statistically significant. Whether this finding reflects on in vivo wound healing remains to be determined. This model provides a rapid and cost-effective method to screen for surface toxicity of topical agents.

18471638
Increasing prevalence of methicillin resistance in serious ocular infections caused by Staphylococcus aureus in the United States: 2000 to 2005.
To report the nationwide prevalence of methicillin resistance in serious ocular infections involving Staphylococcus aureus and profile in vitro antimicrobial susceptibility of S aureus from ocular isolates over time. Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA. Data on S aureus submitted to The Surveillance Network (TSN) by more than 200 laboratories in the United States from January 2000 to December 2005 were reviewed. The prevalence of methicillin resistance in S aureus ocular infections and in vitro susceptibility to antibiotic agents commonly used to treat or prevent ocular infections were determined. The proportion of S aureus infections culture-positive for methicillin-resistant S aureus (MRSA) increased from 29.5% in 2000 to 41.6% in 2005. The MRSA ocular isolates were multidrug resistant; that is, in vitro resistance to 3 antibiotic agents or more, including all fluoroquinolones tested. Multidrug-resistant MRSA is increasing in serious ocular infections. Based on the rate of increase in the TSN database, MRSA cultures from serious ocular infections could be more common than methicillin-susceptible S aureus within 2 to 3 years. Large-scale national surveillance programs are needed to monitor in vitro antimicrobial resistance trends in ocular isolates.

18374299
Ocular TRUST: nationwide antimicrobial susceptibility patterns in ocular isolates.
Ocular Tracking Resistance in U.S. Today (TRUST) annually evaluates in vitro antimicrobial susceptibility of Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus influenzae to ciprofloxacin, gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, penicillin, azithromycin, tobramycin, trimethoprim, and polymyxin B in national samples of ocular isolates. Laboratory investigation. Prospectively collected ocular isolates (197 S. aureus, 49 S. pneumoniae, and 32 H. influenzae) from 35 institutions and archived ocular isolates (760 S. pneumoniae and 356 H. influenzae) from 34 institutions were tested by an independent, central laboratory. Mean minimum inhibitory concentrations that would inhibit growth of 90% of the tested isolates (MIC(90)) were interpreted as susceptible, intermediate, or resistant according to standardized breakpoints for systemic treatment. S. aureus isolates were classified as methicillin susceptible (MSSA) or methicillin resistant (MRSA). MSSA or MRSA susceptibility patterns were virtually identical for the fluoroquinolones, that is, MSSA susceptibility was 79.9% to 81.1% and MRSA susceptibility was 15.2%. Trimethoprim was the only agent tested with high activity against MRSA. All S. pneumoniae isolates were susceptible to gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, and moxifloxacin; 89.8% were susceptible to ciprofloxacin. H. influenzae isolates were 100% susceptible to all tested agents but trimethoprim. Ocular TRUST 1 data were consistent with the eight-year longitudinal sample of archived ocular isolates. The fluoroquinolones were consistently active in MSSA, S. pneumoniae, and H. influenzae. After more than a decade of intensive ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin use as systemic therapy, 100% of ocular S. pneumoniae isolates were susceptible to gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, and moxifloxacin; nonsusceptibility to ciprofloxacin was less than 15%. High-level in vitro MRSA resistance suggests the need to consider alternative therapy to fluoroquinolones when MRSA is a likely pathogen.

17993829
Contact lens-related Fusarium infection: case series experience in New York City and review of fungal keratitis.
To report and define the clinical presentation, hygienic practices, treatment regimens, and visual sequelae of contact lens wearers infected with Fusarium keratitis in the New York City metropolitan area and to review the literature on Fusarium keratitis. A retrospective chart review was conducted on three patients diagnosed with Fusarium keratitis by corneal fungal culture in the New York City metropolitan area from October 2005 to February 2006. None of the patients had a history of recent ocular trauma before infection. All three patients used disposable soft contact lenses and ReNu with MoistureLoc 1 month before infection. All patients experienced a unilateral stabbing pain of the affected eye after removal of the contact lens. Patients had corneal ulcers ranging from 1 to 5 mm in diameter and were all initially treated with topical antibiotics and steroids for a period between 7 and 52 days. Antifungal treatment was eventually prescribed to all patients, with topical natamycin 5% every hour being the most common. One patient required corneal transplantation, and the other two patients recovered visual acuity comparable to their baseline acuity. A delay in diagnosis and prolonged treatment delay of Fusarium keratitis is associated with significant comorbidity. Physicians must have a higher index of suspicion for fungal keratitis in contact lens wearers to facilitate in early diagnosis and treatment.

17962448
Nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB precedes apoptotic poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage during productive HSV-1 replication in corneal epithelial cells.
Herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 infections of the human cornea range in severity from uncomplicated episodes that readily resolve to severe, recurring disease that invades the stroma, having a devastating permanent effect on vision. Recent published data implicate an apoptotic component to stromal HSV-1 infection. In a prior study, it was found that wild type (wt) HSV-1 infection induces, then blocks, apoptosis in epithelial cells derived from skin and that this block requires infected cell proteins (ICPs) synthesized between 3 and 6 hours post infection (hpi). This inhibition of apoptosis is in part dependent on the activation of inducible nuclear transcription factor kappaB (NF-kappaB). HSV-1-dependent apoptosis in rabbit corneal epithelial (SIRC) cells was compared with that in infected human epithelial (HEp-2) cells. SIRC cells were sensitive to apoptotic cell death induced by environmental treatment with tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha plus cycloheximide (CHX). HSV-1 stimulated the degradation of regulatory IkappaBalpha protein, resulting in nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB. This phenomenon was dependent on ICP synthesis. Neither wt nor apoptotic HSV-1 infection resulted in apoptosis in these cells. However, wt HSV-1-infected cells produced detectable levels of cleaved poly(ADP-ribose) (PARP). Inhibition of SIRC cell protein synthesis with CHX during wt HSV-1 infection led to a reduction in the amount of PARP cleavage. Whereas PARP cleavage defined cell death in most other cell types, its processing in SIRC cells was a reproducible characteristic of wt HSV-1 infection. This is the first report of such an effect, and it suggests that in corneal epithelial cells, activation of apoptotic pathways may be necessary for productive viral replication. Thus, efficient replication of HSV-1 in the corneal milieu proceeds via a different mechanism than it does in skin. However, it appears that NF-kappaB participates in inhibiting apoptosis during HSV-1 infection in both systems.

17568211
Conductive keratoplasty.
Conductive keratoplasty is a noninvasive, in-office procedure for the correction of hyperopia, hyperopic astigmatism, and management of presbyopia. It serves as an alternative to laser-based refractive surgery with essentially no intraoperative or postoperative complications. In the past decade, photorefractive keratectomy and laser in-situ keratomileusis have been the most popular refractive surgical procedures to correct myopia, hyperopia and astigmatism. Although relatively safe, flap-related complications often result in undesirable visual acuity. Since US Food and Drugs Administration approval in 2002, conductive keratoplasty has become a promising technique to correct low to moderate hyperopia and astigmatism. The procedure was first used by Mendez and colleagues in 1993. It is a nonlaser, no cutting procedure that delivers radio-frequency energy to corneal stroma in a circular fashion to steepen the cornea. Multiple studies have shown that conductive keratoplasty offers equal or superior efficacy, predictability, stability and safety than currently used refractive procedures to correct hyperopia or hyperopic astigmatism. In addition, monovision conductive keratoplasty has been shown to be successful for the management of presbyopia. Conductive keratoplasty, an alternative to the laser-based procedure, is effective, predictable, and safe to correct low to moderate hyperopia, astigmatism, and manage presbyopia.

