20231319
Efficacy of meta-cognitive therapy for adult ADHD.
The authors investigated the efficacy of a 12-week manualized meta-cognitive therapy group intervention designed to enhance time management, organization, and planning in adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Eighty-eight clinically referred adults who met DSM-IV criteria for ADHD according to clinical and structured diagnostic interviews and standardized questionnaires were stratified by ADHD medication use and otherwise randomly assigned to receive meta-cognitive therapy or supportive psychotherapy in a group modality. Meta-cognitive therapy uses cognitive-behavioral principles and methods to impart skills and strategies in time management, organization, and planning and to target depressogenic and anxiogenic cognitions that undermine effective self-management. The supportive therapy condition controlled for nonspecific aspects of treatment by providing support while avoiding discussion of cognitive-behavioral strategies. Therapeutic response was assessed by an independent (blind) evaluator via structured interview before and after treatment as well as by self-report and collateral informant behavioral ratings. General linear models comparing change from baseline between treatments revealed statistically significant effects for self-report, collateral report, and independent evaluator ratings of DSM-IV inattention symptoms. In dichotomous indices of therapeutic response, a significantly greater proportion of members of the meta-cognitive therapy group demonstrated improvement compared with members of the supportive therapy group. Logistic regression examining group differences in operationally defined response (controlling for baseline ADHD severity) revealed a robust effect of treatment group (odds ratio=5.41; 95% CI=1.77-16.55). Meta-cognitive therapy yielded significantly greater improvements in dimensional and categorical estimates of severity of ADHD symptoms compared with supportive therapy. These findings support the efficacy of meta-cognitive therapy as a viable psychosocial intervention.

19594667
Event-related FMRI of inhibitory control in the predominantly inattentive and combined subtypes of ADHD.
To examine the neurophysiological basis for the pronounced differences in hyperactivity and impulsiveness that distinguish the predominantly inattentive type of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD-PI) from the combined type of the disorder (ADHD-C). Event-related brain responses to a go/no-go test of inhibitory control were measured with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in 11 children with ADHD-C and 9 children with ADHD-PI, aged 7 to 13 years, who were matched for age, sex, and intelligence. There were no significant group differences in task performance. Children with ADHD-C and ADHD-PI activated overlapping regions of right inferior frontal gyrus, right superior temporal lobe, and left inferior parietal lobe during inhibitory control. However, the magnitude of the activation in the temporal and parietal regions, as well as in the bilateral middle frontal gyrus, was greater in children with ADHD-PI than those with ADHD-C. Conversely, children with ADHD-C activated bilateral medial occipital lobe to a greater extent than children with ADHD-PI. The results provide preliminary evidence that phenotypic differences between the ADHD-C and ADHD-PI subtypes are associated with differential activation of regions that have previously been implicated in the pathophysiology of ADHD and are thought to mediate executive and attentional processes.

19372497
Social functioning in predominantly inattentive and combined subtypes of children with ADHD.
The objective of this study was to compare the social functioning of children with the Combined (CB) and Predominantly Inattentive (PI) subtypes of Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), controlling for comorbidity and medication-status, which may have confounded the results of previous research. Parents and teachers of rigorously diagnosed unmedicated children with PI or CB subtypes of ADHD, and typical comparison children, rated them on the multidimensional Social Skills Rating Scale (SSRS). After co-varying for oppositionality and anxiety, social impairment was substantial and equivalent in both ADHD groups whether rated by parent or teacher. In addition, when rated by teacher, the nature of the deficits varied by subtype: Children with PI were impaired in assertiveness, whereas children with CB were deficient in self-control. These findings indicate that AD/HD subtypes differ in the nature of their social dysfunction independent of comorbidity and highlight the need for interventions to target their divergent needs.

19372494
Reliability of DSM-IV Symptom Ratings of ADHD: implications for DSM-V.
The objective of this study was to examine the intrarater reliability of DSM-IV ADHD symptoms. Two-hundred-two children referred for attention problems and 49 comparison children (all 7-12 years) were rated by parents and teachers on the identical DSM-IV items presented in two different formats, the SNAP-IV and Conners' Revised Questionnaires, at two closely spaced points in time. For the combined sample, weighted kappa scores for intrarater agreement ranged from .30 ("fair") to .77 ("good") across symptoms. Kappa scores were good with respect to agreement on the DSM-IV criterion of endorsement of at least six symptoms in a given cluster for Inattention (.60 and .76, for parents and teachers, respectively) and Hyperactivity-Impulsivity (.72 and .75, respectively). Kappas for identification of cases as AD/HD or not AD/HD were good to excellent (.67 and .79 for parents and teachers, respectively). Classification as AD/HD or not AD/HD changed from the first to the second rating in 12% and 10% of cases rated parents and teachers, respectively. Reliability of individual ADHD symptoms appears to be suboptimal for clinical and research use and is improved, although less than ideal, at the levels of cluster endorsement and case classification.

17712167
Development of a new psychosocial treatment for adult ADHD.
The purpose of this study was to assess the effectiveness of a new manualized group Meta-Cognitive Therapy (MCT) for adults with ADHD that extends the principles and practices of cognitive-behavioral therapy to the development of executive self-management skills. Thirty adults diagnosed with ADHD completed an 8- or 12-week program designed to target impairments in time management, organization, and planning skills. Treatment efficacy was measured using pre- and posttreatment self-report standardized measures (CAARS-S:L & Brown ADD Scales). General linear modeling revealed a robust significant posttreatment decline on the CAARS DSM-IV Inattentive symptom scale (p < .001) as well as improvement on the Brown ADD Scales (p < .001). The findings indicate that participants in the MCT program showed marked improvement with respect to core ADHD symptoms of inattention, as well as executive functioning skills, suggesting that this program has promise as a treatment for meta-cognitive deficits in adults with ADHD.

17629724
Neurocognitive functioning in AD/HD, predominantly inattentive and combined subtypes.
The Predominantly Inattentive (PI) and Combined (CB) subtypes of AD/HD differ in cognitive tempo, age of onset, gender ratio, and comorbidity, yet a differentiating endophenotype has not been identified. The aim of this study was to test rigorously diagnosed PI, CB, and typical children on measures selected for their potential to reveal hypothesized differences between the subtypes in specific neurocognitive systems (anterior vs. posterior attentional systems) and processes (arousal vs. activation). Thirty-four CB and 26 PI children meeting full DSM-IV criteria for subtype both in school and at home, without confounding reading disability or emotional disorder, were enrolled along with 20 typically developing children. Neurocognitive functions measured included attention, inhibitory control, working memory, learning, and executive functions. Tasks included the Stroop, Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, Continuous Performance Test (CPT). Buschke Selective Reminding Test, ad the Tower of London (TOL), as well as instruments developed by Posner and Sternberg, and tasks assessing the impact on reaction time of [corrected] varying preparatory intervals and stimulus/response complexity. After co-varying for IQ, subtypes differed primarily on measures of impulsivity during tests of vigilance (CPT) and executive function (TOL), with the CB group showing greater impulsivity than both other groups. In addition, the PI group showed worse performance than CB and control groups on the WISC-III Processing Speed Index. Whether analyzed with or without an IQ co-variate, there was no support in the data for hypothesized differences between subtypes in functioning of the anterior vs. posterior attentional systems, nor in involvement of arousal vs. activation processes. The results indicate that the PI and CB subtypes are best differentiated by ratings, observations and tests of cognitive tempo and behavioral impulsivity. Neuropsychological methods have yet to identify critical neuropsychological [corrected] substrates of these differences.

18268458
The predominantly inattentive subtype of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
The predominantly inattentive (IN) subtype of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a recently defined condition that is often overlooked by professionals and is still not completely understood. Characterized by symptoms of inattentiveness, such as distractibility, failure to complete work, forgetfulness, and disorganization, the IN subtype differs from the more commonly recognized combined (CB) subtype of ADHD in that symptoms of hyperactivity and impulsivity are absent or minimal. Large-scale epidemiologic studies suggest that the IN subtype is at least as prevalent as the CB subtype, and is at least as likely to be associated with academic and/or social impairment. Diagnosis of the IN subtype, however, may be more challenging because in addition to inattentiveness, other symptoms, including learning problems, depression, and anxiety, may also present without externalizing behaviors. Several studies have shown that compared with the CB subtype, the IN subtype has a later age of onset and referral, a relatively larger proportion of affected females, and is much less likely to be associated with symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder. Research is currently under way to examine the cognitive characteristics of the IN subtype and its genetic and neurobiologic underpinnings, as well as to evaluate the effectiveness of pharmacotherapy and other treatments.

