21499580
Acute liver failure caused by 'fat burners' and dietary supplements: a case report and literature review.
Globally, people are struggling with obesity. Many effective, nonconventional methods of weight reduction, such as herbal and natural dietary supplements, are increasingly being sought. Fat burners are believed to raise metabolism, burn more calories and hasten fat loss. Despite patient perceptions that herbal remedies are free of adverse effects, some supplements are associated with severe hepatotoxicity. The present report describes a young healthy woman who presented with fulminant hepatic failure requiring emergent liver transplantation caused by a dietary supplement and fat burner containing usnic acid, green tea and guggul tree extracts. Thorough investigation, including histopathological examination, revealed no other cause of hepatotoxicity. The present case adds to the increasing number of reports of hepatotoxicity associated with dietary supplements containing usnic acid, and highlights that herbal extracts from green tea or guggul tree may not be free of adverse effects. Until these products are more closely regulated and their advertising better scrutinized, physicians and patients should become more familiar with herbal products that are commonly used as weight loss supplements and recognize those that are potentially harmful.

19442922
Care of the cirrhotic patient.
Timely surveillance for varices and hepatocellular carcinoma, prophylaxis against spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) improve survival in patients awaiting transplantation. Early diagnosis of minimal or overt hepatic encephalopathy can delay life threatening complications, reduce need for hospitalization, and potentially improve survival pending liver transplantation.

17606216
Pretransplant management of the cirrhotic patient.
Cirrhosis is the twelfth commonest cause of death in the United States, with more than 27,000 deaths and more than 421,000 hospitalizations annually. Currently, there are more than 17,000 patients awaiting liver transplantation in the United States across the 11 United Network for Organ Sharing regions. Approximately 10% of such patients will die awaiting transplantation.

20546461
Education and Imaging. Hepatobiliary and pancreatic: Candida liver abscesses associated with endocarditis.


