21422542
Anatomical observations of the caudal vestibulo-sympathetic pathway.
The vestibular system senses the movement and position of the head in space and uses this information to stabilize vision, control posture, perceive head orientation and self-motion in three-dimensional space, and modulate autonomic and limbic activity in response to locomotion and changes in posture. Most vestibular signals are not consciously perceived and are usually appreciated through effector pathways classically described as the vestibulo-ocular, vestibulo-spinal, vestibulo-collic and vestibulo-autonomic reflexes. The present study reviews some of the recent data concerning the connectivity and chemical anatomy of vestibular projections to autonomic sites that are important in the sympathetic control of blood pressure.

17726112
Essential role for autophagy protein Atg7 in the maintenance of axonal homeostasis and the prevention of axonal degeneration.
Autophagy is a regulated lysosomal degradation process that involves autophagosome formation and transport. Although recent evidence indicates that basal levels of autophagy protect against neurodegeneration, the exact mechanism whereby this occurs is not known. By using conditional knockout mutant mice, we report that neuronal autophagy is particularly important for the maintenance of local homeostasis of axon terminals and protection against axonal degeneration. We show that specific ablation of an essential autophagy gene, Atg7, in Purkinje cells initially causes cell-autonomous, progressive dystrophy (manifested by axonal swellings) and degeneration of the axon terminals. Consistent with suppression of autophagy, no autophagosomes are observed in these dystrophic swellings, which is in contrast to accumulation of autophagosomes in the axonal dystrophic swellings under pathological conditions. Axonal dystrophy of mutant Purkinje cells proceeds with little sign of dendritic or spine atrophy, indicating that axon terminals are much more vulnerable to autophagy impairment than dendrites. This early pathological event in the axons is followed by cell-autonomous Purkinje cell death and mouse behavioral deficits. Furthermore, ultrastructural analyses of mutant Purkinje cells reveal an accumulation of aberrant membrane structures in the axonal dystrophic swellings. Finally, we observe double-membrane vacuole-like structures in wild-type Purkinje cell axons, whereas these structures are abolished in mutant Purkinje cell axons. Thus, we conclude that the autophagy protein Atg7 is required for membrane trafficking and turnover in the axons. Our study implicates impairment of axonal autophagy as a possible mechanism for axonopathy associated with neurodegeneration.

17278132
Vestibular neurons in the rat contain imidazoleacetic acid-ribotide, a putative neurotransmitter involved in blood pressure regulation.
A substantial body of research has led to the recognition that the vestibular system participates in blood pressure modulation during active movements and changes in posture, and that this modulation is effected at least partly by the caudal vestibular nuclei. The I-4 isomer of imidazoleacetic acid-ribotide (IAA-RP) is a putative neurotransmitter/modulator that is thought to be an endogenous regulator of general sympathetic drive, particularly systemic blood pressure. The present study employed immunofluorescence and light and electron microscopic immunocytochemistry to visualize IAA-RP in the vestibular nuclei of adult male rats. The results demonstrate IAA-RP immunolabeling of subpopulations of vestibular neurons in the descending nucleus and the caudal half of the medial nucleus, with scattered immunostained vestibular neurons also present more rostrally. On the basis of double immunofluorescence staining for IAA-RP and calbindin, many of these ribotide-immunoreactive neurons appear to be innervated by cerebellar Purkinje cell afferents. Ultrastructural observations in the caudal vestibular nuclei confirm the IAA-RP immunolocalization in cell bodies and dendritic processes, and in some myelinated axons and presynaptic boutons. The regional distribution of IAA-RP immunoreactivity corresponds to the location of vestibular neurons involved in autonomic functions. The presence of IAA-RP in those neurons suggests that they participate specifically in vestibulo-autonomic regulation of blood pressure. The localization of immunostain in processes and terminals suggests that vestibulo-autonomic activity is subject to local feedback control. Overall, the observations offer a chemoanatomic basis for understanding the vestibular side effects commonly experienced by patients treated with clonidine and other imidazoline-related drugs.

17210242
Distribution and cellular localization of imidazoleacetic acid-ribotide, an endogenous ligand at imidazol(in)e and adrenergic receptors, in rat brain.
Imidazoleacetic acid-ribotide (IAA-RP) is a putative neurotransmitter/modulator recently discovered in mammalian brain. The present study examines the distribution of IAA-RP in the rat CNS using a highly specific antiserum raised in rabbit against IAA-RP with immunostaining of aldehyde-fixed rat CNS. IAA-RP-immunoreactive neurons were present throughout the neuraxis; neuroglia were not labeled. In each region, only a subset of the neuronal pool was immunostained. In the forebrain, ribotide-immunolabeled neurons were common in neocortex, in hippocampal formation, and in subcortical structures including basal ganglia, thalamus and hypothalamus. Labeling was prominent in limbic areas including olfactory bulb, basal forebrain, pyriform cortex and amygdala. In the mid- and hindbrain, immunolabeled neurons were concentrated in specific nuclei and, in some areas, in specific subregions of those nuclei. Structures of the motor system, including cranial nerve motor nuclei, precerebellar nuclei, the substantia nigra, and the red nucleus were clearly labeled. Staining was intense in cells and/or puncta in the rostral and caudal ventrolateral medullary reticular formation, nucleus tractus solitarius and the caudal vestibular nuclear complex. Within neurons, the ribotide was found predominantly in somata and dendrites; some myelinated axons and occasional synaptic terminals were also immunostained. These data indicate that IAA-RP contributes to the neurochemical phenotype of many neuronal populations and further supports our suggestion that, in autonomic structures, IAA-RP may serve as a chemical mediator in complex circuits involved in blood pressure regulation and, more generally, sympathetic drive.

21228308
Imidazoleacetic acid-ribotide induces depression of synaptic responses in hippocampus through activation of imidazoline receptors.
Imidazole-4-acetic acid-ribotide (IAA-RP), an endogenous agonist at imidazoline receptors (I-Rs), is a putative neurotransmitter/regulator in mammalian brain. We studied the effects of IAA-RP on excitatory transmission by performing extracellular and whole cell recordings at Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapses in rat hippocampal slices. Bath-applied IAA-RP induced a concentration-dependent depression of synaptic transmission that, after washout, returned to baseline within 20 min. Maximal decrease occurred with 10 ?M IAA-RP, which reduced the slope of field extracellular postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) to 51.2 ± 5.7% of baseline at 20 min of exposure. Imidazole-4-acetic acid-riboside (IAA-R; 10 ?M), the endogenous dephosphorylated metabolite of IAA-RP, also produced inhibition of fEPSPs. This effect was smaller than that produced by IAA-RP (to 65.9 ± 3.8% of baseline) and occurred after a further 5- to 8-min delay. The frequency, but not the amplitude, of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents was decreased, and paired-pulse facilitation (PPF) was increased after application of IAA-RP, suggesting a principally presynaptic site of action. Since IAA-RP also has low affinity for ?(2)-adrenergic receptors (?(2)-ARs), we tested synaptic depression induced by IAA-RP in the presence of ?(2)-ARs, I(1)-R, or I(3)-R antagonists. The ?(2)-AR antagonist rauwolscine (100 nM), which blocked the actions of the ?(2)-AR agonist clonidine, did not affect either the IAA-RP-induced synaptic depression or the increase in PPF. In contrast, efaroxan (50 ?M), a mixed I(1)-R and ?(2)-AR antagonist, abolished the synaptic depression induced by IAA-RP and abolished the related increase in PPF. KU-14R, an I(3)-R antagonist, partially attenuated responses to IAA-RP. Taken together, these data support a role for IAA-RP in modulating synaptic transmission in the hippocampus through activation of I-Rs.

21163335
Direct projections from the caudal vestibular nuclei to the ventrolateral medulla in the rat.
While the basic pathways mediating vestibulo-ocular, -spinal, and -collic reflexes have been described in detail, little is known about vestibular projections to central autonomic sites. Previous studies have primarily focused on projections from the caudal vestibular region to solitary, vagal and parabrachial nuclei, but have noted a sparse innervation of the ventrolateral medulla. Since a direct pathway from the vestibular nuclei to the rostral ventrolateral medulla would provide a morphological substrate for rapid modifications in blood pressure, heart rate and respiration with changes in posture and locomotion, the present study examined anatomical evidence for this pathway using anterograde and retrograde tract tracing and immunofluorescence detection in brainstem sections of the rat medulla. The results provide anatomical evidence for direct pathways from the caudal vestibular nuclear complex to the rostral and caudal ventrolateral medullary regions. The projections are conveyed by fine and highly varicose axons that ramify bilaterally, with greater terminal densities present ipsilateral to the injection site and more rostrally in the ventrolateral medulla. In the rostral ventrolateral medulla, these processes are highly branched and extremely varicose, primarily directed toward the somata and proximal dendrites of non-catecholaminergic neurons, with minor projections to the distal dendrites of catecholaminergic cells. In the caudal ventrolateral medulla, the axons of vestibular nucleus neurons are more modestly branched with fewer varicosities, and their endings are contiguous with both the perikarya and dendrites of catecholamine-containing neurons. These data suggest that vestibular neurons preferentially target the rostral ventrolateral medulla, and can thereby provide a morphological basis for a short latency vestibulo-sympathetic pathway.

