20198431
Gastroduodenal ulceration associated with radioembolization for the treatment of hepatic tumors: an institutional experience and review of the literature.
Microsphere radioembolization is a method of delivering radiation therapy directly to tumors, thereby minimizing toxicity to adjacent structures. Despite the relatively high precision of this modality, numerous adverse effects have been recognized. One particularly untoward complication is the development of severe gastroduodenal ulceration. In order to further characterize gastroduodenal ulceration associated with radioembolization, our institutional experience as well as the reported literature were reviewed. The current evidence suggests that radioembolization-associated gastroduodenal ulceration results from inadvertent delivery of microspheres to the microvasculature of the gastrointestinal tract, leading to direct radiation toxicity. The reported incidence of this entity ranges between 2.9% and 4.8%. Most patients with this complication present with abdominal pain, often associated with nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. Symptoms can arise from hours to months after radioembolization treatment; diagnosis is made by endoscopic biopsy and histopathologic evaluation of the ulcer specimen. Radiation-induced ulcers have proven to be extremely difficult to treat. Current therapy based on acid suppression has had limited success, and the evidence for the addition of antioxidants and anti-inflammatory agents is still sparse. The increasing utilization of radioembolization will lead to adverse events including gastroduodenal ulceration. This entity must be considered in any patient treated with radioactive microspheres presenting with symptoms of dyspepsia. Accurate diagnosis and aggressive treatment are necessary to improve patient outcomes.

19373915
Adrenal histoplasmosis.


19122508
Neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas: endoscopic diagnosis.
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is a valuable tool in the diagnosis and management of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. This review highlights advances over the last year in EUS in the evaluation of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. We will focus on recent findings regarding the accuracy of EUS, EUS-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-fine needle aspiration), emerging cytologic markers obtained from fine needle aspiration samples, and the role of EUS screening for patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 syndrome. Additionally, we will introduce potential therapeutic EUS interventions in the treatment of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. The present review highlights recent advances in the utility of EUS in the clinical management of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. Key studies from the last year demonstrate the important role of EUS in the diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.

18288615
A case study and review of pancreatitis in the AIDS population.
This case study considers a 55-year-old African American woman with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) who presented with epigastric abdominal pain for 1 week. She was found to have pancreatitis on computed tomography scanning. Unique to this case are the numerous possible etiologies of her pancreatitis. Thus, this case study systematically reviews the different etiologies of pancreatitis in the AIDS population compared to the general population. Furthermore it discusses the management and treatment of pancreatitis in AIDS.

