19596145
Audit of manufactured products: use of allergen advisory labels and identification of labeling ambiguities.
The Food Allergy Labeling and Consumer Protection Act became effective January 1, 2006, and mandates disclosure of the 8 major allergens in plain English and as a source of ingredients in the ingredient statement. It does not regulate advisory labels. We sought to determine the frequency and language used in voluntary advisory labels among commercially available products and to identify labeling ambiguities affecting consumers with allergy. Trained surveyors performed a supermarket survey of 20,241 unique manufactured food products (from an original assessment of 49,604 products) for use of advisory labels. A second detailed survey of 744 unique products evaluated additional labeling practices. Overall, 17% of 20,241 products surveyed contain advisory labels. Chocolate candy, cookies, and baking mixes were the 3 categories of 24 with the greatest frequency (> or = 40%). Categorically, advisory warnings included "may contain" (38%), "shared equipment" (33%), and "within plant" (29%). The subsurvey disclosed 25 different types of advisory terminology. Nonspecific terms, such as "natural flavors" and "spices," were found on 65% of products and were not linked to a specific ingredient for 83% of them. Additional ambiguities included unclear sources of soy (lecithin vs protein), nondisclosure of sources of gelatin and lecithin, and simultaneous disclosure of "contains" and "may contain" for the same allergen, among others. Numerous products have advisory labeling and ambiguities that present challenges to consumers with food allergy. Additional allergen labeling regulation could improve safety and quality of life for individuals with food allergy.

18525364
Osteoarticular infectious complications in patients with primary immunodeficiencies.
To describe the incidence and management of various infectious arthritides in selected primary immunodeficiency states. Joint complications have been a well recognized finding in patients with primary immunodeficiencies for many years. Many are clearly infectious in etiology, but other apparently noninfectious joint abnormalities similar to rheumatoid arthritis have been shown to be due to an underlying infectious trigger. In humoral immunodeficiencies such as common variable immunodeficiency and X-linked agammaglobulinemia, bacterial organisms are the most common causes of infectious arthritis, but mycoplasmas and ureaplasmas are also of particular importance. In nonhumoral immunodeficiencies, noninfectious inflammatory arthritides are more prevalent, although microbiologic organisms have been reported in some cases of arthritis. Lack of appropriate culturing techniques and documentation of infectious agents may underestimate the prevalence of low-virulence infections in these patients. Infectious arthritis is a significant comorbidity associated with primary immunodeficiencies and can be the presenting feature for some patients. Prompt examination for common as well as atypical organisms is not only important for the treatment but also crucial to the understanding of the exact etiology of arthritides as a whole in these disorders.

