21575861
High-Frequency Canonical Wnt Activation in Multiple Sarcoma Subtypes Drives Proliferation through a TCF/?-Catenin Target Gene, CDC25A.
Wnt canonical signaling is critical for normal development as well as homeostasis of several epithelial tissues, and constitutive activation of this pathway is commonly observed in carcinomas. We show here that 50% of human sarcomas (n = 45) and 65% of sarcoma cell lines (n = 23) of diverse histological subtypes exhibit upregulated autocrine canonical Wnt signaling. Furthermore, in Wnt autocrine cell lines, we identify alterations including overexpression or gene amplification of Wnt ligands and/or LRP5/6 coreceptors and epigenetic silencing of different cell surface Wnt antagonists. Mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene were observed in two nonautocrine Wnt-positive sarcoma cell lines. Finally, downregulation of the activated Wnt pathway inhibited sarcoma cell proliferation both in vitro and in vivo by a mechanism involving the downregulation of CDC25A.

21078818
Canonical and noncanonical Wnts use a common mechanism to activate completely unrelated coreceptors.
Wnt ligands signal through ?-catenin and are critically involved in cell fate determination and stem/progenitor self-renewal. Wnts also signal through ?-catenin-independent or noncanonical pathways that regulate crucial events during embryonic development. The mechanism of noncanonical receptor activation and how Wnts trigger canonical as opposed to noncanonical signaling have yet to be elucidated. We demonstrate here that prototype canonical Wnt3a and noncanonical Wnt5a ligands specifically trigger completely unrelated endogenous coreceptors-LRP5/6 and Ror1/2, respectively-through a common mechanism that involves their Wnt-dependent coupling to the Frizzled (Fzd) coreceptor and recruitment of shared components, including dishevelled (Dvl), axin, and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3). We identify Ror2 Ser 864 as a critical residue phosphorylated by GSK3 and required for noncanonical receptor activation by Wnt5a, analogous to the priming phosphorylation of low-density receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6) in response to Wnt3a. Furthermore, this mechanism is independent of Ror2 receptor Tyr kinase functions. Consistent with this model of Wnt receptor activation, we provide evidence that canonical and noncanonical Wnts exert reciprocal pathway inhibition at the cell surface by competition for Fzd binding. Thus, different Wnts, through their specific coupling and phosphorylation of unrelated coreceptors, activate completely distinct signaling pathways.

20837657
Abelson family kinases regulate Frizzled planar cell polarity signaling via Dsh phosphorylation.
Abelson (Abl) family tyrosine kinases have been implicated in cell morphogenesis, adhesion, motility, and oncogenesis. Using a candidate approach for genes involved in planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling, we identified Drosophila Abl (dAbl) as a modulator of Frizzled(Fz)/PCP signaling. We demonstrate that dAbl positively regulates the Fz/Dishevelled (Dsh) PCP pathway without affecting canonical Wnt/Wg-Fz signaling. Genetic dissection suggests that Abl functions via Fz/Dsh signaling in photoreceptor R3 specification, a well-established Fz-PCP signaling readout. Molecular analysis shows that dAbl binds and phosphorylates Dsh on Tyr473 within the DEP domain. This phosphorylation event on Dsh is functionally critical, as the equivalent DshY473F mutant is nonfunctional in PCP signaling and stable membrane association, although it rescues canonical Wnt signaling. Strikingly, mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) deficient for Abl1 and Abl2/Arg genes also show reduced Dvl2 phosphorylation as compared with control MEFs, and this correlates with a change in subcellular localization of endogenous Dvl2. As in Drosophila, such Abl-deficient MEFs show no change in canonical Wnt signaling. Taken together, our results argue for a conserved role of Abl family members in the positive regulation of Dsh activity toward Fz-Dsh/PCP signaling by Dsh phosphorylation.

20605919
Role of progerin-induced telomere dysfunction in HGPS premature cellular senescence.
Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) is a premature-aging syndrome caused by a dominant mutation in the gene encoding lamin A, which leads to an aberrantly spliced and processed protein termed progerin. Previous studies have shown that progerin induces early senescence associated with increased DNA-damage signaling and that telomerase extends HGPS cellular lifespan. We demonstrate that telomerase extends HGPS cellular lifespan by decreasing progerin-induced DNA-damage signaling and activation of p53 and Rb pathways that otherwise mediate the onset of premature senescence. We show further that progerin-induced DNA-damage signaling is localized to telomeres and is associated with telomere aggregates and chromosomal aberrations. Telomerase amelioration of DNA-damage signaling is relatively rapid, requires both its catalytic and DNA-binding functions, and correlates in time with the acquisition by HGPS cells of the ability to proliferate. All of these findings establish that HGPS premature cellular senescence results from progerin-induced telomere dysfunction.

19535900
Effects of p21 deletion in mouse models of premature aging.
An approach to investigate the role of cellular senescence in organismal aging has been to abrogate signaling pathways known to induce cellular senescence and to assess the effects in mouse models of premature aging. Recently, we reported the effect of loss of function of p21, a gene implicated in p53-induced cellular senescence, in the background of the Ku80(-/-) premature aging mouse (Zhao et al., EMBO Rep 2009). Here, we provide an overview of the effects of p21 deletion in different models of premature aging.

19349579
Canonical Wnts function as potent regulators of osteogenesis by human mesenchymal stem cells.
Genetic evidence indicates that Wnt signaling is critically involved in bone homeostasis. In this study, we investigated the functions of canonical Wnts on differentiation of adult multipotent human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) in vitro and in vivo. We observe differential sensitivities of hMSCs to Wnt inhibition of osteogenesis versus adipogenesis, which favors osteoblastic commitment under binary in vitro differentiation conditions. Wnt inhibition of osteogenesis is associated with decreased expression of osteoblastic transcription factors and inhibition of c-Jun N-terminal kinase and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase activation, which are involved in osteogenic differentiation. An hMSC subpopulation exhibits high endogenous Wnt signaling, the inhibition of which enhances osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation in vitro. In an in vivo bone formation model, high levels of Wnt signaling inhibit de novo bone formation by hMSCs. However, hMSCs with exogenous expression of Wnt1 but not stabilized beta-catenin markedly stimulate bone formation by naive hMSCs, arguing for an important role of a canonical Wnt gradient in hMSC osteogenesis in vivo.

19079133
Cellular senescence and organismal ageing in the absence of p21(CIP1/WAF1) in ku80(-/-) mice.
Ku80 is important in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks by its essential function in non-homologous end-joining. The absence of Ku80 causes the accumulation of DNA damage and leads to premature ageing in mice. We showed that mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from ku80(-/-) mice senesced rapidly with elevated levels of p53 and p21. Deletion of p21 delayed the early senescence phenotype in ku80(-/-) MEFs, despite an otherwise intact response of p53. In contrast to ku80(-/-)p53(-/-) mice, which die rapidly primarily from lymphomas, there was no significant increase in tumorigenesis in ku80(-/-)p21(-/-) mice. However, ku80(-/-)p21(-/-) mice showed no improvement with respect to rough fur coat or osteopaenia, and even showed a shortened lifespan compared with ku80(-/-) mice. These results show that the increased lifespan of ku80(-/-) MEFs owing to the loss of p21 is not associated with an improvement of the premature ageing phenotypes of ku80(-/-) mice observed at the organismal level.

18663127
Transcriptional role of p53 in interferon-mediated antiviral immunity.
Tumor suppressor p53 is activated by several stimuli, including DNA damage and oncogenic stress. Previous studies (Takaoka, A., S. Hayakawa, H. Yanai, D. Stoiber, H. Negishi, H. Kikuchi, S. Sasaki, K. Imai, T. Shibue, K. Honda, and T. Taniguchi. 2003. Nature. 424:516-523) have shown that p53 is also induced in response to viral infections as a downstream transcriptional target of type I interferon (IFN) signaling. Moreover, many viruses, including SV40, human papillomavirus, Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus, adenoviruses, and even RNA viruses such as polioviruses, have evolved mechanisms designated to abrogate p53 responses. We describe a novel p53 function in the activation of the IFN pathway. We observed that infected mouse and human cells with functional p53 exhibited markedly decreased viral replication early after infection. This early inhibition of viral replication was mediated both in vitro and in vivo by a p53-dependent enhancement of IFN signaling, specifically the induction of genes containing IFN-stimulated response elements. Of note, p53 also contributed to an increase in IFN release from infected cells. We established that this p53-dependent enhancement of IFN signaling is dependent to a great extent on the ability of p53 to activate the transcription of IFN regulatory factor 9, a central component of the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 complex. Our results demonstrate that p53 contributes to innate immunity by enhancing IFN-dependent antiviral activity independent of its functions as a proapoptotic and tumor suppressor gene.

18316605
Clonal selection in malignant transformation of human fibroblasts transduced with defined cellular oncogenes.
Recent evidence has implied that disruption of a limited number of defined cellular pathways is necessary and sufficient for neoplastic conversion of a variety of normal human cell types in tissue culture. We show instead that malignancy in such models results from an iterative process of clonal selection in vitro and/or in vivo. Normal human fibroblasts underwent malignant transformation after transduction with telomerase, cyclin-dependent kinase 4, dominant-negative p53, and activated Ras or MEK. Furthermore, culture conditions favoring overgrowth resulted in clonal selection, which with added Ras or MEK oncogenes led to the emergence of tumorigenic clones. Such tumors showed variable degrees of malignancy with some even exhibiting metastasis. SV40 small t antigen (ST) has been reported to be necessary and sufficient to convert human fibroblasts with these pathway aberrations to a polyclonal tumor. However, we observed that clonal tumors emerged even with ST addition. Genomic instability was markedly increased by p53 and Rb pathway abrogation. Under the same conditions, fibroblasts with these alterations failed to induce tumors, implying that genomic instability may be necessary but not sufficient for malignant transformation. These findings indicate that the minimum number of events required for malignant transformation of human fibroblasts is greater than has been enumerated by such oncogene addition strategies and support a stochastic cancer progression model initiated by four defined cellular alterations.

17575141
Androgen-induced Wnt signaling in preosteoblasts promotes the growth of MDA-PCa-2b human prostate cancer cells.
The high morbidity and mortality associated with prostate cancer (PCa) result from its tendency to metastasize to bone where it produces predominantly osteoblastic lesions. The Wnt signaling pathway plays an important role in embryogenesis, tumorigenesis, osteoblast development, and bone formation. Androgen signaling via the androgen receptor (AR) is critical in both PCa and bone cell growth. We examined the effects of androgens on cell growth and Wnt signaling in the AR-positive MDA-PCa-2b cell line and MC3T3 preosteoblasts, grown alone and in coculture. We show that the potent androgen dihydrotestosterone increases AR expression and transcriptional activity only in the preosteoblasts. Although dihydrotestosterone induced an 80% increase in PCa cell growth when the cells were grown alone, dihydrotestosterone had a more significant effect on MDA-PCa-2b cell proliferation (3.2-fold increase) when the PCa cells were cocultured with preosteoblasts. Dihydrotestosterone addition to preosteoblasts promoted Wnt-dependent transcriptional reporter activity associated with GSK3beta(S-9) phosphorylation and accumulation of nuclear beta-catenin as well as elevated Runx2 expression. In addition, the increased proliferation of PCa cells in coculture with MC3T3 cells in response to dihydrotestosterone was abrogated by the addition of either exogenous DKK-1 or sFRP-1 protein, two naturally occurring Wnt antagonists. Finally, we show that the paracrine growth-promoting effect of androgens is limited to MDA-PCa-2b cells. These data imply that Wnt signaling is involved in the androgen-regulated crosstalk between preosteoblasts and PCa cells and suggest that androgens may stimulate growth of some prostate tumor cells indirectly, via up-regulation of Wnt signaling in bone cells.

21042278
Diverse mechanisms of Wnt activation and effects of pathway inhibition on proliferation of human gastric carcinoma cells.
Human gastric carcinomas are among the most treatment-refractory epithelial malignancies. Increased understanding of the underlying molecular aberrations in such tumors could provide insights leading to improved therapeutic approaches. In this study, we characterized diverse genetic aberrations leading to constitutive Wnt signaling activation in a series of human gastric carcinoma cell lines. Downregulation of TCF signaling by stable transduction of dominant negative TCF4 (DNTCF4) resulted in inhibition of proliferation in Wnt-activated AGS tumor cells. c-Myc downregulation and the associated upregulation of its repression target, p21 observed in these tumor cells, as well as the profound growth inhibition induced by c-Myc small hairpin RNA (shRNA) implied their c-Myc addiction. In striking contrast, Wnt-activated MKN-28 and MKN-74 tumor cells appeared refractory to DNTCF4 inhibition of proliferation despite comparably decreased c-Myc expression levels. The resistance of these same tumor cells to growth inhibition by c-Myc shRNA established that their refractoriness to DNTCF was because of their independence from c-Myc for proliferation. There was no correlation between this resistance phenotype and the presence or absence of constitutive mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and/or AKT pathway activation, commonly observed in gastrointestinal tumors. However, in both DNTCF-sensitive and -resistant tumor cells with MAPK and/or AKT pathway activation, the ability of small molecule antagonists directed against either pathway to inhibit tumor cell growth was enhanced by Wnt pathway inhibition. These findings support the concept that although certain Wnt-activated tumors may escape c-Myc dependence for proliferation, disruption of other oncogenic pathways can unmask cooperative antiproliferative effects for Wnt pathway downregulation.

20453880
Drosophila Abelson kinase mediates cell invasion and proliferation through two distinct MAPK pathways.
The Abelson (Abl) family of non-receptor tyrosine kinases has an important role in cell morphogenesis, motility, and proliferation. Although the function of Abl has been extensively studied in leukemia, its role in epithelial cell invasion remains obscure. Using the Drosophila wing epithelium as an in vivo model system, we show that overexpression (activation) of Drosophila Abl (dAbl) causes loss of epithelial apical/basal cell polarity and secretion of matrix metalloproteinases, resulting in a cellular invasion and apoptosis. Our in vivo data indicate that dAbl acts downstream of the Src kinases, which are known regulators of cell adhesion and invasion. Downstream of dAbl, Rac GTPases activate two distinct MAPK pathways: c-Jun N-terminal kinase signaling (required for cell invasion and apoptosis) and ERK signaling (inducing cell proliferation). Activated Abl also increases the activity of Src members through a positive feedback loop leading to signal amplification. Thus, targeting Src-Abl, using available dual inhibitors, could be of therapeutic importance in tumor cell metastasis.

19377513
Wnt pathway aberrations including autocrine Wnt activation occur at high frequency in human non-small-cell lung carcinoma.
Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer mortality worldwide. Non-small-cell lung carcinomas (NSCLCs), which represent around 80% of lung tumors, exhibit poor prognosis and are usually refractory to conventional chemotherapy. Elucidating the molecular and cellular mechanisms that are dysregulated in NSCLCs may lead to new possibilities for targeted therapy or enhanced efficacy of current therapies. Here we demonstrate Wnt pathway activation in around 50% of human NSCLC cell lines and primary tumors, through different mechanisms, including autocrine Wnt pathway activation involving upregulation of specific Wnt ligands. Downregulation of activated Wnt signaling inhibited NSCLC proliferation and induced a more differentiated phenotype. Together, our findings establish importance of activated Wnt signaling in human NSCLCs and offer the possibility of targeting upregulated Wnt signaling as a new therapeutic modality for this disease.

21227046
Inhibition of vascular endothelial cell growth factor suppresses the in vivo growth of human prostate tumors.
The LNCaP human prostate cancer cell line is androgenand stromal-dependent for in vivo growth. We co-inoculated LNCaP cells with human fetal fibroblasts, isolated from prostate, bone (male), and lung (male and female) derived from 18- to 22-week-old human fetal tissue, into non-castrate male nude mice. Co-inoculation of LNCaP with fetal prostatic fibroblasts resulted in high tumor take rates (27 of 30, or 90%) 6 to 8 weeks after subcutaneous co-inoculation. Serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) values correlated strongly with wet tumor weight (r=0.86). The fetal fibroblast enhancement of tumor take rates in vivo was neither gender- nor organ-specific. Fetal fibroblast-conditioned medium (CM) did not have a significant proliferative effect on LNCaP cell growth in vitro. Areas of angiogenesis were demonstrable in all tumors, with blood vessels arising at the interface between stromal and tumor cells. The fetal fibroblasts, but not the LNCaP cells, expressed significant amounts of the mRNA and protein for vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF). Treatment of tumor-bearing animals with neutralizing antibodies to VEGF resulted in significant tumor growth suppression. These findings indicate that VEGF is an important mediator of stromal-induced enhancement of human prostate cancer cell growth in vivo.

