21261298
Making structural sense of dimerization interfaces of delta opioid receptor homodimers.
Opioid receptors, like other members of the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) family, have been shown to associate to form dimers and/or oligomers at the plasma membrane. Whether this association is stable or transient is not known. Recent compelling evidence suggests that at least some GPCRs rapidly associate and dissociate. We have recently calculated binding affinities from free energy estimates to predict transient association between mouse delta opioid receptor (DOR) protomers at a symmetric interface involving the fourth transmembrane (TM4) helix (herein termed "4" dimer). Here we present disulfide cross-linking experiments with DOR constructs with cysteines substituted at the extracellular ends of TM4 or TM5 that confirm the formation of DOR complexes involving these helices. Our results are consistent with the involvement of TM4 and/or TM5 at the DOR homodimer interface, but possibly with differing association propensities. Coarse-grained (CG) well-tempered metadynamics simulations of two different dimeric arrangements of DOR involving TM4 alone or with TM5 (herein termed "4/5" dimer) in an explicit lipid-water environment confirmed the presence of two structurally and energetically similar configurations of the 4 dimer, as previously assessed by umbrella sampling calculations, and revealed a single energetic minimum of the 4/5 dimer. Additional CG umbrella sampling simulations of the 4/5 dimer indicated that the strength of association between DOR protomers varies depending on the protein region at the interface, with the 4 dimer being more stable than the 4/5 dimer.

20617813
Lessons from free energy simulations of delta-opioid receptor homodimers involving the fourth transmembrane helix.
Several G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), including opioid receptors deltaOR, muOR, and kappaOR, have been reported to form stable dimers or oligomers in lipid bilayers and cell membranes. This notion has been recently challenged by imaging data supporting a transient nature of GPCR association. Here we use umbrella sampling reconstructed free energies of deltaOR homodimers involving the fourth transmembrane helix to predict their association constant. The results of these simulations, combined with estimates of diffusion-limited association rates, suggest a short lifetime for deltaOR homodimers in the membrane, in agreement with recent trends.

20483344
Putative active states of a prototypic g-protein-coupled receptor from biased molecular dynamics.
A major current focus of structural work on G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) pertains to the investigation of their active states. However, for virtually all GPCRs, active agonist-bound intermediate states have been difficult to characterize experimentally owing to their higher conformational flexibility, and thus intrinsic instability, as compared to inactive inverse agonist-bound states. In this work, we explored possible activation pathways of the prototypic GPCR bovine rhodopsin by means of biased molecular dynamics simulations. Specifically, we used an explicit atomistic representation of the receptor and its environment, and sampled the conformational transition from the crystal structure of a photoactivated deprotonated state of rhodopsin to the low pH crystal structure of opsin in the presence of 11-trans-retinal, using adiabatic biased molecular dynamics simulations. We then reconstructed the system free-energy landscape along the predetermined transition trajectories using a path collective variable approach based on metadynamics. Our results suggest that the two experimental endpoints of rhodopsin/opsin are connected by at least two different pathways, and that the conformational transition is populated by at least four metastable states of the receptor, characterized by a different amplitude of the outward movement of transmembrane helix 6.

19785461
Exploring molecular mechanisms of ligand recognition by opioid receptors with metadynamics.
Opioid receptors are G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) of utmost significance in the development of potent analgesic drugs for the treatment of severe pain. An accurate evaluation at the molecular level of the ligand binding pathways into these receptors may play a key role in the design of new molecules with more desirable properties and reduced side effects. The recent characterization of high-resolution X-ray crystal structures of non-rhodopsin GPCRs for diffusible hormones and neurotransmitters presents an unprecedented opportunity to build improved homology models of opioid receptors, and to study in more detail their molecular mechanisms of ligand recognition. In this study, possible pathways for entry of the nonselective antagonist naloxone (NLX) from the water environment into the well-accepted alkaloid binding pocket of a delta opioid receptor (DOR) molecular model based on the beta2-adrenergic receptor crystal structure are explored using microsecond-scale well-tempered metadynamics simulations. Using as collective variables distances that account for the position of NLX and of the receptor extracellular loop 2 in relation to the DOR binding pocket, we were able to distinguish between the different states visited by the ligand (i.e., docked, undocked, and metastable bound intermediates) and to predict a free energy of binding close to experimental values after correcting for possible drawbacks of the sampling approach. The strategy employed herein holds promise for its application to the docking of diverse ligands to the opioid receptors as well as to other GPCRs.

19455709
Targeted molecular dynamics reveals overall common conformational changes upon hybrid domain swing-out in beta3 integrins.
The beta3 integrin family members alphaIIbeta3 and alphaVbeta3 signal bidirectionally through long-range allosteric changes, including a transition from a bent unliganded-closed low-affinity state to an extended liganded-open high-affinity state. To obtain an atomic-level description of this transition in an explicit solvent, we carried out targeted molecular dynamics simulations of the headpieces of alphaIIbeta3 and alphaVbeta3 integrins. Although minor differences were observed between these receptors, our results suggest a common transition pathway in which the hybrid domain swing-out is accompanied by conformational changes within the beta3 betaA (I-like) domain that propagate through the alpha7 helix C-terminus, and are followed by the alpha7 helix downward motion and the opening of the beta6-alpha7 loop. Breaking of contact interactions between the beta6-alpha7 loop and the alpha1 helix N-terminus results in helix straightening, internal rearrangements of the specificity determining loop (SDL), movement of the beta1-alpha1 loop toward the metal ion dependent adhesion site (MIDAS), and final changes at the interfaces between the beta3 betaA (I-like) domain and either the hybrid or the alpha beta-propeller domains. Taken together, our results suggest novel testable hypotheses of intradomain and interdomain interactions responsible for beta3 integrin activation.

20028319
Progress in elucidating the structural and dynamic character of G Protein-Coupled Receptor oligomers for use in drug discovery.
G Protein-Coupled Receptors (GPCRs) are the most targeted group of proteins for the development of therapeutic drugs. Until the last decade, structural information about this family of membrane proteins was relatively scarce, and their mechanisms of ligand binding and signal transduction were modeled on the assumption that GPCRs existed and functioned as monomeric entities. New crystal structures of native and engineered GPCRs, together with important biochemical and biophysical data that reveal structural details of the activation mechanism(s) of this receptor family, provide a valuable framework to improve dynamic molecular models of GPCRs with the ultimate goal of elucidating their allostery and functional selectivity. Since the dynamic movements of single GPCR protomers are likely to be affected by the presence of neighboring interacting subunits, oligomeric arrangements should be taken into account to improve the predictive ability of computer-assisted structural models of GPCRs for effective use in drug design.

