20393108
TGF-?-stimulated CTGF production enhanced by collagen and associated with biogenesis of a novel 31-kDa CTGF form in human corneal fibroblasts.
Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) is induced by transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-?) after corneal wounding. This study addressed the role of the extracellular matrix in the induction of CTGF by TGF-?. Human corneal fibroblasts (HCFs) were grown on fibronectin (FN), vitronectin (VN), or collagen (CL) in supplemented serum-free media alone or with TGF-?1 or fibroblast growth factor plus heparin. CTGF mRNA was analyzed by qPCR and protein expression by Western blot analysis of Triton X-100 (TX-100)-soluble and TX-100-insoluble cell lysates using antibodies to N-terminal, mid, and C-terminal CTGF regions. Immunocytochemistry was performed on nonconfluent or scrape-wounded confluent HCFs. TGF-?-treated HCFs grown on CL produced five times more 38-kDa CTGF than untreated controls (72 hours). TGF-?-treated HCFs on CL secreted twofold more CTGF than those on FN or VN. Furthermore, a 31-kDa CTGF form, lacking the N-terminal domain, was detected in Triton X-100 insoluble fractions in Western blot analysis. Immunodetectable extracellular CTGF formed linear arrays parallel to, but not colocalized with, CL or FN. It also did not colocalize with FAK, vinculin, or integrins ?(v)?(3) and ?(5)?(1). Intracellular CTGF was detected in the Golgi apparatus and vesicles, including endosomes. Enhanced CTGF secretion induced by TGF-? in CL-grown cells may contribute to positive feedback in which CL is overexpressed in CTGF-induced fibrosis. N-terminal CTGF fragments in the plasma of patients with severe fibrotic disease may be a product of CTGF proteolysis that also produces the newly identified 31-kDa CTGF that remains cell associated and may have its impact by non-integrin signaling pathways.

19487690
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 regulates integrin alphavbeta3 expression and autocrine transforming growth factor beta signaling.
Fibrosis is characterized by elevated transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) signaling, resulting in extracellular matrix accumulation and increased PAI-1 (plasminogen activator inhibitor) expression. PAI-1 induces the internalization of urokinase plasminogen activator/receptor and integrin alphavbeta3 from the cell surface. Since increased alphavbeta3 expression correlates with increased TGFbeta signaling, we hypothesized that aberrant PAI-1-mediated alphavbeta3 endocytosis could initiate an autocrine loop of TGFbeta activity. We found that in PAI-1 knock-out (KO) mouse embryonic fibroblasts), alphavbeta3 endocytosis was reduced by approximately 75%, leaving alphavbeta3 in enlarged focal adhesions, similar to wild type cells transfected with PAI-1 small interfering RNA. TGFbeta signaling was significantly enhanced in PAI-1 KO cells, as demonstrated by a 3-fold increase in SMAD2/3-containing nuclei and a 2.9-fold increase in TGFbeta activity that correlated with an increase in alphavbeta3 and TGFbeta receptor II expression. As expected, PAI-1 KO cells had unregulated plasmin activity, which was only partially responsible for TGFbeta activation, as evidenced by a mere 25% reduction in TGFbeta activity when plasmin was inhibited. Treatment of cells with an alphavbeta3-specific cyclic RGD peptide (GpenGRGD) led to a more profound (59%) TGFbeta inhibition; a nonspecific RGD peptide (GRGDNP) inhibited TGFbeta by only 23%. Human primary fibroblasts were used to confirm that PAI-1 inhibition and beta3 overexpression led to an increase in TGFbeta activity. Consistent with a fibrotic phenotype, PAI-1 KO cells were constitutively myofibroblasts that had a 1.6-fold increase in collagen deposition over wild type cells. These data suggest that PAI-1-mediated regulation of alphavbeta3 integrin is critical for the control of TGFbeta signaling and the prevention of fibrotic disease.

17507651
Urokinase receptor cleavage: a crucial step in fibroblast-to-myofibroblast differentiation.
Fibroblasts migrate into and repopulate connective tissue wounds. At the wound edge, fibroblasts differentiate into myofibroblasts, and they promote wound closure. Regulated fibroblast-to-myofibroblast differentiation is critical for regenerative healing. Previous studies have focused on the role in fibroblasts of urokinase plasmingen activator/urokinase plasmingen activator receptor (uPA/uPAR), an extracellular protease system that promotes matrix remodeling, growth factor activation, and cell migration. Whereas fibroblasts have substantial uPA activity and uPAR expression, we discovered that cultured myofibroblasts eventually lost cell surface uPA/uPAR. This led us to investigate the relevance of uPA/uPAR activity to myofibroblast differentiation. We found that fibroblasts expressed increased amounts of full-length cell surface uPAR (D1D2D3) compared with myofibroblasts, which had reduced expression of D1D2D3 but increased expression of the truncated form of uPAR (D2D3) on their cell surface. Retaining full-length uPAR was found to be essential for regulating myofibroblast differentiation, because 1) protease inhibitors that prevented uPAR cleavage also prevented myofibroblast differentiation, and 2) overexpression of cDNA for a noncleavable form of uPAR inhibited myofibroblast differentiation. These data support a novel hypothesis that maintaining full-length uPAR on the cell surface regulates the fibroblast to myofibroblast transition and that down-regulation of uPAR is necessary for myofibroblast differentiation.

