21610689
AGE restriction in diabetes mellitus: a paradigm shift.
Persistently elevated oxidative stress and inflammation precede or occur during the development of type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus and precipitate devastating complications. Given the rapidly increasing incidence of diabetes mellitus and obesity in the space of a few decades, new genetic mutations are unlikely to be the cause, instead pointing to environmental initiators. A hallmark of contemporary culture is a preference for thermally processed foods, replete with pro-oxidant advanced glycation endproducts (AGEs). These molecules are appetite-increasing and, thus, efficient enhancers of overnutrition (which promotes obesity) and oxidant overload (which promotes inflammation). Studies of genetic and nongenetic animal models of diabetes mellitus suggest that suppression of host defenses, under sustained pressure from food-derived AGEs, may potentially shift homeostasis towards a higher basal level of oxidative stress, inflammation and injury of both insulin-producing and insulin-responsive cells. This sequence promotes both types of diabetes mellitus. Reducing basal oxidative stress by AGE restriction in mice, without energy or nutrient change, reinstates host defenses, alleviates inflammation, prevents diabetes mellitus, vascular and renal complications and extends normal lifespan. Studies in healthy humans and in those with diabetes mellitus show that consumption of high amounts of food-related AGEs is a determinant of insulin resistance and inflammation and that AGE restriction improves both. This Review focuses on AGEs as novel initiators of oxidative stress that precedes, rather than results from, diabetes mellitus. Therapeutic gains from AGE restriction constitute a paradigm shift.

20497781
Advanced glycation end products in foods and a practical guide to their reduction in the diet.
Modern diets are largely heat-processed and as a result contain high levels of advanced glycation end products (AGEs). Dietary advanced glycation end products (dAGEs) are known to contribute to increased oxidant stress and inflammation, which are linked to the recent epidemics of diabetes and cardiovascular disease. This report significantly expands the available dAGE database, validates the dAGE testing methodology, compares cooking procedures and inhibitory agents on new dAGE formation, and introduces practical approaches for reducing dAGE consumption in daily life. Based on the findings, dry heat promotes new dAGE formation by >10- to 100-fold above the uncooked state across food categories. Animal-derived foods that are high in fat and protein are generally AGE-rich and prone to new AGE formation during cooking. In contrast, carbohydrate-rich foods such as vegetables, fruits, whole grains, and milk contain relatively few AGEs, even after cooking. The formation of new dAGEs during cooking was prevented by the AGE inhibitory compound aminoguanidine and significantly reduced by cooking with moist heat, using shorter cooking times, cooking at lower temperatures, and by use of acidic ingredients such as lemon juice or vinegar. The new dAGE database provides a valuable instrument for estimating dAGE intake and for guiding food choices to reduce dAGE intake.

20363923
Induction of diabetes in aged C57B6 mice results in severe nephropathy: an association with oxidative stress, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and inflammation.
Kidney aging is a slowly progressive process that is postulated to be accelerated by intervening diseases, such as diabetes, due in part to the addition of excessive stress and inflammation from the intervening disease to the underlying aging process. This hypothesis was tested by inducing diabetes with streptozotocin in 18-month-old, aging mice. After 4 months of diabetes, these mice developed severe albuminuria, elevated creatinine levels, and renal lesions including extensive apoptotic cell death, glomerulosclerosis, afferent and efferent hyalinosis, and tubulointerstitial inflammation and fibrosis. These symptoms were associated with elevated oxidative stress. The presence of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in 22-month-old diabetic kidneys resulted in up-regulation of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), which may play a role in increasing kidney lesions because CHOP-deficient proximal tubular cells were resistant to ER stress-induced cell death, and CHOP-deficient mice were protected from diabetic nephropathy. Moreover, CHOP-deficient mice did not develop albuminuria as they aged. Inflammation, another key component of progressive diabetic nephropathy, was prominent in 22-month-old diabetic kidneys. The expression of tumor-necrosis factor-alpha in 22-month-old diabetic kidneys may play a role in inflammation, ER stress, and apoptosis. Thus, diabetes may accelerate the underlying kidney aging process present in old mice.

20006791
Identifying advanced glycation end products as a major source of oxidants in aging: implications for the management and/or prevention of reduced renal function in elderly persons.
Aging is characterized by increasing inflammation and oxidant stress (OS). Reduced renal function was present in more than 20% of normal-aged individuals sampled in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) cross-sectional study of the US population. Longitudinal studies in the United States and Italy showed that renal function does not decline in some individuals, suggesting that a search for causes of the loss of renal function in some persons might be indicated and interventions to reduce this outcome should be sought. Because advanced glycation end products (AGEs) induce both inflammation and OS, accumulate with age, and primarily are excreted by the kidney, one outcome of reduced renal function in aging could be decreased AGE disposal. The build-up of AGEs with reduced renal function could contribute to inflammation, increased oxidant stress, and accumulation of AGEs in aging. In fact, results from a longitudinal study of normal aging adults in Italy showed that the most significant correlation with mortality was the level of renal function. A clear link between inflammation, OS, AGEs, and chronic disease was shown in studies of mice that showed that reduction of AGE levels by drugs or decreased intake of AGEs reduces chronic kidney disease (CKD) and cardiovascular disease of aging. The data support a role for AGEs in the development of renal lesions in aging mice and reveal that AGEs in the diet are very important contributors to renal and cardiovascular lesions. AGEs signal through two receptors, one of which is anti-inflammatory (AGER1) and the other is proinflammatory (RAGE). Overexpression of AGER1 protects against OS and acute vascular injury. The reduction of AGEs in the diet is as efficient in preventing aging-related cardiovascular and renal lesions in mice as that seen with calorie restriction. Studies in normal adults of all ages and those with CKD suggest that the findings in mice may be directly applicable to both aging and CKD. Namely, the dietary content of AGEs determines the serum levels of AGEs and inflammatory mediators and urine AGE levels in both normal subjects and CKD patients. Importantly, reduction of AGEs controls these changes in both normal subjects and CKD patients, and the phenotypic changes in AGER1 are reduced in CKD patients by decreasing the amount of AGEs consumed with the diet. These data suggest that the changes in renal function in normal aging may be subject to control and this subject deserves renewed attention.

20006785
Aging and the kidney: introduction.


19955485
AGER1 regulates endothelial cell NADPH oxidase-dependent oxidant stress via PKC-delta: implications for vascular disease.
Advanced glycated end-product receptor 1 (AGER1) protects against vascular disease promoted by oxidants, such as advanced glycated end products (AGEs), via inhibition of reactive oxygen species (ROS). However, the specific AGEs, sources, and pathways involved remain undefined. The mechanism of cellular NADPH oxidase (NOX)-dependent ROS generation by defined AGEs, N(epsilon)-carboxymethyl-lysine- and methylglyoxal (MG)-modified BSA, was assessed in AGER1 overexpressing (AGER1(+) EC) or knockdown (sh-mRNA-AGER1(+) EC) human aortic endothelial (EC) and ECV304 cells, and aortic segments from old (18 mo) C57BL6-F(2) mice, propagated on low-AGE diet (LAGE), or LAGE supplemented with MG (LAGE+MG). Wild-type EC and sh-mRNA-AGER1(+) EC, but not AGER1(+) EC, had high NOX p47(phox) and gp91(phox) activity, superoxide anions, and NF-kappaB p65 nuclear translocation in response to MG and N(epsilon)-carboxymethyl-lysine. These events involved epidermal growth factor receptor-dependent PKC-delta redox-sensitive Tyr-311 and Tyr-332 phosphorylation and were suppressed in AGER1(+) ECs and enhanced in sh-mRNA-AGER1(+) ECs. Aortic ROS, PKC-delta Tyr-311, and Tyr-332 phosphorylation, NOX expression, and nuclear p65 in older LAGE+MG mice were significantly increased above that in age-matched LAGE mice, which had higher levels of AGER1. In conclusion, circulating AGEs induce NADPH-dependent ROS generation in vascular aging in both in vitro and in vivo models. Furthermore, AGER1 provides protection against AGE-induced ROS generation via NADPH.

19946325
Role of oxidants/inflammation in declining renal function in chronic kidney disease and normal aging.
Oxidant stress (OS) and inflammation increase in normal aging and in chronic kidney disease (CKD), as observed in human and animal studies. In cross-sectional studies of the US population, these changes are associated with a decrease in renal function, which is exhibited by a significant proportion of the population. However, since many normal adults have intact renal function, and longitudinal studies show that some persons maintain normal renal function with age, the link between OS, inflammation, and renal decline is not clear. In aging mice, greater oxidant intake is associated with increased age-related CKD and mortality, which suggests that interventions that reduce OS and inflammation may be beneficial for older individuals. Both OS and inflammation can be readily lowered in normal subjects and patients with CKD stage 3-4 by a simple dietary modification that lowers intake and results in reduced serum and tissue levels of advanced glycation end products. Diabetic patients, including those with microalbuminuria, have a decreased ability to metabolize and excrete oxidants prior to observable changes in serum creatinine. Thus, OS and inflammation may occur in the diabetic kidney at an early time. We review the evidence that oxidants in the diet directly lead to increased serum levels of OS and inflammatory mediators in normal aging and in CKD. We also discuss a simple dietary intervention that helps reduce OS and inflammation, an important and achievable therapeutic goal for patients with CKD and aging individuals with reduced renal function.

19820033
Protection against loss of innate defenses in adulthood by low advanced glycation end products (AGE) intake: role of the antiinflammatory AGE receptor-1.
Increased oxidant stress and inflammation (OS/infl) are linked to both aging-related diseases and advanced glycation end products (AGEs). Whereas AGE receptor-1 (AGER1) reduces OS/infl in animals, this has not been assessed in normal humans. The objectives of the study were to determine whether AGER1 correlates with AGEs and OS/infl and a reduction of dietary AGEs (dAGEs) lowers OS/infl in healthy adults and chronic kidney disease (CKD-3) patients. This study was cross-sectional with 2-yr follow-up studies of healthy adults and CKD-3 patients, a subset of which received a reduced AGE or regular diet. The study was conducted at general community and renal clinics. Participants included 325 healthy adults (18-45 and >60 yr old) and 66 CKD-3 patients. An isocaloric low-AGE (30-50% reduction) or regular diet was given to 40 healthy subjects for 4 months and to nine CKD-3 patients for 4 wk. Relationships between age, dAGEs, serum AGEs, peripheral mononuclear cell AGE-receptors, and OS/Infl before and after reduction of dAGE intake were measured. AGEs, oxidant stress, receptor for AGE, and TNFalpha were reduced in normal and CKD-3 patients after the low-AGE diet, independently of age. AGER1 levels in CKD-3 patients on the low-AGE diet resembled 18- to 45-yr-old normal subjects. Dietary, serum, and urine AGEs correlated positively with peripheral mononuclear cell AGER1 levels in healthy participants. AGER1 was suppressed in CKD-3 subjects, whereas receptor for AGE and TNFalpha were increased. Reduction of AGEs in normal diets may lower oxidant stress/inflammation and restore levels of AGER1, an antioxidant, in healthy and aging subjects and CKD-3 patients. AGE intake has implications for health outcomes and costs and warrants further testing.

19779136
Advanced glycation end product receptor-1 transgenic mice are resistant to inflammation, oxidative stress, and post-injury intimal hyperplasia.
The high levels of oxidative stress (OS) and inflammation associated with cardiovascular disease are linked to pro-oxidants such as advanced glycation end products (AGEs). AGEs interact with multiple receptors, including receptor 1 (AGER1), which promotes AGE removal and blocks OS and inflammation, and RAGE, which enhances inflammation. In this study, we evaluated metabolic and vascular changes in AGER1 transgenic mice (AGER1-tg) subjected to an atherogenic diet and arterial wire-injury. Both baseline and postatherogenic diet serum and tissue AGEs as well as plasma 8-isoprostane levels were lower in AGER1-tg mice than in wild-type mice. The levels of injected (125)I-AGE in tissues were decreased as well in AGER1-tg mice. After ingesting a high-fat diet, AGER1-tg mice had a normal glucose tolerance and only 7% were hyperglycemic, whereas 53% of wild-type mice had stable hyperglycemia. After wire-injury, intimal lesions in AGER1-tg mice were small, whereas wild-type mice had diffuse intimal hyperplasia, a high intima/media ratio, and inflammatory cell infiltrates. In addition, AGER1 staining, prominent in AGER1-tg mice, was attenuated in 30 to 40% of wild-type cells, although all cells were strongly positive for AGEs. Thus, AGER1 overexpression in mice reduces basal levels of AGEs and OS, enhances resistance to diet-induced hyperglycemia and OS, and protects against injury-induced arterial intimal hyperplasia and inflammation, providing protection against OS and inflammation induced by AGEs and high-fat diets in vivo.

19776174
Oxidative stress-induced JNK activation contributes to proinflammatory phenotype of aging diabetic mesangial cells.
Chronic inflammation and increased oxidative stress (OS) play an important role in diabetic nephropathy progression. Herein, we show that mesangial cells from streptozotocin-induced aging diabetic mice, a model of progressive diabetic nephropathy, exhibited increased OS and a proinflammatory phenotype characterized by elevated chemokines and ICAM-1 expression. This phenotypic change was consistent with the extensive inflammatory lesions present in aging diabetic kidneys and was not found in mesangial cells from old and young controls or young diabetic mice. Activation of the c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway was a likely contributor to the proinflammatory phenotype of aging diabetic mesangial cells since 1) phosphorylated JNK levels and JNK kinase activity were increased in these cells, 2) suppression of JNK significantly decreased monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) production in these cells, and 3) activation of JNK in normal mesangial cells induced inflammation. Elevated OS in aging diabetic mesangial cells may be a cause of JNK activation and inflammation, because antioxidant treatment decreased JNK phosphorylation and MCP-1 production. Additionally, decreased expression of mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 5 (MKP5) may also contribute to increased JNK and inflammation in aging diabetic mesangial cells since overexpression of MKP5 in these cells normalized phosphorylated JNK levels and reversed the proinflammatory phenotype. Moreover, knocking down of MKP5 expression in old control mesangial cells resulted in JNK activation and MCP-1 production, a phenotype seen in aging diabetic mesangial cells. Interestingly, MKP5 phosphatase activity was diminished by free radicals in vitro. Thus, OS may induce inflammation in mesangial cells by activating JNK through either a direct activation of JNK or indirectly by suppression of MKP5 activity. Proinflammatory phenotype of mesangial cells may contribute to chronic inflammatory lesions and disease progression of aging diabetic mice.

19246537
Advanced glycation end products inhibit glucose-stimulated insulin secretion through nitric oxide-dependent inhibition of cytochrome c oxidase and adenosine triphosphate synthesis.
Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are implicated in diabetic complications. However, their role in beta-cell dysfunction is less clear. In this study we examined the effects of AGEs on islet function in mice and in isolated islets. AGE-BSA or BSA was administered ip to normal mice twice a day for 2 wk. We showed that AGE-BSA-treated mice exhibited significantly higher glucose levels and lower insulin levels in response to glucose challenge than did BSA-treated mice, although there were no significant differences in insulin sensitivity and islet morphology between two groups. Glucose-stimulated insulin secretion by islets of the AGE-BSA-treated mice or AGE-BSA-treated normal islets was significantly lower than that by islets isolated from the BSA-treated mice or BSA-treated normal islets. Furthermore, AGE treatment of islet beta-cells inhibited ATP production, and glimepiride, a sulfonylurea derivative, restored glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Further investigation indicated that AGEs inhibited cytochrome c oxidase activity by inducing the expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). Blocking the formation of nitric oxide with an iNOS selective inhibitor aminoguanidine reversed the inhibitory effects of AGEs on ATP production and insulin secretion. We conclude that AGEs inhibit cytochrome c oxidase and ATP production, leading to the impairment of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion through iNOS-dependent nitric oxide production.

18448795
Advanced glycation end product homeostasis: exogenous oxidants and innate defenses.
Increased oxidative stress (OS) underlies many chronic diseases prevalent in aging. Data in humans confirm the hypothesis that advanced glycation end products (AGEs) and other oxidants derived from the diet may be major contributors to increased OS in normal adults as well as those with diabetes mellitus or kidney failure. Mice fed a diet with a lowered (approximately 50%) content of AGEs or a typical calorie-restricted (CR) diet, accumulated a smaller amount of AGEs, maintained normal levels of AGE receptor-1 (AGER1), and did not have increased oxidant stress or cardiac or kidney fibrosis with aging. However, the findings in mice fed a CR diet with an increased content of AGEs resembled those in mice fed a nonrestricted diet that had the usual higher content of AGEs. Thus, there was an inverse correlation between the dietary AGE content, the AGER1 to receptor for AGE (RAGE) ratio, OS, organ damage, and life span. In both humans and mice, there was an inverse correlation between the AGER1 to RAGE ratio and the levels of OS.

18256374
Endothelial dysfunction in patients with chronic kidney disease results from advanced glycation end products (AGE)-mediated inhibition of endothelial nitric oxide synthase through RAGE activation.
Advanced glycation end products, known pro-inflammatory and pro-oxidative compounds that accumulate in patients with chronic kidney disease, may play a major role in their high prevalence of endothelial dysfunction and subsequent cardiovascular disease. This study examined the association of advanced glycation end product accumulation with cellular receptor for advanced glycation end product expression and endothelial dysfunction as well as the mechanisms of this association in chronic kidney disease. A cross-sectional study was conducted of ambulatory patients without diabetes and with different stages of chronic kidney disease (n = 51), compared with gender- and age-matched healthy subjects. Fasting blood was obtained for measurement of advanced glycation end products and mRNA receptor for advanced glycation end product expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Endothelial reactivity was assessed by the microcirculatory response to local ischemia (postocclusive reactive hyperemia) and local hyperthermia (thermal hyperemia). Sera were pooled and passed through affinity columns to separate advanced glycation end product-rich fractions, which were incubated with human aortic endothelial cells, with or without blockade of receptor for advanced glycation end product, to measure their effect on endothelial nitric oxide synthase. Glomerular filtration rate correlated with serum advanced glycation end product, mRNA receptor for advanced glycation end product levels, postocclusive reactive hyperemia, and thermal hyperemia. Serum advanced glycation end product correlated with receptor for advanced glycation end product and inversely with postocclusive reactive hyperemia. Advanced glycation end product-rich fractions from chronic kidney disease sera suppressed endothelial nitric oxide synthase expression of human aortic endothelial cells compared with sera from healthy subjects, an effect abrogated by receptor for advanced glycation end product blockade. This study demonstrates for the first time an association of excess advanced glycation end product burden with increased peripheral blood mononuclear cell mRNA receptor for advanced glycation end product and in vivo endothelial dysfunction in patients with chronic kidney disease. Endothelial dysfunction in chronic kidney disease may be partly mediated by advanced glycation end product-induced inhibition of endothelial nitric oxide synthase through receptor for advanced glycation end product activation.

18032526
AGE-receptor-1 counteracts cellular oxidant stress induced by AGEs via negative regulation of p66shc-dependent FKHRL1 phosphorylation.
Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) promote reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation and oxidant stress (OS) in diabetes and aging-related diseases. AGE-induced OS is suppressed by AGER1, an AGE-receptor that counteracts receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mediated Shc/Ras signal activation, resulting in decreased OS. Akt, FKHRL1, and antioxidants; e.g., MnSOD, regulate OS. Serine phosphorylation of p66(shc) also promotes OS. We examined the effects of two defined AGEs N(epsilon)-carboxy-methyl-lysine (CML) and methyl-glyoxal derivatives (MG) on these cellular pathways and their functional relationship to AGER1 in human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293). Stimulation of HEK293 cells with either AGE compound increased phosphorylation of Akt and FKHRL1 by approximately threefold in a redox-dependent manner. The use of p66(shc) mutants showed that the AGE-induced effects required Ser-36 phosphorylation of p66(shc). AGE-induced phosphorylation of FKHRL1 led to a 70% downregulation of MnSOD, an effect partially blocked by a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor (LY-294002) and strongly inhibited by an antioxidant (N-acetylcysteine). These pro-oxidant responses were suppressed in AGER1 overexpressing cells and reappeared when AGER1 expression was reduced by small interfering RNA (siRNA). These studies point to a new pathway for the induction of OS by AGEs involving FKHRL1 inactivation and MnSOD suppression via Ser-36 phosphorylation of p66(shc) in human kidney cells. This represents a key mechanism by which AGER1 maintains cellular resistance against OS. Thus the decrease of AGER1 noted in aging and diabetes may further enhance OS and reduce innate antioxidant defenses.

17547841
Glycotoxins in the diet promote diabetes and diabetic complications.
Oxidant stress underlies diabetes and diabetic complications, including cardiovascular, renal, and retinal disease. Advanced glycation end products (AGEs), or glycotoxins, are a significant contributor to oxidant stress in diabetes. The diet is a major, unrecognized source of AGEs. Importantly, reduction of dietary AGEs decreases circulating inflammatory markers in both diabetic patients and prediabetic patients and complications in animal models. This beneficial outcome requires only a 50% decrease in dietary AGEs, making this necessary intervention practical and inexpensive.

17525257
Reduced oxidant stress and extended lifespan in mice exposed to a low glycotoxin diet: association with increased AGER1 expression.
Aging is accompanied by increased oxidative stress (OS) and accumulation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs). AGE formation in food is temperature-regulated, and ingestion of nutrients prepared with excess heat promotes AGE formation, OS, and cardiovascular disease in mice. We hypothesized that sustained exposure to the high levels of pro-oxidant AGEs in normal diets (Reg(AGE)) contributes to aging via an increased AGE load, which causes AGER1 dysregulation and depletion of anti-oxidant capacity, and that an isocaloric, but AGE-restricted (by 50%) diet (Low(AGE)), would decrease these abnormalities. C57BL6 male mice with a life-long exposure to a Low(AGE) diet had higher than baseline levels of tissue AGER1 and glutathione/oxidized glutathione and reduced plasma 8-isoprostanes and tissue RAGE and p66(shc) levels compared with mice pair-fed the regular (Reg(AGE)) diet. This was associated with a reduction in systemic AGE accumulation and amelioration of insulin resistance, albuminuria, and glomerulosclerosis. Moreover, lifespan was extended in Low(AGE) mice, compared with Reg(AGE) mice. Thus, OS-dependent metabolic and end organ dysfunction of aging may result from life-long exposure to high levels of glycoxidants that exceed AGER1 and anti-oxidant reserve capacity. A reduced AGE diet preserved these innate defenses, resulting in decreased tissue damage and a longer lifespan in mice.

17496238
Single oral challenge by advanced glycation end products acutely impairs endothelial function in diabetic and nondiabetic subjects.
The current study was designed to test the acute effects of dietary advanced glycation end products (AGEs) on endothelial function of diabetic and nondiabetic subjects. Flow-mediated dilation (FMD) of the brachial artery and serum levels of AGEs, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1), vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1), and glucose were assessed before and after a single oral AGE challenge (approximately 1.8 x 10(6) AGE units) in 44 diabetic and 10 nondiabetic subjects. The diabetic patients had higher baseline levels of serum AGEs (P = 0.020), PAI-1 (NS), and VCAM-1 (P = 0.033) and lower baseline values of FMD compared with nondiabetic subjects (P = 0.032). Ninety minutes after a single oral AGE challenge, serum AGEs and PAI-1 levels increased and FMD decreased significantly in both healthy subjects (AGEs: 7.2 +/- 0.5 to 9.3 +/- 1 units/ml, P = 0.014; PAI-1: 5.4 +/- 0.4 to 6.8 +/- 0.4 ng/ml, P = 0.007; and FMD: 9.9 +/- 0.7 to 7.4 +/- 0.9%, P = 0.019) and diabetic subjects (AGEs: 10.5 +/- 0.7 to 14.2 +/- 1 units/ml, P = 0.020; PAI-1: 6.5 +/- 1 to 10 +/- 2 ng/ml, P = 0.030; and FMD: 5.4 +/- 0.4 to 4.0 +/- 0.3%, P = 0.032). Serum glucose and VCAM-1 levels remained unchanged. Significant increases in serum AGEs can occur together with altered clinical measures of endothelial function in diabetic and nondiabetic subjects after a single modest AGE-rich beverage. Thus, repeated or chronic exposure to high AGE diets could over time lead to and/or accelerate vascular disease.

17452738
Circulating glycotoxins and dietary advanced glycation endproducts: two links to inflammatory response, oxidative stress, and aging.
Oxidative stress (OS) and inflammatory mediators increase with aging. The levels of advanced glycation endproducts (AGEs), prooxidant factors linked to chronic diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and renal disease, also increase with aging. AGEs are readily derived from heat-treated foods. We propose that the excess consumption of certain AGEs via the diet enhances OS and inflammatory responses in healthy adults, especially in elderly persons. We examined 172 young (<45 years old) and older (>60 years old) healthy individuals to determine whether the concentration of specific serum AGEs (N(epsilon)-carboxymethyl-lysine [CML] or methylglyoxal [MG] derivatives) were higher in older compared to younger persons and whether, independent of age, they correlated with the intake of dietary AGEs, as well as with circulating markers of OS and inflammation. Body weight, body mass index (BMI), and serum AGE, CML, and MG derivatives were higher in older participants, independent of gender. Serum CML correlated with levels of 8-isoprostanes (r = 0.448, p =.0001) as well as with Homeostasis Model Assessment index (HOMA), an index of insulin resistance (r = 0.247, p =.044). The consumption of dietary AGEs, but not of calories, correlated independently with circulating AGEs (CML: r = 0.415, p =.0001 and MG: r = 0.282, p =.002) as well as with high sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) (r = 0.200, p =.042). Circulating indicators of AGEs (CML and MG derivatives), although elevated in older participants, correlate with indicators of inflammation and OS across all ages. Indicators of both AGEs and OS are directly influenced by the intake of dietary AGEs, independent of age or energy intake. Thus, reduced consumption of these oxidants may prove a safe economic policy to prevent age-related diseases, especially in an aging population.

