21056041
Notch-1 signaling regulates intestinal epithelial barrier function, through interaction with CD4+ T cells, in mice and humans.
Interactions between lymphocytes and intestinal epithelial cells occur in the subepithelial space of the gastrointestinal tract. Normal human lamina propria lymphocytes (LPLs) induce differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells. The absence of LPLs in mice, such as in RAG1(-/-) mice, results in defects in epithelial cell differentiation. We investigated the role of lymphoepithelial interactions in epithelial differentiation and barrier function. We used adoptive transfer to determine if CD4(+) T cells (CD4(+)CD62L(+)CD45Rb(Hi) and/or CD4(+)CD62L(+)CD45Rb(Lo)) could overcome permeability defect (quantified in Ussing chambers). Immunofluorescence staining was performed to determine expression of cleaved Notch-1, villin, and claudin 5 in colon samples from mice and humans. Caco-2 cells were infected with a lentivirus containing a specific Notch-1 or scrambled short hairpin RNA sequence. Tight junction assembly was analyzed by immunoblot and immunofluorescence analyses, and transepithelial resistance was monitored. Expression of cleaved Notch-1, villin, or claudin 5 was not detected in RAG1(-/-) colonocytes; their loss correlated with increased intestinal permeability. Transfer of CD45Rb(Hi) and/or CD45Rb(Lo) cells into RAG1(-/-) mice induced expression of cleaved Notch, villin, and claudin 5 in colonocytes and significantly reduced the permeability of the distal colon. Loss of Notch-1 expression in Caco-2 cells correlated with decreased transepithelial resistance and dysregulated expression and localization of tight junction proteins. Levels of cleaved Notch-1 were increased in colonic epithelium of patients with Crohn's disease. LPLs promote mucosal barrier function, which is associated with activation of the Notch-1 signaling pathway. LPLs maintain intestinal homeostasis by inducing intestinal epithelial cell differentiation, polarization, and barrier function.

19538323
Lymphoepithelial interactions: a new paradigm.
Intestinal lymphoepithelial interactions occur in the epithelium and subepithelial space. We asked whether or not lamina propria lymphocytes (LPL) could promote intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) differentiation. In contrast to epithelial cells in UC mucosa, which do not differentiate because of rapid turnover, differentiation of epithelial cells in CD mucosa occurs in the crypts. This dysregulation is driven by alterations in the crosstalk between CD LPL and CD IECs, leading to an acceleration of their differentiation. This alteration seems to involve the transcription factor CDX2 via the activation of the PI3K and MAPK pathways and provides new insights into the dysfunction of the epithelial barrier in CD versus UC. The absence of lymphocytes in Rag1-deficient mice was associated with a defect in colonic IEC differentiation, restored by co-transfer of naïve and regulatory T cells. Interestingly, the transfer of naïve T cells alone induced an acceleration of IEC differentiation similar to what was seen in the colonic mucosa of CD patients. Thus, there is a crosstalk between LPL and IECs that is altered in CD, which leads to an absorptive phenotype of IEC differentiation.

18045591
Epithelial: lamina propria lymphocyte interactions promote epithelial cell differentiation.
Intestinal lymphoepithelial interactions occur in the epithelium and the subepithelial space. We asked whether normal, Crohn's disease (CD), or ulcerative colitis (UC) lamina propria lymphocytes (LPL) could promote intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) growth and differentiation. T84 cells were cocultured with isolated LPL. IECs were then lysed and subjected to measurement of intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP) activity; Western blot analysis for MAPK and Akt activation; and real-time polymerase chain reaction to assess caudal-related homeoprotein 2 (CDX2) messenger RNA (mRNA) levels. Tissue sections were immunostained for evidence of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) activation, CDX2, and IAP; and CDX2 mRNA expression was assessed in human colonic biopsy specimens. IAP activity was increased in T84 cells cocultured for 8 days with normal LPL (P < .05) and even greater with CD LPL (P < .001). Crypt IECs in active CD mucosa expressed IAP ex vivo. Phospho-MAPK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2, p38, and c-Jun-N-terminal kinase) and phospho-Akt were seen as early as 30 minutes after coculture. MAPK activation was greatest in T84 cells cocultured with CD LPL. There was a specific increase in Phospho-p38 MAPK and Phospho-Akt staining in the nuclei of crypt IECs in active vs inactive CD, normal mucosa, and UC mucosa. CDX2 mRNA expression was increased in CD LPL cocultured T84 cells, which did not correlate with CDX2 protein localization ex vivo. There is cross talk between LPL and IECs, which leads to IEC differentiation. The differentiation is accelerated in CD mucosa.

17291293
Epithelia: lymphocyte interactions in the gut.
The mucosal immune system is governed by a unique set of rules and regulations. The local microenvironment dictates the necessity for these differences. The intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) sits at the interface between an antigen-rich lumen and a lymphocyte-rich lamina propria (LP). The cross talk that occurs between these compartments serves to maintain intestinal homeostasis. IECs have the capacity to talk to LP lymphocytes, activating populations of unique regulatory T cells. These cells have the capacity to talk back to the epithelium, influencing epithelial cell growth and differentiation. This review looks at this cross talk and places it in the context of mucosal immunoregulation.

18588554
Pasteurization of milk proteins promotes allergic sensitization by enhancing uptake through Peyer's patches.
The underlying mechanisms responsible for allergic sensitization to food proteins remain elusive. To investigate the intrinsic properties (as well as the effect of pasteurization) of the milk proteins alpha-lactalbumin, beta-lactoglobulin and casein that promote the induction of milk allergy. Alteration of structure and immune-reactivity of native and pasteurized proteins was assessed by gel filtration and ELISA. Uptake of these proteins was compared in vitro and in vivo. The biological effect was assessed by orally sensitizing C3H/HeJ mice with milk proteins followed by a graded oral challenge. Required dose to induce anaphylaxis, symptoms and mean body temperature was recorded. Antigen-specific antibodies and cytokine production by splenocytes were analyzed. Soluble beta-lactoglobulin and alpha-lactalbumin but not insoluble casein were readily transcytosed through enterocytes in vitro and in vivo. Pasteurization caused aggregation of beta-lactoglobulin and alpha-lactalbumin inhibiting uptake by intestinal epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, aggregation redirected uptake to Peyer's patches, which promoted significantly higher Th2-associated antibody and cytokine production in mice than their native counterparts. Despite this only the soluble forms of beta-lactoglobulin and alpha-lactalbumin elicited anaphylaxis (following priming) when allergens were administered orally. Aggregated beta-lactoglobulin and alpha-lactalbumin as well as casein required systemic administration to induce anaphylaxis. These results indicate that triggering of an anaphylactic response requires two phases (1) sensitization by aggregates through Peyer's patches and (2) efficient transfer of soluble protein across the epithelial barrier. As the majority of common food allergens tend to form aggregates, this may be of clinical importance.

