21606082
Synergistic effect of liver X receptor activation and simvastatin on plaque regression and stabilization: an magnetic resonance imaging study in a model of advanced atherosclerosis.
Aims The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of liver X receptors (LXRs)-? preferential activation by LXR-623 (WAY-252623), a novel LXRs agonist, on plaque progression/regression in a rabbit model of advanced atherosclerosis. Methods and results Advanced atherosclerosis was induced in New Zealand White Rabbits (n= 41). At the end of atherosclerosis induction, animals underwent a baseline magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and were randomized to receive LXR-623 (1.5, 5, or 15 mg/kg/day), simvastatin (5 mg/kg/day), or placebo. The combination of LXR-1.5/simvastatin was also tested. After a final MRI, animals were euthanized and their aortas processed for further analysis. Simvastatin significantly reduced lesion progression (-25%; P< 0.01) in comparison with the placebo group. A similar effect was observed in the LXR-1.5 and -5 groups. A significant regression (16.5%; P< 0.01) of existing atherosclerosis was observed in the LXR-1.5/simvastatin group. Histological and molecular analysis showed plaque stabilization in the animals treated with the LXR-1.5 and -5, and LXR-1.5/simvastatin. The effects of LXR-623 were observed in the presence of a non-significant effect on total-cholesterol, low-density lipoproteins-cholesterol, and triglyceride levels. Conclusion The results of the present study show that LXR-623 significantly reduces the progression of atherosclerosis and induces plaque regression in combination with simvastatin. These observations could drive future development of novel anti-atherosclerotic therapeutic approaches.

21164355
Adeno-associated virus serotype 8 ApoA-I gene transfer reduces progression of atherosclerosis in ApoE-KO mice: comparison of intramuscular and intravenous administration.
Apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I)/high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-raising treatments are effective antiatherosclerotic strategies. We have compared the antiatherogenic effects of human ApoA-I (hApoA-I) overexpression by intraportal and intramuscular gene transfer in atherosclerotic ApoE-knockout mice. Atherosclerotic lesions were induced by atherogenic diet. After atherosclerosis induction, a group of animals was killed and served as atherosclerosis baseline-control group. The remaining animals were randomized into the following groups: (1) atherosclerosis-progression-control, (2) intraportal/vector administration, and (3) intramuscular/vector administration. Aortas and hearts were processed for atherosclerotic quantification by en face Sudan IV and Oil Red-O, respectively. Liver and muscle specimens were processed for protein/gene expression analysis. A sustained increase in hApoA-I/HDL plasma levels was observed in both transduced groups. hApoA-I overexpression abolished plaque progression versus progression-control group. hApoA-I overexpression significantly reduced lesion macrophage, feature indicative of plaque stabilization. Scavenger receptor class-B type I (SR-BI), but not ATP-binding cassette, sub-family A (ABCA), member 1 (ABCA-1), was significantly upregulated in treated groups versus progression-controls. The results of this study show a similar effect of hApoA-I/HDL overexpression on plaque progression/stabilization by 2 different routes of administration. Our results showing similar effects using either intramuscular administration and intraportal route of administration may have significant clinical implications, given the reduced medical risk to patient and cost of intramuscular injections.

21163454
Contrast-enhanced ultrasound imaging detects intraplaque neovascularization in an experimental model of atherosclerosis.
The aims of this study were to investigate the feasibility of contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEU) imaging for in vivo visualization of intraplaque neovascularization and to correlate the in vivo observations with histological assessment of neovessel density and plaque composition in an experimental animal model of advanced atherosclerosis. Recent evidence has linked plaque angiogenesis with enhanced atherosclerotic plaque progression and vulnerability. Increased neovascularization has been detected in ruptured human lesions and is associated with clinical manifestations of plaque rupture. Advanced aortic atherosclerosis was induced in New Zealand white rabbits (n = 21; high cholesterol-rich diet/double-balloon aortic denudation). Animals underwent standard and CEU imaging at the end of the atherosclerosis induction period. Six age-matched animals served as control subjects. Within 24 h, animals were euthanized and aortas processed for histopathological evaluation of plaque composition and neovascularization. Imaged plaques were classified as contrast enhanced (CE) positive or CE negative, according to their contrast enhancement on CEU imaging. The lesions were also classified as class III (predominantly echogenic) or class II (predominantly echolucent), according to their echogenicity on non-CEU images. No contrast enhancement was observed in control animals. In atherosclerotic animals, class III lesions showed an increased contrast enhancement compared with class II lesions and CE-positive lesions showed greater neovascularization than CE-negative plaques. Macrophage density, but not smooth muscle cell density, was significantly higher in CE-positive than CE-negative lesions. As expected, class III lesions showed increased macrophage density compared with class II plaques. Intraplaque neovessel density at histology was significantly higher in CE-positive than in CE-negative lesions. Class III plaques showed a significantly higher neovessel density compared with class II lesions. A strong correlation between intraplaque neovessels and contrast enhancement was found. CEU imaging is a feasible noninvasive imaging modality to evaluate intraplaque neovascularization. A noninvasive imaging modality to assess lesion neovascularization could be of great importance to identify vascularized, "high-risk" lesions before rupture.

20886180
Prostanoid and TP-receptors in atherothrombosis: is there a role for their antagonism?
Atherosclerosis and its clinical manifestations (i.e. myocardial infarction, stroke) are major causes of mortality and morbidity in Western countries. Endothelial dysfunction is considered the first step in the cascade leading up to coronary events. Increasing evidence suggests that direct inhibition of thromboxane A2/prostaglandin (TP)-receptors may not only have anti-platelet effects but also impact endothelial dysfunction as well as inflammatory component of atherosclerosis. While TP-receptor involvement in platelet function has received the greatest attention, more recent findings support the critical role of TP-receptor in other pathophysiological aspects of atherothrombosis. Prostanoids (i.e. TxA2, F2-isoprostanes, prostaglandins endoperoxides PGG2/PGH2) are known to promote the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis, not only via platelet activation, but through leukocyte-endothelial interactions and vasoconstriction. Dysfunctional endothelium, characterised by increased COX-activity, releases prostanoids that promote endothelial exposure to adhesion molecules and induce smooth muscle cell contraction. Plaque macrophages synthesise PGH2/PGG2 via COX-2; these potent prostanoids can trigger platelet activation and aggregation despite COX-1 inhibition by aspirin. TP-receptor inhibition has been reported to exert anti-atherosclerotic effects in pre-clinical model of disease. Reduction of plaque burden was associated with plaque stabilisation documented by the reduction in the content of macrophages, apoptotic cells, MMPs and endothelin-1, and the increase in smooth muscle cells content. TP-receptor blockade might have an anti-atherosclerotic and plaque stabilisation effect. The possibility of combining anti-platelet activity with an anti-atherosclerotic effect via selective TP-receptor inhibitors could have important implications especially in clinical conditions associated with increased production of prostanoids, such as diabetes.

20864196
Carvedilol administration in acute myocardial infarction results in stronger inhibition of early markers of left ventricular remodeling than metoprolol.
BACKGROUND: The structural secuelae of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is mostly dictated by left ventricular (LV) remodelling, leading to heart failure. Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) play a critical role in LV remodelling. ?-blockers are first line therapy for AMI and heart failure; however, the mechanisms responsible for their benefits remain poorly understood. Different ?-blocker agents have been shown to exert beneficial activities both in AMI and heart failure, however, their role in early remodelling after ischemia/reperfusion is to be fully elucidated. We sought to compare the effect of 2 of the most prescribed ?-blocker agents in early markers of LV remodelling after AMI. METHODS: A reperfused AMI was induced in Yorshire pigs, being randomized to early intravenous carvedilol, metoprolol or placebo. Twenty-four hours after reperfusion markers of early remodelling were addressed in the LV. RESULTS: The early administration of both ?-blockers is able to significantly reduce macrophage infiltration as well as the expression and activity of MCP-1 and MMP-2 compared to placebo. The effects of carvedilol were much stronger than those of metoprolol. Conversely, carvedilol upregulated the expression TIMP-2 to a greater extent than metoprolol. CONCLUSIONS: In an AMI model closely mimicking human pathophysiology, the early administration of carvedilol reduced the expression of markers associated with early LV remodelling to greater extent than metoprolol. These findings may explain the superior clinical benefits exerted by carvedilol in heart failure.

20304838
Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano rapidly reverses aortic valve stenosis and decreases leaflet inflammation in an experimental rabbit model.
Aortic stenosis (AS) is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano (rApoA-I(M)) induces atherosclerotic plaque regression. The aims of this study were to determine the effects of rApoA-I(M) on experimental aortic valve degeneration and its mechanisms of action. New Zealand White rabbits (n = 20) were fed an atherogenic diet for 9 months and then randomized to either placebo or rApoA-I(M). Echocardiography was used to assess the effect of the treatments on AS. Porcine aortic valve myofibroblasts (PAVMF) treated with oxidized low-density lipoprotein served to define the effects of rApoA-I(M) on the expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB, and alkaline phosphatase (AP). Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano increased aortic valve area (AVA) by 32% (0.25 +/- 0.05 to 0.34 +/- 0.07 cm(2), P < 0.01); whereas AVA remained unchanged in the placebo group (0.24 +/- 0.05 to 0.26 +/- 0.04 cm(2), P = 0.58). Histopathological examination of aortic valves in the rApoA-I(M) animals showed significantly less leaflet thickening, inflammation, and calcification vs. the placebo group. In vitro, rApoA-I(M) significantly inhibited MCP-1, AP, and NF-kappaB and decreased intracellular cholesterol content in PAVMF. Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano treatment reverses AS in this experimental rabbit model. The beneficial effects seem to be mediated by enhanced cholesterol removal and by reduced inflammation and calcification.

20097703
Anxiety is a better predictor of platelet reactivity in coronary artery disease patients than depression.
Depression and anxiety are linked to coronary events but the mechanism(s) remains unclear. We investigated the associations of depression and anxiety with serotonin-mediated platelet hyperactivity in coronary artery disease (CAD) patients in a cross-sectional study. Three months after an acute coronary event, stable CAD patients (n = 83) on aspirin and clopidogrel were evaluated for depression (beck depression inventory) and anxiety (hospital anxiety and depression scale), and their platelet reactivity was measured (optical aggregometry and flow cytometric fibrinogen binding in response to adenosine diphosphate (ADP = 5 microM) and two serotonin + epinephrine doses [5HT:E (L) = 4 microM + 4 microM and 5HT:E (H) = 10 microM + 4 microM]. Platelet reactivity was significantly higher in depressed and anxious than in depressed only or non-depressed-and-non-anxious patients. Aggregation (mean +/- SE) was 41.9 +/- 2.6% vs. 32.2 +/- 2.6% vs. 30.4 +/- 3.7% with 5HT:E (L) and 46.9 +/- 2.7% vs. 35.6 +/- 2.7% vs. 31.7 +/- 3.8% with 5HT:E (H) (P < 0.05 for both). Differences in ADP aggregations were not significant, perhaps because of clopidogrel therapy. Flow cytometry findings were similar. In a multivariate linear regression model adjusted for age, body mass index, and each other, anxiety symptoms independently predicted all 5HT:E-mediated platelet reactivity measures, whereas depression predicted none. Anxiety is associated with elevated serotonin-mediated platelet reactivity in stable CAD patients and symptoms of anxiety show strong, independent correlations with platelet function.

20062928
A new oral antiplatelet agent with potent antithrombotic properties: comparison of DZ-697b with clopidogrel a randomised phase I study.
DZ-697b is a new orally active antiplatelet agent that inhibits collagen and ristocetin-mediated platelet activation. It does not require metabolisation to generate its active compound and has a safer profile than clopidogrel in pre-clinical studies. We compared the antithrombotic effects and bleeding time prolongations of three DZ-697b doses with clopidogrel 300 mg. In a four-treatment, three-period, crossover-design, 20 healthy subjects (31 + or - 7 years, 85% males) were randomised to single oral doses of DZ-697b (60, 120 and 360 mg), and clopidogrel (300 mg) (n=15 in each treatment with crossing-over). Antithrombotic effects were assessed by measuring six-hour post-dose changes from baseline in thrombus size in the Badimon chamber and platelet adhesion using Diamed Impact-R platelet function assay. Bleeding times were also measured pre-dose and at six hours post-dose. DZ-697b caused dose-dependent reductions in thrombus size at both high- and low-shear rates (mean reductions at 60, 120 and 360 mg doses of: 13.0%, 18.7%, 26.4% and 11.4%, 12.7%, 22.1% respectively, p<0.05 for all). Effect of clopidogrel (reductions of 18.7% and 11.0% respectively, p<0.05 for both) was closest to DZ-697b 120 mg. Reductions in platelet adhesion were also dose-dependent. Bleeding time ratio from baseline were shorter with DZ-697b versus clopidogrel (1.3, 1.4 and 1.5 versus 1.9, p<0.05 for all). The oral agent DZ-697b shows potent, dose-dependent, antithrombotic effects that are comparable to 300 mg clopidogrel at the 120 mg dose. Despite having equal or greater antiplatelet potency than 300 mg clopidogrel, bleeding time prolongations are significantly shorter with DZ-697b.

19913314
The cardioprotection granted by metoprolol is restricted to its administration prior to coronary reperfusion.
Myocardial infarct size is a strong predictor of cardiovascular events. Intravenous metoprolol before coronary reperfusion has been shown to reduce infarct size; however, it is unknown whether oral metoprolol initiated early after reperfusion, as clinical guidelines recommend, is similarly cardioprotective. We compared the extent of myocardial salvage associated with intravenous pre-reperfusion-metoprolol administration in comparison with oral post-reperfusion-metoprolol or placebo. We also studied the effect on suspected markers of reperfusion injury. Thirty Yorkshire-pigs underwent a reperfused myocardial infarction, being randomized to pre-reperfusion-metoprolol, post-reperfusion-metoprolol or placebo. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was performed in eighteen pigs at day 3 for the quantification of salvaged myocardium. The amounts of at-risk and infarcted myocardium were quantified using T2-weighted and post-contrast delayed enhancement imaging, respectively. Twelve animals were sacrificed after 24h for reperfusion injury analysis. The pre-reperfusion-metoprolol group had significantly larger salvaged myocardium than the post-reperfusion-metoprolol or the placebo groups (31 ± 4%, 13 ± 6%, and 7 ± 3% of myocardium at-risk respectively). Post-mortem analyses suggest lesser myocardial reperfusion injury in the pre-reperfusion-metoprolol in comparison with the other 2 groups (lower neutrophil infiltration, decreased myocardial apoptosis, and higher activation of the salvage-kinase phospho-Akt). Salvaged myocardium and reperfusion injury pair wise comparisons proved there were significant differences between the pre-reperfusion-metoprolol and the other 2 groups, but not among the latter two. The intravenous administration of metoprolol before coronary reperfusion results in larger myocardial salvage than its oral administration initiated early after reperfusion. If confirmed in the clinical setting, the timing and route of ?-blocker initiation could be revisited.

19845440
Platelet reactivity and nonresponse to dual antiplatelet therapy: a review.
Clopidogrel is a second-generation thienopyridine that irreversibly inhibits the P2Y(12) adenosine diphosphate (ADP) receptor on platelets, preventing platelet aggregation. As early as 2003, researchers have observed inter-patient variability in response to clopidogrel, leading to a multitude of studies investigating the phenomenon of "clopidogrel resistance," due to the possible link between clopidogrel resistance and in-stent thrombosis. However, due to differences in study methodology and the lack of a clear definition, there is confusion about what it means and its clinical implications. Literature searches were performed using the Web of Science Database. Keywords used to search for relevant literature included clopidogrel resistance. While several studies have shown associations between high platelet reactivity and a high incidence of adverse outcomes, the optimal level of platelet inhibition is unknown. Regardless of the term used to describe high platelet reactivity after treatment, evidence shows that this leads to adverse clinical outcomes. Future goals for research should be aimed at developing a standard method of measuring platelet function and investigating determinants of high platelet reactivity. Alternative treatment options for patients with high platelet reactivity in the face of dual antiplatelet therapy are currently being investigated.

19701094
Safe and sustained overexpression of functional apolipoprotein A-I/high-density lipoprotein in apolipoprotein A-I-null mice by muscular adeno-associated viral serotype 8 vector gene transfer.
High levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) have protective effects against atherosclerosis and cardiovascular diseases. The postulated mechanism of action for these benefits is an enhanced reverse cholesterol transport. Apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I) is the major protein of HDL. The clinical benefits of raising ApoA-I/HDL have been clearly established by clinical and epidemiological studies. Despite these observations, there are not very effective pharmacological means for raising HDL. ApoA-I gene delivery by viral vectors seems a promising strategy to raise ApoA-I/HDL levels. Sustained gene expression in animals and humans has been attained using adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors. The aim of the present study was to determine the efficiency, safety, and biological activity of human ApoA-I intramuscularly delivered using an AAV vector in mice. AAV serotype 8 vectors encoding for human ApoA-I transgene were administered intraportally and intramuscularly in ApoA-I- deficient animals. ApoA-I levels were measured every 2 weeks post administration. The effectiveness of the generated HDL was tested in vitro in cholesterol-loaded macrophages. The administration of the vectors resulted in a significant and sustained increase in ApoA-I and HDL plasma levels for up to 16 weeks at similar extent by both routes of administration. Activity of the generated HDL in removal of cholesterol from cholesterol-loaded macrophages was similar in both groups. Our data suggest that intramuscular AAV8-mediated gene transfer of human ApoA-I results in a significant and maintained increase in ApoA-I and functional HDL.

19342832
Genesis and dynamics of atherosclerotic lesions: implications for early detection.
Atherosclerosis is a diffuse pathological process characterized by the deposition of lipid and other blood-borne material within the arterial wall of almost all vascular territories. Cholesterol accumulation plays a central role in atherogenesis. It is the result of an imbalance between cholesterol influx and efflux. The disease progresses silently with focal clinical manifestation due to plaque rupture with superimposed thrombus: atherothrombosis. It has been shown that the atherosclerotic plaque composition rather than the degree of arterial stenosis can be the determinant of rupture. This has led to the search for new imaging techniques that can provide information about plaque composition. Ultrasound measurements of carotid and aortic wall thickness are an accurate 'noninvasive' technique that permits correlation with clinical events. Magnetic resonance imaging can evaluate in detail the arterial anatomy of almost all vascular territories. Multidetector computed tomography recently emerged for measuring luminal stenosis, coronary calcium, and even the extent of non-calcified coronary plaque volume. Next future is the molecular imaging based on the knowledge of molecular mechanisms involved in the genesis and progression of atherosclerotic lesions and the contrast agent able to identify different molecules and/or cells in the target zone.

19120689
Up-regulation of reverse cholesterol transport key players and rescue from global inflammation by ApoA-I(Milano).
Recombinant-ApoA-I(M) (rApoA-I(M)) administration has been shown to regress and stabilize atherosclerotic plaques. However, the mechanisms responsible for these beneficial effects are not fully understood. The aims of the present study were to define whether the benefits of rApoA-I(M) treatment were mediated via an enhanced reverse cholesterol transport (RCT) and/or anti-inflammation-related mechanisms. Advanced aortic lesions were induced in New Zealand White rabbits (n= 16). Animals were randomized to placebo or rApoA-I(M) (rApoA-I(M)/phospholipids; ETC-216), two infusions 4 days apart. Four days after last dose, aortas and livers were processed for cholesterol content, expression of RCT-related receptors (ATP-binding cassette A-1 [ABCA-1] and scavenger receptor BI [SR-BI]), and inflammation-related markers (inducible nitric oxide synthase [iNOS] and capase-3). Oxidative stress was assessed in the vessel wall and in plasma. rApoA-I(M) administration resulted in a significant reduction in the hepatic and aortic cholesterol content without differences in plasma levels. This effect was associated with an up-regulation of vessel wall ABCA-1, as well as a hepatic and arterial-wall SR-BI up-regulation. Systemic and atherosclerotic-plaque inflammation markers were significantly reduced by the rApoA-I(M) administration, as demonstrated by a reduction in circulating oxidative stress markers and prostaglandin F1-alpha levels, and the down-regulation of the iNOS and caspase 3 in the aortic lesions. rApoA-IM up-regulated the ABCA-1 and SR-BI levels to a greater extent than the wild-type form of apoA-I in in vitro studies done with lipid-rich macrophages. Our data suggest that rApoA-I(M) administration enhances RCT and induces a 'rescue' from the global inflammatory status associated with atherosclerotic disease. The Milano form of apoA-I seems to be more efficient in RCT than the apoA-I wild-type.

18979182
In vivo non-invasive serial monitoring of FDG-PET progression and regression in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis.
We investigated the ability of fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG PET) imaging to serially monitor macrophage content in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis was induced in rabbits (n = 8) by a combination of atherogenic diet and balloon denudation of the aorta. At the end of nine months, the rabbits were randomized to a further six months of the same atherogenic diet (progression group) or normal diet (regression group). In vivo uptake of FDG by the thoracic aorta was measured using aortic uptake-to-blood radioactivity ratios at the start and end of the randomized period. A significant increase in FDG uptake of the progression group after continued cholesterol feeding (aortic uptake-to-blood radioactivity: 0.57 +/- 0.02 to 0.68 +/- 0.02, P = 0.001), and a corresponding fall in FDG uptake of the regression group after returning to a normal chow diet (aortic uptake-to-blood radioactivity ratios: 0.67 +/- 0.02 to 0.53 +/- 0.02, P < 0.0001). FDG PET can quantify in vivo macrophage content and serially monitor changes in FDG activity in this rabbit model.

18547543
HDL-cholesterol: is it really good? Differences between apoA-I and HDL.
Since the very first report showing the regression of established atherosclerotic lesions by means of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) plasma fraction, much information has been generated about the protective role of HDL-C in atherosclerosis. Nonetheless, this positive point of view about HDL has been nearly surpassed since modern informations concerning torcetrapib have appeared. Disappointment was palpable when its pivotal morbidity-and-mortality clinical trial, ILLUMINATE, was abruptly stopped due to excess mortality amongst the group randomized to receive torcetrapib. In this work we will try to put things in perspective. Lowering low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels with statins is a proven strategy for reducing the cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk. Despite the impressive benefits of statins, there remain a significant proportion of treated patients in which cardiovascular events are not prevented. Low HDL-C levels are an important independent risk factor for CVD. There is a need to develop suitable therapies to reduce this residual risk through HDL-C related mechanisms. Therefore, we will first review HDL-C pathways and we will subsequently state the new pharmacological approaches to HDL-C metabolism.

18466906
Quantification of serial changes in plaque burden using multi-detector computed tomography in experimental atherosclerosis.
Assessment of changes in plaque volume is increasingly used as a surrogate-endpoint in clinical trials testing the efficacy of anti-atherosclerotic interventions. Multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT) can detect and quantify non-calcified atherosclerotic plaques, but its ability to monitor changes in plaque volume has not yet been tested. We sought to test the ability of MDCT to detect and quantify serial changes in atheroma burden in comparison with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Rabbits (n=12) with experimentally induced abdominal atherosclerosis were randomized to receive a plaque-regressing agent (recombinant apoA-I(Milano), n=8) or placebo (n=4). All animals underwent two 64-slice MDCT angiography and MRI studies (pre- and post-treatment). The primary endpoint was the change in plaque burden (defined as vessel wall volume in the 5cm distal to the left renal artery) between pre- and post-treatment MDCT in comparison with MRI. MDCT detected a significant decrease in plaque burden caused by recombinant apoA-I(Milano) (464 [423-535] to 405 [363-435]mm(3), p=0.03) that was confirmed by MRI (324 [286-412] to 298 [282-399]mm(3), p=0.03). No significant effect was noted in the placebo group either by MDCT or MRI. There were strong correlations between both modalities for the quantification of plaque burden (r=0.750, p<0.001) and change in plaque burden (r=0.657, p=0.020). MDCT overestimated plaque burden compared to MRI. On MDCT, the mean interobserver variability for plaque burden was 2.5+/-0.4%. In an animal model of atherosclerosis, MDCT accurately documented serial changes in aortic plaque burden, demonstrating good correlation and agreement with MRI-derived measurements and low interobserver variability.

18367192
Selective estrogen receptor modulation influences atherosclerotic plaque composition in a rabbit menopause model.
Osteoporosis trials suggest raloxifene decreased cardiovascular events in women with pre-existing atherosclerosis. We assessed the hypothesis that selective estrogen receptor modulation induces plaque stability in "menopausal" animals. Atherosclerosis was induced in 42 ovariectomized New Zealand white rabbits by cholesterol feeding and mechanical injury. Animals were imaged by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for baseline atherosclerosis, and randomized to control (OVX (ovariectomized control group), n=12), raloxifene 35-60 mg/kg/day by diet admixture (RLX (raloxifene therapy group), n=24), or immediate sacrifice (n=6) for immunohistopathologic correlation of MRI. Six months later, rabbits underwent repeat MRI then sacrifice for micro-computed tomography (microCT) and molecular analysis. Unlike OVX, RLX reduced atheroma volume. Analysis for lesion inflammation revealed reductions in COX-2 (cyclooxygenase-2), MMP-1 (matrix metalloproteinase-1), MCP-1 (monocyte chemoattractant protein-1) expression and macrophage infiltration in RLX versus OVX with concomitant upregulation of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha). microCT showed similar total vascular calcification between groups, but calcifications in RLX were less nodular with better radial organization (mean calcific arc angle 63+/-7 degrees versus 33+/-6 degrees in OVX), the predicted result of a 53% increase in BMP-2 (bone-morphogenetic protein-2). Raloxifene treatment results in reduced lesion volume, enhanced mechanical stability of vascular calcification, and less inflamed lesions characterized by less macrophage infiltration and reduced COX-2, MMP-1 and MCP-1 expression.

18342230
Rapid change in plaque size, composition, and molecular footprint after recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano (ETC-216) administration: magnetic resonance imaging study in an experimental model of atherosclerosis.
This study sought to assess the effect of short-term apolipoprotein (apo) A-I(Milano) administration on plaque size and on suspected markers of plaque vulnerability. Long-term lipid-lowering interventions can regress and stabilize atherosclerotic plaques. However, the majority of recurrent events occur early after the first episode. Interventions able to acutely induce plaque regression and stabilization are lacking. Regression of human coronary lesions after 5 weeks of treatment with apoA-I(Milano) administration has been shown. However, there are no data regarding its effect on plaque vulnerability. Advanced aortic lesions were induced in New Zealand White rabbits (n = 40). Plaque size was assessed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at the end of atherosclerosis induction. Animals were randomized to placebo or apoA-I(Milano) phospholipids (ETC-216), 2 infusions 4 days apart. After the last dose, another MRI study was performed and aortas were processed for cellular composition and gene protein expression of markers associated with plaque instability. Pre-treatment MRI showed similar plaque size in both groups, whereas post-treatment MRI showed 6% smaller plaques in apoA-I(Milano)-treated animals compared with placebo (p = 0.026). The apoA-I(Milano) treatment induced a 5% plaque regression (p = 0.003 vs. pre-treatment), whereas the placebo showed no significant effect. Plaque regression by apoA-I(Milano) was associated with a reduction in plaque macrophage density and a significant down-regulation in gene and protein expression of tissue factor, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, and cyclooxygenase-2, as well as marked decrease in gelatinolytic activity. Conversely, cyclooxygenase-1 was significantly up-regulated. Acute plaque regression observed after short-term apoA-I(Milano) administration was associated with a significant reduction in suspected makers of plaque vulnerability in an experimental model of atherosclerosis.

18332609
Statin therapy alone and in combination with an acyl-CoA:cholesterol O-acyltransferase inhibitor on experimental atherosclerosis.
The ability to modify the enzymatic processes involved in promoting atherosclerotic plaque disruption and to serially monitor atherosclerotic evolution could provide novel information in the management of patients with atherosclerosis. We studied the effects of a statin (atorvastatin) and its combination with an acyl-CoA:cholesterol O-acyltransferase (ACAT) inhibitor (avasimibe) on atherosclerotic regression and plaque stability as measured by matrix metalloproteinase 1 and 3 (MMP-1 and MMP-3) levels. Watanabe Heritable Hyperlipidemic (WHHL) rabbits treated with atorvastatin alone experienced an attenuated increase in atherosclerotic burden versus controls as determined by MR imaging. The mean vessel wall area (VWA) prior to drug therapy was 5.57 +/- 0.01 mm2. The VWA increased to 6.71 +/- 0.03 and 7.16 +/- 0.03 mm2, respectively, in atorvastatin-treated and control groups (p < 0.0001 for both). The combination of atorvastatin and avasimibe induced a significant regression of the previously established atherosclerotic lesions, with the VWA decreasing to 4.54 +/- 0.04 mm2 (p = 0.009). Atorvastatin alone induced a nonsignificant reduction in the percent staining of MMP-1 in atherosclerotic lesions, but the combination treatment with avasimibe led to a significant reduction versus controls (p = 0.005). However, a reduction in MMP-3 staining was significant for rabbits treated with both atorvastatin alone (p = 0.007) and in combination with avasimibe (p = 0.04) versus controls. In this animal model, the addition of avasimibe to atorvastatin has beneficial effects on both atherosclerotic plaque regression and stabilization.

17938815
Antithrombotic effects of factor Xa inhibition with DU-176b: Phase-I study of an oral, direct factor Xa inhibitor using an ex-vivo flow chamber.
Direct and specific inhibition of factor Xa is an emerging therapeutic strategy for atherothrombotic disease. Parenteral factor Xa inhibitors promise efficacy comparable to standard therapies, which could be extended to ambulatory patients with oral agents. We evaluated the antithrombotic effect of the oral, direct factor Xa inhibitor DU-176b in a phase-I study. Healthy subjects (n = 12) received a single, 60 mg dose of DU-176b. Antithrombotic effects were assessed by comparing ex-vivo thrombus formation at 1.5, 5, and 12 hours post-dose versus baseline, along with factor Xa activity, thrombin generation and clotting parameters. Under venous flow after 1.5 and 5 hours, the thrombus was 28% and 21% smaller versus baseline, respectively (p < 0.05). Under arterial condition, the reduction was 26% and 17% (p < 0.05). Thrombin generation decreased by 28% at 1.5 hours and 10% at 5 hours. Changes in PT and INR correlated well with plasma drug concentrations (R2 = 0.79 and 0.78). Direct and specific inhibition of factor Xa by DU-176b significantly reduced ex-vivo thrombus formation at both venous and arterial rheologies, up to 5 hours post-dose. The effects mirrored changes in clotting parameters, suggesting their potential usefulness for monitoring in a clinical setting.

17908311
Dual antiplatelet therapy and drug eluting stents: a marriage of convenience.


17659921
Comparison of platelet function and morphology in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention receiving bivalirudin versus unfractionated heparin versus clopidogrel pretreatment and bivalirudin.
We hypothesized that direct thrombin inhibition could attenuate platelet activation and release of soluble CD40 ligand (sCD40L), a marker of inflammation, during percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). To assess platelet function under flow conditions with bivalirudin versus unfractionated heparin (UFH), we employed the cone and plate(let) analyzer (CPA) assay in drug-spiked blood samples from volunteers (n = 3) in vitro, and then in PCI patients who received bivalirudin alone (n = 20), UFH alone (n = 15), and clopidogrel pretreatment plus bivalirudin (n = 15). Scanning electron microscopy was employed to image bivalirudin or UFH-treated platelets to determine whether platelet function observations had a morphologic explanation. Enzyme immunoassay was used to measure sCD40L levels in PCI patients. In vitro, bivalirudin decreased platelet surface coverage; UFH increased platelet surface coverage. In PCI patients, bivalirudin alone decreased platelet surface coverage, UFH alone increased platelet surface coverage, and clopidogrel pretreatment plus bivalirudin additively reduced platelet surface coverage. Unlike UFH, bivalirudin did not activate platelets in SEM studies. Bivalirudin alone or coupled with clopidogrel significantly reduced plasma sCD40L in PCI patients. In conclusion, our findings suggest that under flow conditions, bivalirudin alone or coupled with clopidogrel may have an antiplatelet effect versus UFH alone during PCI. These data suggest that bivalirudin and UFH may confer an anti-inflammatory effect by reducing sCD40L during PCI.

17515460
Early metoprolol administration before coronary reperfusion results in increased myocardial salvage: analysis of ischemic myocardium at risk using cardiac magnetic resonance.
Beta-blockers improve clinical outcome when administered early after acute myocardial infarction. However, whether beta-blockers actually reduce the myocardial infarction size is still in dispute. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging can accurately depict the left ventricular (LV) ischemic myocardium at risk (T2-weighted hyperintense region) early after myocardial infarction, as well as the extent of necrosis (delayed gadolinium enhancement). The aim of this study was to determine whether early administration of metoprolol could increase myocardial salvage, measured as the difference between the extent of myocardium at risk and myocardial necrosis. Twelve Yorkshire pigs underwent a 90-minute left anterior descending coronary occlusion, followed by reperfusion. They were randomized to metoprolol (7.5 mg during myocardial infarction) or placebo. Global and regional LV function, extent of myocardium at risk, and myocardial necrosis were quantified by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging studies performed 4 and 22 days after reperfusion in 10 survivors. Despite similar extent of myocardium at risk in metoprolol- and placebo-treated pigs (30.9% of LV versus 30.6%; P=NS), metoprolol resulted in 5-fold-larger salvaged myocardium (32.4% versus 6.2% of myocardium at risk; P=0.015). The LV ejection fraction significantly improved in metoprolol-treated pigs between days 4 and 22 (37.2% versus 43.0%; P=0.037), whereas it remained unchanged in pigs treated with placebo (35.1% versus 35.0%; P=NS). The extent of myocardial salvage was related directly to LV ejection fraction improvement (P=0.031) and regional LV wall motion recovery (P=0.039) at day 22. Early metoprolol administration during acute coronary occlusion increases myocardial salvage. The extent of myocardial salvage, measured as the difference between myocardium at risk and myocardial necrosis, was associated with regional and global LV motion improvement.

17365244
Validation study of a semi-automated program for quantification of atherosclerotic burden.
Practical implementation of cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) for the noninvasive screening of atherosclerosis is limited by inter-and intra-observer variability and labor intensity of morphometric analysis by manual planimetry (MANU). We assessed the hypothesis that a semi-automated quantification program (AUTO) for CMR would be faster and more accurate than MANU without loss of reliability. In the analysis of carotid atherosclerosis in asymptomatic hypercholesterolemic patients (n = 17), AUTO was superior to MANU in speed and histopathologic correlation without significant differences in inter-and intra-observer variability. Implementation of AUTO may facilitate CMR for the screening of the burden of atherosclerotic disease.

18279396
Ovariectomy increases vascular calcification via the OPG/RANKL cytokine signalling pathway.
Observational studies suggest a strong relationship between menopause and vascular calcification. Receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaBeta ligand (RANKL) and osteoprotegerin (OPG) are critical regulators of bone remodelling and modulate vascular calcification. We assessed the hypothesis that ovariectomy increases vascular calcification via the OPG/RANKL axis. Age-matched sexually mature rabbits were randomized to ovariectomy (OVX, n = 12) or sham procedure (SHAM, n = 12). One month post-procedure, atherosclerosis was induced by 15 months 0.2%-cholesterol diet and endothelial balloon denudations (at months 1 and 3). Aortic atherosclerosis was assessed in vivo by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at months 9 and 15. At sacrifice, aortas were harvested for ex vivo microcomputed tomography (microCT) and molecular analysis of the vascular tissue. Vascular calcification density and calcific particle number were significantly greater in OVX than SHAM (8.4 +/- 2.8 vs. 1.9 +/- 0.6 mg cm(-3), P = 0.042, and 94 +/- 26 vs. 33 +/- 7 particles cm(-3), P = 0.046, respectively). Calcification morphology, as assessed by the arc angle subtended by the largest calcific particle, showed no difference between groups (OVX 33 +/- 7 degrees vs. SHAM 33 +/- 5 degrees , P = 0.99). By Western blot analysis, OVX increased the vascular OPG:RANKL ratio by 66%, P = 0.029, primarily by decreasing RANKL (P = 0.019). At month 9, MRI demonstrated no difference in atheroma volume between OVX and SHAM, and no significant change was seen by the end of the study. In contrast to bone, vascular OPG:RANKL ratio increased in response to ovariectomy with a corresponding fourfold increase in arterial calcification. This diametrical organ-specific response may explain the comorbid association of osteoporosis with calcifying atherosclerosis in post-menopausal women.

17635739
Plaque progression and regression in atherothrombosis.
Atherosclerotic disease is a pathological process characterized by the deposition of lipid and other blood-borne material within the arterial wall. The deposition of these materials and the subsequent thickening of the wall may significantly compromise the vessel lumen. Atherosclerosis is a diffuse disease with focal clinical manifestations that are the consequence of thrombotic complications on disrupted atherosclerotic lesions. Until recently, atherosclerosis development was envisaged as an incessant progressing process; however, new evidence has shown that atherosclerotic plaque homeostasis is not necessarily a constantly progressing process. There are many data showing that atherosclerotic plaque formation can be slowed, stopped or even reversed. Comprehension of the underlying mechanisms involved in the homeostasis of atherosclerotic plaque (progression/regression) should allow the development of interventions enhancing the regression pathway. Novel imaging technology has allowed the accurate evaluation of plaque progression, vital in the assessment of the efficacy of interventions. In this review we discuss the processes involved in the formation and progression of atherosclerotic lesions, the triggers for plaque disruption, as well as new therapies. We also deal with the potential pathways of plaque regression, as well as tools for accurate serial atherosclerotic quantification.

17389007
A novel anti-ischemic nitric oxide donor (LA419) reduces thrombogenesis in healthy human subjects.
Platelet and endothelial production of nitric oxide (NO) is known to be impaired in coronary artery disease patients. Compounds that release NO (e.g. nitrates) have antiplatelet effects, but at supratherapeutic doses with hypotensive side effects. To investigate the antithrombotic effect on human blood of a novel NO donor (LA419) with known anti-ischemic properties but without hypotensive side effects and to compare with abciximab. Healthy subjects (n = 8; 32 +/- 3 years) received daily aspirin starting three days prior to the study day. Treatments (LA419 10 and 20 microm, and abciximab 4 microm) were added ex vivo to non-anticoagulated blood, and the antithrombotic properties were assessed by measuring changes in thrombus size from pretreatment baseline in the Badimon perfusion chamber at low and high shear rates. Platelet surface adhesion using a Cone and Platelet Analyzer (CPA) and platelet fibrinogen-receptor activation with flow cytometry were also evaluated. At low shear rates, LA419 displayed a reduction in thrombus area of 43% +/- 8% (10 microm) and 56% +/- 6% (20 microm), whereas at high shear rates the reductions were 44% +/- 3% (10 microm) and 62% +/- 6% (20 microm). Platelet surface adhesion with the CPA was also reduced. Abciximab exhibited a strong inhibitory effect on thrombus formation, platelet surface adhesion and fibrinogen receptor activation. The novel NO donor, LA419, shows a strong antithrombotic effect in human blood, which is comparable to abciximab, especially under high shear rate conditions. Our observations suggest that the availability of an NO donor could prove beneficial in the prevention of thrombotic complications of cardiovascular disease. Further clinical studies are warranted.

17249334
Atherothrombosis: role of tissue factor; link between diabetes, obesity and inflammation.
Atherothrombotic vascular disease is a complex disorder in which inflammation and coagulation play a pivotal role. Rupture of high-risk, vulnerable plaques with the subsequent tissue factor (TF) exposure is responsible for coronary thrombosis, the main cause of unstable angina, acute myocardial infarction, and sudden cardiac death. Tissue factor (TF), the key initiator of coagulation is an important modulator of inflammation. TF is widely expressed in atherosclerotic plaques and found in macrophages, smooth muscle cells, extracellular matrix and acellular lipid-rich core. TF expression can be induced by various stimulants such as C-reactive protein, oxLDL, hyperglycemia and adipocytokines. The blood-born TF encrypted on the circulating microparticles derived from vascular cells is a marker of vascular injury and a source of procoagulant activity. Another form of TF, called alternatively spliced has been recently identified in human and murine. It is soluble, circulates in plasma and initiates coagulation and thrombus propagation. Evidence indicates that elevated levels of blood-borne or circulating TF has been associated with metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular risk factors and is a candidate biomarker for future cardiovascular events. Therapeutic strategies have been developed to specifically interfere with TF activity in the treatment of cardiovascular disease.

17239165
Normalization of platelet reactivity in clopidogrel-treated subjects.
Aspirin (ASA) + clopidogrel are commonly used in acute coronary syndrome (ACS), but persistent antiplatelet effects may complicate surgery. To study the possibility of normalizing platelet reactivity after ASA + clopidogrel treatment, 11 healthy subjects received a 325-mg ASA + clopidogrel loading dose (300 or 600 mg dependent on study arm), followed by 81 mg of ASA + 75 mg of clopidogrel daily for 2 days. Platelet reactivity was assessed by light transmittance aggregometry (LTA) [challenged by adenosine diphosphate (ADP), arachidonic acid (AA), collagen, and thrombin receptor activating peptide (TRAP)] and flow cytometry for platelet activation by GPIIb/IIIa receptor exposure pretreatment, 4 and 72 h postload. To normalize platelet reactivity, increasing amounts of pooled platelets from five untreated volunteers [volunteers (V)-platelet-rich plasma (PRP)] were added ex vivo to the subject's PRP (S-PRP). At both 4 and 72 h, 40% and 50% V-PRP were needed to overcome platelet disaggregation in the 300 or 600 mg arms, respectively, after ADP challenge; an additional 10% V-PRP fully normalized aggregation. Recovery of function was linear with each incremental increase of V-PRP. ADP-induced GPIIb/IIIa activation showed the same pattern as LTA (r = 0.74). Forty percent V-PRP was required to normalize platelet function to AA, collagen, and TRAP. Our results suggest that the pre-operative transfusion of 10 platelet concentrate units (the equivalent of 40% V-PRP) after a 300-mg clopidogrel loading or 12.5 units (50% V-PRP) after a 600 mg loading may adequately reverse clopidogrel-induced platelet disaggregation to facilitate postoperative hemostasis. An additional 2.5 units fully normalized platelet function. The potential clinical implications of our observations could include shorter hospitalizations and reduced bleeding complications. But these observations should be fully explored in an in vivo clinical setting with clopidogrel-treated patients before and after surgery.

