21051201
Allograft (Alloderm) and Autograft (Temporalis Fascia) Implantation for Glottic Insufficiency: A Novel Approach.
OBJECTIVE: Traditionally, glottic insufficiency because of scar, atrophy, and sulcus has been treated by injection or medialization laryngoplasty. These procedures do not reestablish the vertical height of the vocal fold margin. We propose soft tissue augmentation laryngoplasty with allograft (sheet Alloderm; LifeCell Corporation, Branchburg, NJ) or autograft (temporalis fascia) via a minithyrotomy or a transoral approach. STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective case series analysis of 21 patients treated by sheet Alloderm or temporalis fascia for correction of glottic insufficiency. METHODS: Twenty-one patients with glottic insufficiency secondary to scar, atrophy, or sulcus were treated. Ten failed prior techniques. Seventeen had minithyrotomy by a small fenestration in the thyroid cartilage. Exploration of scar or lamina propria through the fenestration allowed for the creation of a pocket for Alloderm implantation within the intermediate layer of the lamina propria. Four patients underwent a transoral approach by cordotomy with either Alloderm or temporalis fascia implantation, which also allowed for exploration of scar but required repair using sutures. These implantation approaches allowed for both restoration of the layered structure and augmentation of the middle third of the musculomembranous vocal fold. Preoperative and postoperative videostroboscopic examinations were reviewed with review of clinical outcome. RESULTS: With a median follow-up time of 12 months, patients demonstrated excellent long-term vocal fold augmentation and minimal absorption of the implant in 19 out of 21 patients. There is improved pliability of the vocal fold with good oscillation in scar patients. CONCLUSION: Minithyrotomy with soft tissue augmentation is a novel approach for soft tissue augmentation of glottic insufficiency. It has the advantage of augmentation of the medial edge of the vocal fold with a soft tissue implant that has long-term viability. Its role should be explored further in patients with atrophy and scar.

20972969
Injection laryngoplasty with micronized dermis: a 10-year experience with 381 injections in 344 patients.
Micronized Dermis (MD) has been used for injection laryngoplasty for correction of glottic insufficiency since 2000. There is controversy whether the material is temporary or permanent. This is a retrospective review of 381 injections in 344 patients. From this review, we hope to better define the role of MD in injection laryngoplasty. Retrospective chart review from a single surgeon (2000-2010) The indications for MD were for both temporary and permanent correction of glottic insufficiency. The diagnoses were: vocal fold paralysis (n = 216), scar (n = 51), atrophy (n = 42), sulcus (n = 22), and others (n = 13). The material has the best effect when placed into the membranous vocal fold just lateral to the vocal ligament. The operative and postoperative complication was 1.05%. Twenty-nine percent of all injections resulted in unwanted absorption. Overinjection was needed and transcervical approach was preferred to prevent implant extrusion with overinjection. The median volume of injected material has increased from 0.8 cc to 1.0 cc over the decade. In 159 patients with long-term follow-up (>1 year), there was a 14% incidence of reinjection. Despite this, the overall need for open procedures in patients with long-term follow-up was 20%. Despite the problems of inconsistency in preparation, slow absorption and need for overinjection, micronized dermis is a safe allograft material that has long-term (>1 year) stability. The material may reduce the need for open surgery. It can be used for both temporary and permanent vocal fold augmentation.

20842035
Pulse dye and other laser treatments for vocal scar.
Vocal fold scar is a challenging clinical problem, resulting in a spectrum of voice-related complaints. While there are a variety of treatment options available, it is rare to obtain outcomes similar to the perfectly normal voice. The pulsed dye and other lasers are an emerging treatment option for cutaneous scar and have shown promise for the treatment of vocal fold scarring. The purpose of this review is to summarize the theory, and describe clinical outcomes from both cutaneous and vocal fold scarring treated with lasers. There are a growing number of papers in the literature substantiating the use of pulsed dye and other lasers used to treat cutaneous scars. Some experimental models describe potential mechanisms of laser effect, which include the development of a sub-basement membrane cleavage plane, as well as up-regulation of proteins which may actively modulate continued fibrosis. One prospective pilot study of 11 patients with vocal fold scarring treated with the pulsed dye laser has also shown statistically significant improvement in subjective and objective voice measures, as well as laryngeal stroboscopy findings after treatment. The pulsed dye and other lasers have shown effectiveness and potential in treating cutaneous and vocal scarring.

20397148
Correlation between the Voice Handicap Index and voice laboratory measurements after phonosurgery.
Phonosurgery is an effective treatment for some vocal fold pathologies, and the Voice Handicap Index (VHI) survey has been shown to be a useful instrument for evaluating treatment effectiveness. We conducted a nonrandomized, prospective study of 21 patients who underwent phonosurgery for the treatment of non-neoplastic vocal fold lesions at our academic tertiary-care referral center. Our goals were to compare pre- and postoperative VHI scores (subjective assessments) and pre- and postoperative results of acoustic and aerodynamic tests (objective assessments). We sought to determine if there was any correlation between the subjective and objective findings. We looked for differences between professional voice users (n = 10) and nonprofessional voice users (n = 11) in both subjective and objective measures. We found statistically significant differences between pre- and postoperative values in three of four VHI parameters, but in only one of 13 objective measures. There was no correlation between preoperative VHI scores and preoperative acoustic and aerodynamic test results. The professional voice users expressed greater postoperative improvement as reflected by lower VHI scores than did the nonprofessional voice users, confirming that the former are more negatively affected by a voice disability.

18834072
High-speed imaging used to detect vocal fold paresis: a case report.
High-speed imaging has been used to study vocal fold vibration and has been shown to provide additional information in aid of our understanding of pathologic vocal fold vibration. This is the first case report of vocal fold paresis diagnosed by high-speed imaging. An 18-year-old girl presented with intermittent voice loss that had been present for 4 years. The patient had been seen by other otolaryngologists and had been given proton pump inhibitors without any improvement in her voice. Her voice was diplophonic. The patient was examined by rigid stroboscopy and was found to have a predominantly open phase pattern but a normal vibratory pattern. High-speed photography showed a distinct vibratory frequency for each vocal fold, suggestive of a paresis pattern. Laryngeal electromyography confirmed the diagnosis of vocal fold paresis. A computed tomographic scan of the larynx and chest showed a thymoma. After thymectomy, the patient recovered full voice function. High-speed imaging is useful for the clinical evaluation of pathologic vocal fold vibration and can detect subtle features of paralysis that may not be detected on fiberoptic endoscopy and rigid stroboscopy. The additional information from high-speed imaging helped to make the diagnosis of vocal fold paresis in this patient.

18641533
The use of the pulse dye laser in the treatment of vocal fold scar: a preliminary study.
Dysphonia due to vocal fold scarring is a challenging problem to the laryngologist. Vocal fold scarring after radiation, phonosurgery, and laser cordectomy causes moderate to severe dysphonia. Surgical attempts at scar removal and voice restoration have limited success. Pulsed dye laser (PDL) treatment has been shown to be effective in softening scarred skin by serial office treatments. The objective of this preliminary study was to evaluate the use of the PDL in the management of patients with established vocal fold scar. This is an Institutional Review Board-approved prospective study involving 11 patients. The causes of scarring were phonosurgery (n = 7), radiation (n = 2), and partial laryngectomy (n = 2). The subjects were evaluated pre- and postprocedure using the voice handicap index (VHI), laryngeal stroboscopy rating, voice recordings with acoustic and aerodynamic analysis, and self-evaluation. The PDL was applied with the fiberoptic delivery system by three treatments at 1-month intervals in the office setting. Each treatment endpoint was blanching of the treatment site. : There were three women and eight men in our study group. Ten of 11 patients subjectively improved by self-rating. No patients were worse. VHI improved from 48.44 pretreatment to 35.55 at 6 months posttreatment (P < .05). The jitter at 6 months improved from 2.230% to 1.654% (P = NS) and shimmer improved from 3.679% to 3.196% (P = NS). The noise to harmonic ration improved from 0.1428 to 0.1316 (P = NS). The mean phonotory flow went from 0.177 to 0.254 L/S (P < .05). Three raters blinded to treatment sequence rated the posttreatment stroboscopy findings as better than pretreatment in a forced choice comparison, kappa score 0.903. PDL is a safe and potentially promising treatment for established vocal fold scar. Subjectively, no patients were worse and 10 of 11 patients reported improved voice. There was improvement in the VHI, acoustic measures of shimmer and jitter, and stroboscopy findings. Further study using this approach in a larger cohort seems to be warranted.

18564532
Office pulsed dye laser treatment for benign laryngeal vascular polyps: a preliminary study.
The 585-nm pulsed dye laser (PDL) was recently deemed relatively safe and effective for treatment of laryngeal papilloma, dysplasia, and granuloma. We report on in-office PDL treatment of laryngeal vascular polyps. Retrospective case results from 29 consecutive cases of laryngeal polyps were evaluated to determine the percent change in polyps after PDL treatment. Preoperative and postoperative measurements of polyp size, total power delivered to the site, and whether patients opted for postprocedure phonomicrosurgery were analyzed. After PDL treatment, the results varied from complete to partial resolution of the polyp. Four patients requested conventional phonomicrosurgery, and the rest had enough improvement to defer surgery. Almost 40% of patients with larger polyps desired operative intervention after laser treatment, whereas only 13% of those with small polyps opted for phonomicrosurgery. Thirty-eight percent (11 of 29) of the lesions had greater than 70% improvement after 1 or 2 laser treatments (average of 1.1 procedures). Smaller lesions responded better. Thirty-nine percent of small polyps resolved by greater than 70%, whereas only 20% of larger lesions improved by the same amount. There were no adverse events from the office procedure. In-office use of the PDL for treatment of vascular polyps may be a safe alternative to phonomicrosurgery. Small polyps seem to show a better response.

18022129
Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor of larynx: a benign lesion with variable morphological spectrum.
Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor is a recently characterized lesion, composed of exuberant myofibroblastic proliferation and an inflammatory component. Its etiology remains controversial, as to whether this represents a benign tumor with limited potential to recur or progress. Exaggerated response to trauma or infection has also been implicated. Only a few cases of laryngeal inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor have been described in English after it has been assigned the new name. The prototype lesion, inflammatory pseudotumor, has been best described in association with the lung but has also been reported involving various organs. We report 2 additional cases with a considerable variation in the presentation and histology of the lesion, thus expanding the morphological spectrum of the entity. Both lesions appeared aggressive in clinical presentation. One case had relatively more pleomorphic appearance and increased mitotic rate. Both lesions were surgically resected, and complete voice preservation was achieved. No postoperative complications or recurrence were noticed. This uncommon neoplasm may appear clinically as a large infiltrating mass and may be mistaken as a malignant growth. Conservative resection of the tumor may provide a cure with adequate voice preservation.

17721401
Cerebrospinal fluid leak after anterior cervical disc fusion: an unusual cause of dysphagia and neck mass.
Dysphagia after anterior cervical disc fusion (ACDF) is a common complaint. We present two cases of dysphagia caused by a rare complication after ACDF: cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak into the neck. A case series of two patients. Both patients underwent a chart review, comprehensive history, physical examination, flexible nasolaryngoscopy, and radiographic imaging. A literature review of the MEDLINE database (1966-2006), using key words "dysphagia" and "anterior discectomy," was performed. We present two patients with persistent dysphagia after ACDF surgery caused by CSF leak into the neck. Their clinical presentation, physical and radiographic examination findings, and hospital course will be discussed. CSF collection presenting as dysphagia and neck mass after ACDF must be included in the differential diagnosis because incision and drainage is contraindicated, and fine needle aspiration (FNA) must be performed under sterile conditions. Treatment including lumbar drain or re-exploration is appropriate.

