19968915
Bone loss or lost bone: rationale and recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of early postmenopausal bone loss.
Recent reports suggest that bone loss begins during late perimenopause at a dramatic rate, even before estrogen levels plummet. During the ensuing 5 years, there is evidence of the beginnings of microarchitectural deterioration, which impacts bone strength and ultimately enhances its propensity to fracture. The diagnosis of osteoporosis based on T-scores alone, or through stratification for a high fracture risk by FRAX, excludes these women who are rapidly losing bone. Because all antiosteoporosis therapies, in particular bisphosphonates, reduce bone loss, we propose aggressive, likely short-term therapy with a goal to reduce bone loss, stabilize bone density, and prevent microarchitectural deterioration.

18056047
Progression of efficacy with ibandronate: a paradigm for the development of new bisphosphonates.
While initial preclinical studies provide an important starting point for dose selection, they may not provide adequate information to identify the optimal dosage for an extended treatment regimen. Determining the best dose for use in an extended dosing regimen requires ongoing development, illustrated best with the bisphosphonate, ibandronate. As mandated for regulatory purposes, the daily oral regimen of ibandronate was proven effective in significantly reducing the rate of new vertebral fractures assessed prospectively, and nonvertebral fractures in a high-risk population, assessed retrospectively. Extended dosing regimens, namely monthly and quarterly intravenous formulations, were developed subsequently to improve the convenience and enhance persistence, while maintaining or increasing efficacy. The continuing and progressive evolution of data led to the understanding that extension of drug-free interval requires higher annual cumulative skeletal exposures (ACE), which were not simply numerical multipliers of the interval and daily dose. For ibandronate, this led to dose selection for the oral monthly 150 mg (ACE 10.8 mg) and intravenous quarterly 3 mg (ACE 12 mg) formulations that proved superior in increasing bone mineral density (BMD) compared with oral daily 2.5 mg (ACE 5.5 mg) ibandronate. Pooling data from clinical trials with high ACE regimens (monthly and quarterly) led to the evolution of statistical evidence for a reduction in clinical and nonvertebral fractures with ibandronate. The ibandronate story should serve as an important future paradigm for bisphosphonate development.

17872390
Cellular and molecular consequences of calcineurin A alpha gene deletion.
Here we briefly review our studies that have unraveled an important role for the calcium- and calmodulin-sensitive enzyme calcineurin (CN) in bone remodeling. We find that the genetic deletion of the calcineurin Aalpha isoform results in osteoporosis, which is recapitulated in humans following calcineurin inhibitor therapy widely used after solid organ transplantation. Mechanistically, however, while both calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporine and tacrolimus initially stimulate osteoclastic bone resorption in humans, the predominant feature in the CNAalpha null mouse is a profound reduction in bone formation. We speculate that the so-called "calcineurin inhibitors" may interact with molecules other than calcineurin. The clinical relevance of these observations is explored.

16968888
Evidence that calcineurin is required for the genesis of bone-resorbing osteoclasts.
Here, we demonstrate that the Ca(2+)/calmodulin-sensitive phosphatase calcineurin is a necessary downstream mediator for osteoclast differentiation. Using quantitative PCR, we detected the calcineurin isoforms Aalpha, Abeta, Agamma (catalytic), and B1 (regulatory) in osteoclast precursor RAW-C3 cells. We found that, although the expression of these isoforms remained relatively unchanged during osteoclast differentiation, there was a profound increase in the expression of their primary substrate for calcineurin, nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT)c1. For gain-of-function studies, we incubated osteoclast precursors for 10 min with a calcineurin fusion protein (TAT-calcineurin Aalpha); this resulted in its receptorless influx into >90% of the precursor cells. A marked increase in the expression of the osteoclast differentiation markers tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) and integrin beta(3) followed. In addition, the expression of NFATc1, as well as the alternative substrate for calcineurin, IkappaBalpha, was significantly enhanced. Likewise, transfection with constitutively active NFAT resulted in an increased expression of both TRAP and integrin beta(3). In parallel loss-of-function studies, transfection with dominant-negative NFAT not only inhibited osteoclast formation but also reversed the induction of NFATc1, TRAP, and integrin beta(3) by TAT-calcineurin Aalpha. The expression of these markers was also inhibited by calcineurin Aalpha U1 small nuclear RNA, which significantly reduced calcineurin Aalpha mRNA and protein expression. Consistent with these observations, we observed a reduction in osteoclastogenesis in calcineurin Aalpha(-/-) cells and in osteoclast precursors treated with the calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporin A and FK506. Together, the gain- and loss-of-function experiments establish that calcineurin Aalpha is necessary for osteoclast formation from its precursor and that this occurs via an NFATc1-dependent mechanism.

