18724128
A survey of microvascular protocols for lower extremity free tissue transfer II: postoperative care.
Due to the complex, and often tenuous nature of microsurgical tissue transfer, postoperative monitoring of free tissue flaps plays a vital role in the management of such patients. Some of the more challenging reconstructive problems occur in patients with lower extremity trauma, yet to date, no preferred protocol exists for the postoperative care of lower extremity free flaps. The present study sought to evaluate and assess current preferences in monitoring following lower extremity free tissue transfer. Members of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS) were surveyed with regard to their choice for postoperative monitoring and return to dependent positioning ("dangling"). The results demonstrate that there is some agreement among surgeons regarding the optimal means for postoperative monitoring. Most rely on clinical observation in addition to conventional Doppler probe for an average of 4.8 days. Most surgeons follow their own flaps in addition to relying on the residents and nursing staff. The study also notes a wide variety in the times and frequencies at which dangling of the extremity was commenced. Most respondents initiate dangling within 2 weeks of surgery and begin with only 1 to 5 minutes per session.

18317106
Bilateral breast deformity after neonatal tube thoracostomy in fraternal twins.


17721222
A survey of microvascular protocols for lower-extremity free tissue transfer I: perioperative anticoagulation.
Reconstruction of the lower extremity using free tissue transfer is performed throughout the country by numerous surgical teams. However, no established protocol exists for the use of anticoagulation in the perioperative period. The present study sought to analyze trends in current protocols regarding perioperative anticoagulation for lower-extremity free flap reconstruction. Members of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons were surveyed with regard to their preferences for perioperative anticoagulation in conjunction with lower-extremity free tissue transfer. The results demonstrated tremendous variability in both the agents used and therapeutic periods employed. They highlighted the absence of 1 or more common anticoagulation protocols and tried to establish common trends in the use of such agents.

17245142
Laparoscopic-assisted abdominal wall reconstruction in prune-belly syndrome.
Prune-belly syndrome (PBS) refers to a congenital absence or weakness of the musculature of the abdominal wall, in conjunction with anomalies of the gastrointestinal or genitourinary systems. As such, many patients undergo numerous intra-abdominal procedures and develop significant peritoneal adhesions, making reoperation a challenging endeavor. Numerous approaches to abdominal wall reconstruction in patients with PBS have been reported. The authors describe a novel approach that uses laparoscopic visualization of intra-abdominal contents combined with abdominal wall plication. This technique has been safely performed in 6 patients with PBS. It is believed to improve safety and allows for bilateral, vertical, 2-layer, fascial plication to strengthen the abdominal wall.

