21436031
Broad-spectrum antiviral that interferes with de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis.
Compound A3 was identified in a high-throughput screen for inhibitors of influenza virus replication. It displays broad-spectrum antiviral activity, and at noncytotoxic concentrations it is shown to inhibit the replication of negative-sense RNA viruses (influenza viruses A and B, Newcastle disease virus, and vesicular stomatitis virus), positive-sense RNA viruses (Sindbis virus, hepatitis C virus, West Nile virus, and dengue virus), DNA viruses (vaccinia virus and human adenovirus), and retroviruses (HIV). In contrast to mammalian cells, inhibition of viral replication by A3 is absent in chicken cells, which suggests species-specific activity of A3. Correspondingly, the antiviral activity of A3 can be linked to a cellular protein, dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH), which is an enzyme in the de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway. Viral replication of both RNA and DNA viruses can be restored in the presence of excess uracil, which promotes pyrimidine salvage, or excess orotic acid, which is the product of DHODH in the de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway. Based on these findings, it is proposed that A3 acts by depleting pyrimidine pools, which are crucial for efficient virus replication.

21276872
Uncovering the global host cell requirements for influenza virus replication via RNAi screening.
Influenza virus is reliant on numerous host cell functions during its replication cycle. RNA interference technology, applied on a genome-wide level, has identified human host factors that are necessary for efficient virus replication and provides new insight into how influenza virus interacts with its host at the molecular level.

20739535
Novel Nipah virus immune-antagonism strategy revealed by experimental and computational study.
Nipah virus is an emerging pathogen that causes severe disease in humans. It expresses several antagonist proteins that subvert the immune response and that may contribute to its pathogenicity. Studies of its biology are difficult due to its high pathogenicity and requirement for biosafety level 4 containment. We integrated experimental and computational methods to elucidate the effects of Nipah virus immune antagonists. Individual Nipah virus immune antagonists (phosphoprotein and V and W proteins) were expressed from recombinant Newcastle disease viruses, and the responses of infected human monocyte-derived dendritic cells were determined. We developed an ordinary differential equation model of the infectious process that that produced results with a high degree of correlation with these experimental results. In order to simulate the effects of wild-type virus, the model was extended to incorporate published experimental data on the time trajectories of immune-antagonist production. These data showed that the RNA-editing mechanism utilized by the wild-type Nipah virus to produce immune antagonists leads to a delay in the production of the most effective immune antagonists, V and W. Model simulations indicated that this delay caused a disconnection between attenuation of the antiviral response and suppression of inflammation. While the antiviral cytokines were efficiently suppressed at early time points, some early inflammatory cytokine production occurred, which would be expected to increase vascular permeability and promote virus spread and pathogenesis. These results suggest that Nipah virus has evolved a unique immune-antagonist strategy that benefits from controlled expression of multiple antagonist proteins with various potencies.

19515782
Nipah virus sequesters inactive STAT1 in the nucleus via a P gene-encoded mechanism.
The Nipah virus (NiV) phosphoprotein (P) gene encodes the C, P, V, and W proteins. P, V, and W, have in common an amino-terminal domain sufficient to bind STAT1, inhibiting its interferon (IFN)-induced tyrosine phosphorylation. P is also essential for RNA-dependent RNA polymerase function. C is encoded by an alternate open reading frame (ORF) within the common amino-terminal domain. Mutations within residues 81 to 113 of P impaired its polymerase cofactor function, as assessed by a minireplicon assay, but these mutants retained STAT1 inhibitory function. Mutations within the residue 114 to 140 region were identified that abrogated interaction with and inhibition of STAT1 by P, V, and W without disrupting P polymerase cofactor function. Recombinant NiVs were then generated. A G121E mutation, which abrogated inhibition of STAT1, was introduced into a C protein knockout background (C(ko)) because the mutation would otherwise also alter the overlapping C ORF. In cell culture, relative to the wild-type virus, the C(ko) mutation proved attenuating but the G121E mutant virus replicated identically to the C(ko) virus. In cells infected with the wild-type and C(ko) viruses, STAT1 was nuclear despite the absence of tyrosine phosphorylation. This latter observation mirrors what has been seen in cells expressing NiV W. In the G121E mutant virus-infected cells, STAT1 was not phosphorylated and was cytoplasmic in the absence of IFN stimulation but became tyrosine phosphorylated and nuclear following IFN addition. These data demonstrate that the gene for NiV P encodes functions that sequester inactive STAT1 in the nucleus, preventing its activation and suggest that the W protein is the dominant inhibitor of STAT1 in NiV-infected cells.

19211754
Nipah virus edits its P gene at high frequency to express the V and W proteins.
Nipah virus (NiV) is predicted to encode four proteins from its P gene (P, V, W, and C) via mRNA editing and an alternate open reading frame. By use of specific antibodies, the expression of the V, W, and C proteins in NiV-infected cells has now been confirmed. Analysis of the P-gene transcripts shows a ratio of P:V:W mRNA of 1:1:1, but this differs over time, with greater proportions of V and W transcripts observed as the infection progresses. Eighty-two percent of transcripts are edited, with up to 11 G insertions observed. This exceptionally high editing frequency ensures expression of the V and W proteins.

18585796
Modulation of influenza virus replication by alteration of sodium ion transport and protein kinase C activity.
In recent years, increasing levels of resistance to the four FDA-approved anti-influenza virus drugs have been described and vaccine manufacturers have experienced demands that exceed their capacity. This situation underlines the urgent need for novel antivirals as well as innovations in vaccine production in preparation for the next influenza epidemic. Here we report the development of a cell-based high-throughput screen which we have used for the identification of compounds that modulate influenza virus growth either negatively or positively. We screened a library of compounds with known biological activity and identified distinct groups of inhibitors and enhancers that target sodium channels or protein kinase C (PKC). We confirmed these results in viral growth assays and find that treatment with a sodium channel opener or PKC inhibitor significantly reduces viral replication. In contrast, inhibition of sodium channels or activation of PKC leads to enhanced virus production in tissue culture. These diametrically opposing effects strongly support a role for PKC activity and the regulation of Na(+) currents in influenza virus replication and both may serve as targets for antiviral drugs. Furthermore, we raise the possibility that compounds that result in increased viral titers may be beneficial for boosting the production of tissue culture-grown influenza vaccines.

18535660
Cellular proteins in influenza virus particles.
Virions are thought to contain all the essential proteins that govern virus egress from the host cell and initiation of replication in the target cell. It has been known for some time that influenza virions contain nine viral proteins; however, analyses of other enveloped viruses have revealed that proteins from the host cell can also be detected in virions. To address whether the same is true for influenza virus, we used two complementary mass spectrometry approaches to perform a comprehensive proteomic analysis of purified influenza virus particles. In addition to the aforementioned nine virus-encoded proteins, we detected the presence of 36 host-encoded proteins. These include both cytoplasmic and membrane-bound proteins that can be grouped into several functional categories, such as cytoskeletal proteins, annexins, glycolytic enzymes, and tetraspanins. Interestingly, a significant number of these have also been reported to be present in virions of other virus families. Protease treatment of virions combined with immunoblot analysis was used to verify the presence of the cellular protein and also to determine whether it is located in the core of the influenza virus particle. Immunogold labeling confirmed the presence of membrane-bound host proteins on the influenza virus envelope. The identification of cellular constituents of influenza virions has important implications for understanding the interactions of influenza virus with its host and brings us a step closer to defining the cellular requirements for influenza virus replication. While not all of the host proteins are necessarily incorporated specifically, those that are and are found to have an essential role represent novel targets for antiviral drugs and for attenuation of viruses for vaccine purposes.

