18277326
Ischemic brain infarction.


17903795
Clinical improvement related to thrombolysis of third ventricular blood clot in a patient with thalamic hemorrhage.
Intraventricular extension of hemorrhage after intraparenchymal hemorrhage is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Clinical improvement is reported in a patient with thalamic hemorrhage with intraventricular extension after third and fourth ventricular blood clot resolution with instillation of urokinase intraventricularly. A 49-year-old man with hypertension collapsed while at work. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head revealed a left thalamic hemorrhage with extension into the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles and associated hydrocephalus. A left frontal intraventricular catheter (IVC) was placed and intraventricular urokinase was administered at a dose of 25,000 U every 12 hours. The CT scan revealed resolution of the lateral ventricular dilatation and blood clot but no decrease in third or fourth ventricular hemorrhage. No clinical improvement was noted. The IVC was reinserted on the right side with the catheter tip placed through the foramen of Monroe into the third ventricle. Twelve hours after receiving the first dose of urokinase through the new catheter, the patient's condition improved. The CT scan showed a reduction in the volume of blood of the third and fourth ventricles. This case report shows that treatment of hydrocephalus with an IVC was not sufficient to provide a therapeutic effect. Substantial clinical improvement occurred only after the blood clot was cleared from the third and fourth ventricles.

17895147
Spontaneous caudate hemorrhage associated with ingestion of a decongestant containing phenylpropanolamine.
Intracerebral hemorrhage has been associated with phenylpropanolamine, a sympathomimetic agent contained in many over-the-counter medications. Caudate hemorrhage is infrequent, usually related to hypertension, and has not been reported following ingestion of medications containing phenylpropanolamine. We report an unusual case of caudate hemorrhage which developed in a patient taking an over-the-counter nasal decongestant containing phenylpropanolamine.

17895030
Transesophageal echocardiography: diagnostic and clinical applications in the evaluation of the stroke patient.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is superior to transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) in diagnosing cardiac abnormalities that may result in cerebral embolism. The clinical importance of these abnormalities is unclear. We classified 96 consecutive stroke patients into high- or low-risk groups for cardioembolism based on historical criteria. The presence of left atrial thrombus, atrial smoke, patent foramen ovale, atrial septal aneurysm, and plaque in the ascending aorta was assessed with TEE. Stroke type and other possible stroke mechanisms were evaluated. Left atrial thrombus occurred only in the high-risk group. Patent foramen ovale, atrial septal aneurysm, and most cases of left atrial smoke occurred in the presence of another embolic source or were associated with a stroke related to hypertensive small vessel disease. Protruding atherosclerotic plaque in the ascending aorta and aortic arch was the most significant cause of stroke diagnosed by TEE because it frequently occurred in those without other risk factors for stroke. TEE identified aortic plaque in one and left atrial smoke in two patients with lacunar infarction without risk factors for small vessel disease. TEE should be considered in both lacunar and nonlacunar stroke that occur in the absence of stroke risk factors, although optimal management of most TEE findings is yet to be determined.

