18849586
Phosphatase-defective LEOPARD syndrome mutations in PTPN11 gene have gain-of-function effects during Drosophila development.
Missense mutations in the PTPN11 gene, which encodes the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, cause clinically similar but distinctive disorders, LEOPARD (LS) and Noonan (NS) syndromes. The LS is an autosomal dominant disorder with pleomorphic developmental abnormalities including lentigines, cardiac defects, short stature and deafness. Biochemical analyses indicated that LS alleles engender loss-of-function (LOF) effects, while NS mutations result in gain-of-function (GOF). These biochemical findings lead to an enigma that how PTPN11 mutations with opposite effects on function result in disorders that are so similar. To study the developmental effects of the commonest LS PTPN11 alleles (Y279C and T468M), we generated LS transgenic fruitflies using corkscrew (csw), the Drosophila orthologue of PTPN11. Ubiquitous expression of the LS csw mutant alleles resulted in ectopic wing veins and, for the Y279C allele, rough eyes with increased R7 photoreceptor numbers. These were GOF phenotypes mediated by increased RAS/MAPK signaling and requiring the LS mutant's residual phosphatase activity. Our findings provide the first evidence that LS mutant alleles have GOF developmental effects despite reduced phosphatase activity, providing a rationale for how PTPN11 mutations with GOF and LOF produce similar but distinctive syndromes.

18495928
Transcription factor Ap2delta associates with Ash2l and ALR, a trithorax family histone methyltransferase, to activate Hoxc8 transcription.
The family of Ap2 transcription factors comprises five members with highly conserved DNA-binding domains. Among the family members, Ap2delta is the most divergent, because it lacks highly conserved residues within the transactivation domain (TAD) and has weak affinity for known Ap2 binding sites. To identify specific Ap2delta coactivators/regulators during development, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen, using Ap2delta's TAD. We identified the trithorax superfamily member, Ash2l, as a binding partner that interacts exclusively with Ap2delta. We showed that Ash2l positively mediates Ap2delta transactivation in a dose-dependent manner. Given the known role of Ash2l in histone modification, we determined whether Ap2delta was able to form a complex with that activity. Our results showed that Ap2delta associates with endogenous ASH2L and a member of the MLL family of histone lysine methyltransferases (HKMTs), MLL2 (ALR), forming a complex that methylates lysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4). Additionally, we showed that Ap2delta is necessary for recruitment of Ash2l and Alr to the Hoxc8 locus and that recruitment of this complex leads to H3K4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and subsequent gene activation. Altogether, we provide evidence of an association between a highly restricted gene-specific transcription factor and a Su(var), Enhancer of Zeste, Trithorax (SET)1/trithorax-like complex with H3K4 methyltransferase activity. Our studies also document a functional role for Ap2delta in recruiting histone methyltransferases (HMTs) to specific gene targets, such as Hoxc8. This role provides a mechanism through which these transcription factors can have diverse effects despite nearly identical DNA-binding motifs.

17603483
Gain-of-function RAF1 mutations cause Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes are developmental disorders with overlapping features, including cardiac abnormalities, short stature and facial dysmorphia. Increased RAS signaling owing to PTPN11, SOS1 and KRAS mutations causes approximately 60% of Noonan syndrome cases, and PTPN11 mutations cause 90% of LEOPARD syndrome cases. Here, we report that 18 of 231 individuals with Noonan syndrome without known mutations (corresponding to 3% of all affected individuals) and two of six individuals with LEOPARD syndrome without PTPN11 mutations have missense mutations in RAF1, which encodes a serine-threonine kinase that activates MEK1 and MEK2. Most mutations altered a motif flanking Ser259, a residue critical for autoinhibition of RAF1 through 14-3-3 binding. Of 19 subjects with a RAF1 mutation in two hotspots, 18 (or 95%) showed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), compared with the 18% prevalence of HCM among individuals with Noonan syndrome in general. Ectopically expressed RAF1 mutants from the two HCM hotspots had increased kinase activity and enhanced ERK activation, whereas non-HCM-associated mutants were kinase impaired. Our findings further implicate increased RAS signaling in pathological cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

