21606082
Synergistic effect of liver X receptor activation and simvastatin on plaque regression and stabilization: an magnetic resonance imaging study in a model of advanced atherosclerosis.
Aims The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of liver X receptors (LXRs)-? preferential activation by LXR-623 (WAY-252623), a novel LXRs agonist, on plaque progression/regression in a rabbit model of advanced atherosclerosis. Methods and results Advanced atherosclerosis was induced in New Zealand White Rabbits (n= 41). At the end of atherosclerosis induction, animals underwent a baseline magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and were randomized to receive LXR-623 (1.5, 5, or 15 mg/kg/day), simvastatin (5 mg/kg/day), or placebo. The combination of LXR-1.5/simvastatin was also tested. After a final MRI, animals were euthanized and their aortas processed for further analysis. Simvastatin significantly reduced lesion progression (-25%; P< 0.01) in comparison with the placebo group. A similar effect was observed in the LXR-1.5 and -5 groups. A significant regression (16.5%; P< 0.01) of existing atherosclerosis was observed in the LXR-1.5/simvastatin group. Histological and molecular analysis showed plaque stabilization in the animals treated with the LXR-1.5 and -5, and LXR-1.5/simvastatin. The effects of LXR-623 were observed in the presence of a non-significant effect on total-cholesterol, low-density lipoproteins-cholesterol, and triglyceride levels. Conclusion The results of the present study show that LXR-623 significantly reduces the progression of atherosclerosis and induces plaque regression in combination with simvastatin. These observations could drive future development of novel anti-atherosclerotic therapeutic approaches.

21596452
New index alpha improves detection of pulmonary hypertension in comparison with other cardiac magnetic resonance indices.
BACKGROUND: Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) has been proposed for the evaluation of patients with pulmonary hypertension (PH). However, there is no consensus on the optimal method for PH diagnosis using CMR. OBJECTIVE: To compare the diagnostic ability of multiple CMR-derived indices for the detection of PH as determined by right heart catheterization (RHC). METHODS: A total of 185 patients with known or suspected chronic PH who underwent cardiac CMR and RHC in ?15days were included. PH was defined as a mean pulmonary artery (PA) pressure ?25mmHg. Right ventricular (RV) volumes, RV ejection fraction (RVEF), PA areas, and PA average blood flow velocity were quantified with CMR. A novel index ? was defined as the ratio between minimal PA area and RVEF. RESULTS: According to the RHC, PH was present in 152 patients. All CMR-derived parameters correlated with the degree of mean PA pressure, with ? having the highest correlation coefficient (r=0.61, p<0.001). Correlations were also highest for ? in the patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH; r=0.55, p<0.001) and non-PAH subgroup (r=0.61, p<0.001). Diagnostic accuracy for the detection of PH, based on receiver operating curve analysis, was best for ? (area under the curve=0.95). A cutoff value of 7.2 demonstrated a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 88%. CONCLUSIONS: An easily-obtainable and novel CMR index ? that combines geometrical and functional information of the PA and the RV allows for the noninvasive diagnosis of PH with high accuracy, above other common CMR-derived parameters.

21537006
Cellular senescence, vascular disease, and aging: part 2 of a 2-part review: clinical vascular disease in the elderly.


21530319
Evaluation of right ventricular function and post-operative findings using cardiac computed tomography in patients with left ventricular assist devices.
BACKGROUND: Right ventricular (RV) failure is a major contributor to morbidity and mortality after left ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation. Accurate evaluation of RV function in patients with LVAD remains challenging. We hypothesized that, after LVAD implantation, electrocardiographic-gated cardiac computed tomography (CCT) allows RV evaluation with higher feasibility and reproducibility compared with echocardiography. METHODS: Thirty-six patients with an implanted LVAD who had 2-dimensional echocardiography and CCT evaluation were studied. RV end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes and ejection fraction were quantified using CCT. RV fractional area change, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion and RV end-diastolic short-to-long axis ratio were calculated by echocardiography. Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) and Bland-Altman analysis were used to assess intra- and interobserver reproducibility for all measurements. RESULTS: The quality of CCT studies was good in all cases except for one. Intra- and interobserver reproducibility for all CCT measurements was high (interobserver ICC for RV ejection fraction = 0.89, 95% confidence interval 0.74 to 0.95). Echocardiographic indices of RV function and geometry had lower reproducibility. The echocardiographic index that best correlated with the CCT-determined RV ejection fraction was RV fractional area change (r = 0.80, p < 0.001). In addition, CCT detected relevant post-operative findings in 50% of the patients. CONCLUSIONS: CCT is highly effective and reproducible compared with echocardiography for the evaluation of RV function in patients with LVAD support and provides relevant information on post-operative findings. Our results suggest that CCT should be considered as a useful imaging modality in this clinical setting.

21511672
Inflammation, neovascularization and intra-plaque hemorrhage are associated with increased reparative collagen content: Implication for plaque progression in diabetic atherosclerosis.
Sustained inflammation may stimulate a reparative process increasing early reparative type III collagen synthesis, promoting atherosclerotic plaque progression. We evaluated inflammation, neovascularization, intra-plaque hemorrhage (IPH), and collagen deposition in human aortic atherosclerotic plaques from patients with and without diabetes mellitus (DM). Plaques were procured at autopsy from lower thoracic and abdominal aorta from DM (n = 20) and non-DM (n = 22) patients. Inflammation and neovascularization were quantified by double-label immunochemistry and the IPH grade was scored using H&E-stained sections. Type I and type III collagens were quantified using Picro-Sirius red stain with polarization microscopy and computerized planimetry. In non-DM plaques, 27%, 40%, and 33% had mild, moderate and severe inflammation in the fibrous cap and shoulder compared with 2%, 30% and 68% in DM plaques (p < 0.001). The geometric mean neovessel count was increased in DM versus non-DM plaques (140 [95% CI: 119-165] versus 59 [95% CI: 51-70]; p < 0.001). The IPH grade was increased in DM verses non-DM plaques (0.82 ± 0.11 versus 0.29 ± 0.11; p < 0.001) (percentage grade). The density of type III was increased in DM plaques (0.16 ± 0.01 versus 0.06 ± 0.01; p < 0.001) with a non-significant reduction in type I density in DM when compared with non-DM (0.28 ± 0.03 versus 0.33 ± 0.03; p = 0.303) (content per mm(2)). The increase in type III collagen content correlated with total neovessel content (r = 0.58; p < 0.001) in DM plaques. In conclusion, our study suggests that enhanced type III collagen deposition was associated with inflammation, neovascularization and IPH, and may be a contributing factor in DM plaque progression.

21502585
Promoting global cardiovascular health: moving forward.


21502583
Cellular senescence, vascular disease, and aging: part 1 of a 2-part review.


21481422
Increased macrophage infiltration and neovascularization in congenital bicuspid aortic valve stenosis.
OBJECTIVES: Patients with congenital bicuspid aortic valves have aortic valve stenosis at a relatively young age compared with patients with tricuspid aortic valves. We hypothesize that aortic valve stenosis evolves from a more aggressive inflammatory process, with increased macrophage/T-cell and neovessel content in congenital bicuspid aortic valveswhen compared with that seen in tricuspid valves. METHODS: Fifty-one severely stenotic aortic valves were obtained at the time of aortic valve replacement. A total of 17 bicuspid and 34 tricuspid aortic valves were evaluated. Macrophage/T-cell infiltration (CD68 plus CD3) and neovessel density (CD34) were evaluated with immunohistochemical staining. Leaflet calcification and ossification were also quantified. Real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to assess expression of chondromodulin 1 and vascular endothelial growth factor. RESULTS: The density of macrophages/T cells was greater in congenital bicuspid aortic valves than in tricuspid valves (51 ± 31 vs 23 ± 13 cells/mm(2), P = .002). Neovascularization was more frequently noted in congenital bicuspid aortic valves when compared with tricuspid valves (31 ± 10 vs 21 ± 9 vessels/mm(2), P = .0005), and calcification was more severe (P = .03). Expression of chondromodulin 1 demonstrated a 6-fold downregulation (P = .0003) and expression of vascular endothelial growth factor demonstrated a 2-fold increase (P = .02) in congenital bicuspid aortic valves compared with that seen in tricuspid valves. Multivariable analyses demonstrated significant associations between bicuspid aortic valve anatomy and increased inflammatory cell infiltration (? = 25.8, P = .0007) and neovascularization (? = 9.4, P = .001), despite adjusting for measured covariates. CONCLUSIONS: The pathogenesis of aortic valve stenosis in bicuspid aortic valves is associated with a more aggressive inflammatory process with increased macrophage infiltration and neovascularization when compared with that seen in tricuspid valves.

21343593
Aspirin: a historical and contemporary therapeutic overview.


21304473
Diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for small abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) affect 5% of the population in developed countries and are characterized by progressive aortic dilatation with an unpredictable time course. This condition is more common in men than in women, and in smokers than in nonsmokers. If left untreated, AAA can result in aortic rupture and death. Pathologically, aortic extracellular matrix degradation, inflammation, and neovascularization are hallmarks of AAA. Diagnosis of AAA and subsequent surveillance utilize established aortic imaging methods, such as ultrasound, CT, and MRI. More-speculative diagnostic approaches include molecular and cellular imaging methods that interrogate the underlying pathological processes at work within the aneurysm. In this Review, we explore the current diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for the management of AAA. We also describe the diagnostic potential of new imaging techniques and therapeutic potential of new treatments for the management of small AAA.

21259274
Rhythm control for management of patients with atrial fibrillation: balancing the use of antiarrhythmic drugs and catheter ablation.
Antiarrhythmic drug (AAD) therapy may be beneficial for patients with symptoms attributable to atrial fibrillation despite adequate rate control. The limited long-term efficacy of AAD and the relatively large proportion of patients discontinuing therapy because of side effects led to the development of nonpharmacological therapies to achieve rhythm control. Pressing questions remain about the effect of ablation therapy on long-term patient outcomes. Based on recent clinical trials and meta-analyses, ablation appears more effective and possibly safer than AAD for long-term maintenance of sinus rhythm in selected patients, but the evidence is insufficient to recommend ablation in preference to drug therapy as the first AAD therapy for the majority of patients in whom a rhythm control strategy is justified. Herein, we review the most current evidence supporting the use of AAD and catheter ablation in atrial fibrillation.

21243010
Surgery for asymptomatic degenerative aortic and mitral valve disease.
Degenerative valvular heart disease, the most common form of valve disease in the Western world, can lead to aortic stenosis (AS) or mitral regurgitation (MR). In current guidelines for the management of patients with degenerative valvular disease, surgical intervention is recommended at the onset of symptoms or in the presence of left ventricular systolic impairment. Whether surgery is appropriate for asymptomatic patients remains a controversial issue. We argue the case for early pre-emptive intervention in selected, asymptomatic individuals with AS or MR, drawing on contemporary perioperative data, predictors of disease progression, and studies of the natural history of degenerative valvular heart disease.

21164355
Adeno-associated virus serotype 8 ApoA-I gene transfer reduces progression of atherosclerosis in ApoE-KO mice: comparison of intramuscular and intravenous administration.
Apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I)/high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-raising treatments are effective antiatherosclerotic strategies. We have compared the antiatherogenic effects of human ApoA-I (hApoA-I) overexpression by intraportal and intramuscular gene transfer in atherosclerotic ApoE-knockout mice. Atherosclerotic lesions were induced by atherogenic diet. After atherosclerosis induction, a group of animals was killed and served as atherosclerosis baseline-control group. The remaining animals were randomized into the following groups: (1) atherosclerosis-progression-control, (2) intraportal/vector administration, and (3) intramuscular/vector administration. Aortas and hearts were processed for atherosclerotic quantification by en face Sudan IV and Oil Red-O, respectively. Liver and muscle specimens were processed for protein/gene expression analysis. A sustained increase in hApoA-I/HDL plasma levels was observed in both transduced groups. hApoA-I overexpression abolished plaque progression versus progression-control group. hApoA-I overexpression significantly reduced lesion macrophage, feature indicative of plaque stabilization. Scavenger receptor class-B type I (SR-BI), but not ATP-binding cassette, sub-family A (ABCA), member 1 (ABCA-1), was significantly upregulated in treated groups versus progression-controls. The results of this study show a similar effect of hApoA-I/HDL overexpression on plaque progression/stabilization by 2 different routes of administration. Our results showing similar effects using either intramuscular administration and intraportal route of administration may have significant clinical implications, given the reduced medical risk to patient and cost of intramuscular injections.

21163454
Contrast-enhanced ultrasound imaging detects intraplaque neovascularization in an experimental model of atherosclerosis.
The aims of this study were to investigate the feasibility of contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEU) imaging for in vivo visualization of intraplaque neovascularization and to correlate the in vivo observations with histological assessment of neovessel density and plaque composition in an experimental animal model of advanced atherosclerosis. Recent evidence has linked plaque angiogenesis with enhanced atherosclerotic plaque progression and vulnerability. Increased neovascularization has been detected in ruptured human lesions and is associated with clinical manifestations of plaque rupture. Advanced aortic atherosclerosis was induced in New Zealand white rabbits (n = 21; high cholesterol-rich diet/double-balloon aortic denudation). Animals underwent standard and CEU imaging at the end of the atherosclerosis induction period. Six age-matched animals served as control subjects. Within 24 h, animals were euthanized and aortas processed for histopathological evaluation of plaque composition and neovascularization. Imaged plaques were classified as contrast enhanced (CE) positive or CE negative, according to their contrast enhancement on CEU imaging. The lesions were also classified as class III (predominantly echogenic) or class II (predominantly echolucent), according to their echogenicity on non-CEU images. No contrast enhancement was observed in control animals. In atherosclerotic animals, class III lesions showed an increased contrast enhancement compared with class II lesions and CE-positive lesions showed greater neovascularization than CE-negative plaques. Macrophage density, but not smooth muscle cell density, was significantly higher in CE-positive than CE-negative lesions. As expected, class III lesions showed increased macrophage density compared with class II plaques. Intraplaque neovessel density at histology was significantly higher in CE-positive than in CE-negative lesions. Class III plaques showed a significantly higher neovessel density compared with class II lesions. A strong correlation between intraplaque neovessels and contrast enhancement was found. CEU imaging is a feasible noninvasive imaging modality to evaluate intraplaque neovascularization. A noninvasive imaging modality to assess lesion neovascularization could be of great importance to identify vascularized, "high-risk" lesions before rupture.

21146680
Diagnostic value of coronary artery calcium scoring in low-intermediate risk patients evaluated in the emergency department for acute coronary syndrome.
Early and accurate triage of patients with possible ischemic chest pain remains challenging in the emergency department because current risk stratification techniques have significant cost and limited availability. The aim of this study was to determine the diagnostic value of the coronary artery calcium score (CACS) for the detection of obstructive coronary artery disease (CAD) in low- to intermediate-risk patients evaluated in the emergency department for suspected acute coronary syndromes. A total of 225 patients presenting to the emergency department with acute chest pain and Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) scores <4 who underwent non-contrast- and contrast-enhanced coronary computed tomographic angiography were included. CACS was calculated from the noncontrast scan using the Agatston method. The prevalence of obstructive CAD (defined from the contrast scan as ? 50% maximal reduction in luminal diameter in any segment) was 9% and increased significantly with higher scores (p <0.01 for trend). CACS of 0 were observed in 133 patients (59%), of whom only 2 (1.5%) had obstructive CAD. The diagnostic accuracy of CACS to detect obstructive CAD was good, with an area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve of 0.88 and a negative predictive value of 99% for a CACS of 0. In a multivariate model, CACS was independently associated with obstructive CAD (odds ratio 7.01, p = 0.02) and provided additional diagnostic value over traditional CAD risk factors. In conclusion, CACS appears to be an effective initial tool for risk stratification of low- to intermediate-risk patients with possible acute coronary syndromes, on the basis of its high negative predictive value and additive diagnostic value.

21118852
Monitoring of arterial wall remodelling in atherosclerotic rabbits with a magnetic resonance imaging contrast agent binding to matrix metalloproteinases.
Aims P947 is a gadolinium-based magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agent with high affinity for several matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) involved in arterial wall remodelling. We tested whether the intensity of enhancement detected in vivo in the arterial wall with P947 and MRI correlates with actual tissue MMP-related enzymatic activity measured in a rabbit atherosclerotic model subjected to dietary manipulations. Methods and results Aortas of 15 rabbits in which atherosclerotic lesions were induced by balloon angioplasty and 4 months of hypercholesterolaemic diet were imaged at 'baseline' with P947-enhanced MRI. Atherosclerotic rabbits were divided into three groups: five rabbits were sacrificed ('baseline' group); five rabbits continued to be fed a lipid-supplemented diet ('high-fat' group); and five rabbits were switched from atherogenic to a purified chow diet ('low-fat' group). Four months later, a second P947-enhanced MRI was acquired in the 10 remaining rabbits. A significantly lower signal was detected in the aortic wall of rabbits from the 'low-fat' group as compared with rabbits from the 'high-fat' group (21 ± 6 vs. 46 ± 3%, respectively; P = 0.04). Such differences were not detected with the contrast agent P1135, which lacks the MMP-specific peptide sequence. In addition, the intensity of aortic wall enhancement detected with MRI after injection of P947 strongly correlated with actual MMP-2 gelatinolytic activity measured in corresponding aortic segments using zymography (r = 0.87). Conclusion P947-enhanced MRI can distinguish dietary-induced variations in MMP-related enzymatic activity within plaques in an experimental atherosclerotic model, supporting its utility as a clinical imaging tool for in vivo detection of arterial wall remodelling.

21070928
Bisphosphonate Use and Prevalence of Valvular and Vascular Calcification in Women MESA (The Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis).
the aim of this study was to determine whether nitrogen-containing bisphosphonate (NCBP) therapy is associated with the prevalence of cardiovascular calcification. cardiovascular calcification correlates with atherosclerotic disease burden. Experimental data suggest that NCBP might limit cardiovascular calcification, which has implications for disease prevention. the relationship of NCBP use to the prevalence of aortic valve, aortic valve ring, mitral annulus, thoracic aorta, and coronary artery calcification (AVC, AVRC, MAC, TAC, and CAC, respectively) detected by computed tomography was assessed in 3,710 women within the MESA (Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis) with regression modeling. Analyses were age-stratified, because of a significant interaction between age and NCBP use (interaction p values: AVC p < 0.0001; AVRC p < 0.0001; MAC p = 0.002; TAC p < 0.0001; CAC p = 0.046). After adjusting for age; body mass index; demographic data; diabetes; smoking; blood pressure; cholesterol levels; and statin, hormone replacement, and renin-angiotensin inhibitor therapy, NCBP use was associated with a lower prevalence of cardiovascular calcification in women ? 65 years of age (prevalence ratio: AVC 0.68 [95% confidence interval (CI): 0.41 to 1.13]; AVRC 0.65 [95% CI: 0.51 to 0.84]; MAC 0.54 [95% CI: 0.33 to 0.93]; TAC 0.69 [95% CI: 0.54 to 0.88]; CAC 0.89 [95% CI: 0.78 to 1.02]), whereas calcification was more prevalent in NCBP users among the 2,181 women <65 years of age (AVC 4.00 [95% CI: 2.33 to 6.89]; AVRC 1.92 [95% CI: 1.42 to 2.61]; MAC 2.35 [95% CI: 1.12 to 4.84]; TAC 2.17 [95% CI: 1.49 to 3.15]; CAC 1.23 [95% CI: 0.97 to 1.57]). among women in the diverse MESA cohort, NCBPs were associated with decreased prevalence of cardiovascular calcification in older subjects but more prevalent cardiovascular calcification in younger ones. Further study is warranted to clarify these age-dependent NCBP effects.

21045785
Urgent need for human resources to promote global cardiovascular health.
The World Health Organization estimates the existence of a global shortage of over 4 million health-care workers. Given the growing global burden of cardiovascular disease (CVD), the shortfall in global human resources for health (HRH) is probably even greater than predicted. A critical challenge going forward is to determine how to integrate CVD-related human resource needs into the overall global HRH agenda. We describe the CVD implications of core HRH objectives, including coverage, motivation, and competence, in addition to issues such as health-care worker migration and the need for input from multiple stakeholders to successfully address the current problems. We emphasize gaps in knowledge regarding HRH for global CVD-related care and research opportunities. In light of the current global epidemiologic transition from communicable to noncommunicable diseases, now is the time for the global health community to focus on CVD-related human resource needs.

21028895
Multimodal clinical imaging to longitudinally assess a nanomedical anti-inflammatory treatment in experimental atherosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease causing great morbidity and mortality in the Western world. To increase the anti-inflammatory action and decrease adverse effects of glucocorticoids (PLP), a nanomedicinal liposomal formulation of this drug (L-PLP) was developed and intravenously applied at a dose of 15 mg/kg PLP to a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Since atherosclerosis is a systemic disease, emerging imaging modalities for assessing atherosclerotic plaque are being developed. (18)F-Fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography and dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging, methods commonly used in oncology, were applied to longitudinally assess therapeutic efficacy. Significant anti-inflammatory effects were observed as early as 2 days that lasted up to at least 7 days after administration of a single dose of L-PLP. No significant changes were found for the free PLP treated animals. These findings were corroborated by immunohistochemical analysis of macrophage density in the vessel wall. In conclusion, this study evaluates a powerful two-pronged strategy for efficient treatment of atherosclerosis that includes nanomedical therapy of atherosclerotic plaques and the application of noninvasive and clinically approved imaging techniques to monitor delivery and therapeutic responses. Importantly, we demonstrate unprecedented rapid anti-inflammatory effects in atherosclerotic lesions after the nanomedical therapy.

20864196
Carvedilol administration in acute myocardial infarction results in stronger inhibition of early markers of left ventricular remodeling than metoprolol.
BACKGROUND: The structural secuelae of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is mostly dictated by left ventricular (LV) remodelling, leading to heart failure. Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) play a critical role in LV remodelling. ?-blockers are first line therapy for AMI and heart failure; however, the mechanisms responsible for their benefits remain poorly understood. Different ?-blocker agents have been shown to exert beneficial activities both in AMI and heart failure, however, their role in early remodelling after ischemia/reperfusion is to be fully elucidated. We sought to compare the effect of 2 of the most prescribed ?-blocker agents in early markers of LV remodelling after AMI. METHODS: A reperfused AMI was induced in Yorshire pigs, being randomized to early intravenous carvedilol, metoprolol or placebo. Twenty-four hours after reperfusion markers of early remodelling were addressed in the LV. RESULTS: The early administration of both ?-blockers is able to significantly reduce macrophage infiltration as well as the expression and activity of MCP-1 and MMP-2 compared to placebo. The effects of carvedilol were much stronger than those of metoprolol. Conversely, carvedilol upregulated the expression TIMP-2 to a greater extent than metoprolol. CONCLUSIONS: In an AMI model closely mimicking human pathophysiology, the early administration of carvedilol reduced the expression of markers associated with early LV remodelling to greater extent than metoprolol. These findings may explain the superior clinical benefits exerted by carvedilol in heart failure.

20677926
Amniotic fluid cells are more efficiently reprogrammed to pluripotency than adult cells.
Recently, cultured human adult skin cells were reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, which have characteristics similar to human embryonic stem (hES) cells. Patient-derived iPS cells offer genetic and immunologic advantages for cell and tissue replacement or engineering. The efficiency of generating human iPS cells has been very low; therefore an easily and efficiently reprogrammed cell type is highly desired. Here, we demonstrate that terminally differentiated human amniotic fluid (AF) skin cells provide an accessible source for efficiently generating abundant-induced pluripotent stem (AF-iPS) cells. By induction of pluripotency with the transcription factor quartet (OCT3/4, SOX2, KLF4, and c-MYC) the terminally differentiated, cultured AF skin cells formed iPS colonies approximately twice as fast and yielded nearly a two-hundred percent increase in number, compared to cultured adult skin cells. AF-iPS cells were identical to hES cells for morphological and growth characteristics, antigenic stem cell markers, stem cell gene expression, telomerase activity, in vitro and in vivo differentiation into the three germ layers and for their capacity to form embryoid bodies (EBs) and teratomas. Our findings provide a biological interesting conclusion that these fetal AF cells are more rapidly, easily, and efficiently reprogrammed to pluripotency than neonatal and adult cells. AF-iPS cells may have a "young," more embryonic like epigenetic background, which may facilitate and accelerate pluripotency. The ability to efficiently and rapidly reprogram terminally differentiated AF skin cells and generate induced pluripotent stem cells provides an abundant iPS cell source for various basic studies and a potential for future patient-specific personalized therapies.

20668118
Atherosclerotic plaque composition: analysis with multicolor CT and targeted gold nanoparticles.
To investigate the potential of spectral computed tomography (CT) (popularly referred to as multicolor CT), used in combination with a gold high-density lipoprotein nanoparticle contrast agent (Au-HDL), for characterization of macrophage burden, calcification, and stenosis of atherosclerotic plaques. The local animal care committee approved all animal experiments. A preclinical spectral CT system in which incident x-rays are divided into six different energy bins was used for multicolor imaging. Au-HDL, an iodine-based contrast agent, and calcium phosphate were imaged in a variety of phantoms. Apolipoprotein E knockout (apo E-KO) mice were used as the model for atherosclerosis. Gold nanoparticles targeted to atherosclerosis (Au-HDL) were intravenously injected at a dose of 500 mg per kilogram of body weight. Iodine-based contrast material was injected 24 hours later, after which the mice were imaged. Wild-type mice were used as controls. Macrophage targeting by Au-HDL was further evaluated by using transmission electron microscopy and confocal microscopy of aorta sections. Multicolor CT enabled differentiation of Au-HDL, iodine-based contrast material, and calcium phosphate in the phantoms. Accumulations of Au-HDL were detected in the aortas of the apo E-KO mice, while the iodine-based contrast agent and the calcium-rich tissue could also be detected and thus facilitated visualization of the vasculature and bones (skeleton), respectively, during a single scanning examination. Microscopy revealed Au-HDL to be primarily localized in the macrophages on the aorta sections; hence, the multicolor CT images provided information about the macrophage burden. Spectral CT used with carefully chosen contrast agents may yield valuable information about atherosclerotic plaque composition.

20559998
Evolving anatomic, functional, and molecular imaging in the early detection and prognosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Evolving imaging modalities in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), such as tissue Doppler, speckle tracking, measures of myocardial blood flow, and cardiac magnetic resonance with gadolinium enhancement, have advanced our understanding of the pathogenesis of myocardial dysfunction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. These modalities have the potential to differentiate HCM from other causes of left ventricular hypertrophy when there is uncertainty about the diagnosis and to identify affected individuals in the pre-clinical phase of the disease process. Furthermore, preliminary data suggests that functional imaging techniques may add incremental value to conventional risk stratification tools to identify individuals at high risk for sudden death or progression to congestive heart failure.

20530023
General cardiology perspective: decision making regarding revascularization of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease in the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) trial.


20498452
Promoting cardiovascular and cerebrovascular health.


20440291
Early identification of atherosclerotic disease by noninvasive imaging.
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of death worldwide, and its prevalence is expected to increase further, which will be associated with a substantial economic burden. High-risk or vulnerable plaques and, indirectly, the burden of atherosclerotic disease, are responsible for most major cardiovascular events. Most of the current prevention strategies are focused on identifying and managing the established risk factors (smoking, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, obesity, physical inactivity) for atherosclerosis. Another opportunity for further characterizing the population at high CVD risk would be to measure the occurrence and progression of subclinical (asymptomatic) atherosclerotic burden. The detection of subclinical atherosclerosis and high-risk plaques, if proven to predict cardiovascular events, may enable the establishment of earlier control of CVD risk factors and help preventing CVD. In this Review, we address the potential progress in CVD prevention brought about by the use of noninvasive imaging techniques to identify subclinical atherosclerosis.

20425168
Anticoagulation for mechanical heart valves in patients with and without atrial fibrillation.
Surgical replacement of a native valve with a biological or mechanical prosthesis is the definitive treatment for many forms of advanced valvular heart disease. Mechanical heart valves are less prone to structural deterioration compared with bioprostheses, but require chronic oral anticoagulation to prevent thromboembolic events. Thromboembolic risk varies based on patient-related risk factors, including atrial fibrillation, advanced age, low ejection fraction, and hypercoagulability. Other important correlates of high thromboembolic risk include valve design, valve position, anticoagulation variability, and time from surgery. Clinical management is further complicated when antithrombotics may need to be interrupted or altered during surgery or pregnancy. At present, vitamin K antagonists are the only approved agents for thromboprophylaxis but are limited because of a narrow therapeutic window and requirement for frequent monitoring. Novel anticoagulants, including inhibitors of factor IIa and Xa, are currently being evaluated and may emerge as alternatives to vitamin K antagonists.

20359599
The year in atherothrombosis.


20304838
Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano rapidly reverses aortic valve stenosis and decreases leaflet inflammation in an experimental rabbit model.
Aortic stenosis (AS) is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano (rApoA-I(M)) induces atherosclerotic plaque regression. The aims of this study were to determine the effects of rApoA-I(M) on experimental aortic valve degeneration and its mechanisms of action. New Zealand White rabbits (n = 20) were fed an atherogenic diet for 9 months and then randomized to either placebo or rApoA-I(M). Echocardiography was used to assess the effect of the treatments on AS. Porcine aortic valve myofibroblasts (PAVMF) treated with oxidized low-density lipoprotein served to define the effects of rApoA-I(M) on the expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB, and alkaline phosphatase (AP). Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano increased aortic valve area (AVA) by 32% (0.25 +/- 0.05 to 0.34 +/- 0.07 cm(2), P < 0.01); whereas AVA remained unchanged in the placebo group (0.24 +/- 0.05 to 0.26 +/- 0.04 cm(2), P = 0.58). Histopathological examination of aortic valves in the rApoA-I(M) animals showed significantly less leaflet thickening, inflammation, and calcification vs. the placebo group. In vitro, rApoA-I(M) significantly inhibited MCP-1, AP, and NF-kappaB and decreased intracellular cholesterol content in PAVMF. Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano treatment reverses AS in this experimental rabbit model. The beneficial effects seem to be mediated by enhanced cholesterol removal and by reduced inflammation and calcification.

20097703
Anxiety is a better predictor of platelet reactivity in coronary artery disease patients than depression.
Depression and anxiety are linked to coronary events but the mechanism(s) remains unclear. We investigated the associations of depression and anxiety with serotonin-mediated platelet hyperactivity in coronary artery disease (CAD) patients in a cross-sectional study. Three months after an acute coronary event, stable CAD patients (n = 83) on aspirin and clopidogrel were evaluated for depression (beck depression inventory) and anxiety (hospital anxiety and depression scale), and their platelet reactivity was measured (optical aggregometry and flow cytometric fibrinogen binding in response to adenosine diphosphate (ADP = 5 microM) and two serotonin + epinephrine doses [5HT:E (L) = 4 microM + 4 microM and 5HT:E (H) = 10 microM + 4 microM]. Platelet reactivity was significantly higher in depressed and anxious than in depressed only or non-depressed-and-non-anxious patients. Aggregation (mean +/- SE) was 41.9 +/- 2.6% vs. 32.2 +/- 2.6% vs. 30.4 +/- 3.7% with 5HT:E (L) and 46.9 +/- 2.7% vs. 35.6 +/- 2.7% vs. 31.7 +/- 3.8% with 5HT:E (H) (P < 0.05 for both). Differences in ADP aggregations were not significant, perhaps because of clopidogrel therapy. Flow cytometry findings were similar. In a multivariate linear regression model adjusted for age, body mass index, and each other, anxiety symptoms independently predicted all 5HT:E-mediated platelet reactivity measures, whereas depression predicted none. Anxiety is associated with elevated serotonin-mediated platelet reactivity in stable CAD patients and symptoms of anxiety show strong, independent correlations with platelet function.

20014190
Membranous septal aneurysm causing right ventricular outflow tract obstruction.


19913314
The cardioprotection granted by metoprolol is restricted to its administration prior to coronary reperfusion.
Myocardial infarct size is a strong predictor of cardiovascular events. Intravenous metoprolol before coronary reperfusion has been shown to reduce infarct size; however, it is unknown whether oral metoprolol initiated early after reperfusion, as clinical guidelines recommend, is similarly cardioprotective. We compared the extent of myocardial salvage associated with intravenous pre-reperfusion-metoprolol administration in comparison with oral post-reperfusion-metoprolol or placebo. We also studied the effect on suspected markers of reperfusion injury. Thirty Yorkshire-pigs underwent a reperfused myocardial infarction, being randomized to pre-reperfusion-metoprolol, post-reperfusion-metoprolol or placebo. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was performed in eighteen pigs at day 3 for the quantification of salvaged myocardium. The amounts of at-risk and infarcted myocardium were quantified using T2-weighted and post-contrast delayed enhancement imaging, respectively. Twelve animals were sacrificed after 24h for reperfusion injury analysis. The pre-reperfusion-metoprolol group had significantly larger salvaged myocardium than the post-reperfusion-metoprolol or the placebo groups (31 ± 4%, 13 ± 6%, and 7 ± 3% of myocardium at-risk respectively). Post-mortem analyses suggest lesser myocardial reperfusion injury in the pre-reperfusion-metoprolol in comparison with the other 2 groups (lower neutrophil infiltration, decreased myocardial apoptosis, and higher activation of the salvage-kinase phospho-Akt). Salvaged myocardium and reperfusion injury pair wise comparisons proved there were significant differences between the pre-reperfusion-metoprolol and the other 2 groups, but not among the latter two. The intravenous administration of metoprolol before coronary reperfusion results in larger myocardial salvage than its oral administration initiated early after reperfusion. If confirmed in the clinical setting, the timing and route of ?-blocker initiation could be revisited.

19863464
Chronic renal insufficiency, cardiovascular disease and mortality in women: a causal relationship or coincidence?
Evaluation of: Kurth T, de Jong PE, Cook NR, Buring J: Kidney function and risk of cardiovascular disease and mortality in women: a prospective cohort study. BMJ 338, B2769 (2009). The incidence of cardiovascular disease events and cardiovascular death in a cohort of 27,939 apparently healthy female health professionals over 45 years of age (Women's Health Study) who were stratified by estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and followed for 12 years was assessed. Women with a GFR less than 60 ml/min/1.73 m(2) demonstrated an increased risk of death from cardiovascular disease (HR: 1.68; 95% CI: 1.02-2.79) compared with women with a GFR higher than 90 ml/min/1.73 m(2). There was no difference in risk when groups with decreased GFR of different ranges were compared with the group of women with normal GFR for first cardiovascular disease, all-cause mortality, myocardial infarction, stroke, coronary revascularization and noncardiovascular death.

19808576
Relationships among regional arterial inflammation, calcification, risk factors, and biomarkers: a prospective fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography/computed tomography imaging study.
Fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography (FDG PET) imaging of atherosclerosis has been used to quantify plaque inflammation and to measure the effect of plaque-stabilizing drugs. We explored how atherosclerotic plaque inflammation varies across arterial territories and how it relates to arterial calcification. We also tested the hypotheses that the degree of local arterial inflammation measured by PET is correlated with the extent of systemic inflammation and presence of risk factors for vascular disease. Forty-one subjects underwent vascular PET/computed tomography imaging with FDG. All had either vascular disease or multiple risk factors. Forty subjects underwent carotid imaging, 27 subjects underwent aortic, 24 subjects iliac, and 13 subjects femoral imaging. Thirty-three subjects had a panel of biomarkers analyzed. We found strong associations between FDG uptake in neighboring arteries (left versus right carotid, r=0.91, P<0.001; ascending aorta versus aortic arch, r=0.88, P<0.001). Calcification and inflammation rarely overlapped within arteries (carotid artery FDG uptake versus calcium score, r=-0.42, P=0.03). Carotid artery FDG uptake was greater in those with a history of coronary artery disease (target-to- <0.01) and in males versus females (target-to- <0.05). Similar findings were also noted in the aorta and iliac arteries. Subjects with the highest levels of FDG uptake also had the greatest concentrations of inflammatory biomarkers (descending aorta target-to- =0.53, P=0.01; carotid target-to- =0.50, P=0.01). Nonsignificant positive trends were seen between FDG uptake and levels of interleukin-18, fibrinogen, and C-reactive protein. Finally, we found that the atheroprotective biomarker adiponectin was negatively correlated with the degree of arterial inflammation in the descending aorta (r=-0.49, P=0.03). This study shows that FDG PET imaging can increase our knowledge of how atherosclerotic plaque inflammation relates to calcification, serum biomarkers, and vascular risk factors. Plaque inflammation and calcification rarely overlap, supporting the theory that calcification represents a late, burnt-out stage of atherosclerosis. Inflammation in one arterial territory is associated with inflammation elsewhere, and the degree of local arterial inflammation is reflected in the blood levels of several circulating biomarkers. We suggest that FDG PET imaging could be used as a surrogate marker of both atherosclerotic disease activity and drug effectiveness. Prospective, event-driven studies are now underway to determine the role of this technique in clinical risk prediction.

19716042
Exercise performance in patients with pulmonary hypertension linked to cardiac magnetic resonance measures.
The 6-minute walk distance (6MWD) is a useful measure of functional class and has been shown to predict mortality in patients with pulmonary hypertension (PH). Determinants of functional class in PH are incompletely understood. We hypothesized that cardiovascular structure and function, as determined by cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging, and cardiac hemodynamics, as determined by right heart catheterization (RHC), would predict 6MWD in adult patients with PH. Forty-three patients (32 women) with PH underwent RHC, CMR and 6MWD testing within a 3-month period. The 6MWD was correlated with RHC and CMR variables using Spearman rho (r) coefficients. These relationships were further evaluated using linear regression analysis. Median 6MWD was 233.2 (interquartile range 161.6 to 338.4) meters. The 6MWD was correlated with pulmonary artery (PA) elasticity (r = 0.42, p = 0.006), PA average blood flow velocity (r = 0.38, p = 0.014), right ventricular stroke volume index (RVSVI; r = 0.41, p = 0.008), left ventricular SVI (LVSVI; r = 0.36, p = 0.018) and RV stroke work index (RVSWI; r = 0.37, p = 0.017). These associations remained significant after adjustment for age, gender, body mass index and the presence of lung disease. Exercise performance did not correlate with commonly measured indices such as ventricular volume, ejection fraction or pulmonary pressure. Stroke volume index, PA elasticity and PA average blood flow velocity are novel CMR parameters associated with functional class in PH. CMR can provide insights into determinants of exercise performance and may be a useful tool to non-invasively monitor cardiovascular status in patients with PH.

19701094
Safe and sustained overexpression of functional apolipoprotein A-I/high-density lipoprotein in apolipoprotein A-I-null mice by muscular adeno-associated viral serotype 8 vector gene transfer.
High levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) have protective effects against atherosclerosis and cardiovascular diseases. The postulated mechanism of action for these benefits is an enhanced reverse cholesterol transport. Apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I) is the major protein of HDL. The clinical benefits of raising ApoA-I/HDL have been clearly established by clinical and epidemiological studies. Despite these observations, there are not very effective pharmacological means for raising HDL. ApoA-I gene delivery by viral vectors seems a promising strategy to raise ApoA-I/HDL levels. Sustained gene expression in animals and humans has been attained using adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors. The aim of the present study was to determine the efficiency, safety, and biological activity of human ApoA-I intramuscularly delivered using an AAV vector in mice. AAV serotype 8 vectors encoding for human ApoA-I transgene were administered intraportally and intramuscularly in ApoA-I- deficient animals. ApoA-I levels were measured every 2 weeks post administration. The effectiveness of the generated HDL was tested in vitro in cholesterol-loaded macrophages. The administration of the vectors resulted in a significant and sustained increase in ApoA-I and HDL plasma levels for up to 16 weeks at similar extent by both routes of administration. Activity of the generated HDL in removal of cholesterol from cholesterol-loaded macrophages was similar in both groups. Our data suggest that intramuscular AAV8-mediated gene transfer of human ApoA-I results in a significant and maintained increase in ApoA-I and functional HDL.

19621012
Cardiovascular risk factors in patients with chronic kidney disease.
Patients with chronic kidney disease have a higher burden of cardiovascular disease, which increases in a dose-dependent fashion with worsening kidney function. Traditional cardiovascular risk factors, including advanced age, diabetes mellitus, hypertension and dyslipidemia, have an important role in the progression of cardiovascular disease in patients who have a reduced glomerular filtration rate, especially in those with mild-to-moderate kidney disease. In patients with severe kidney disease, nontraditional or 'novel' risk factors, including inflammation, oxidative stress, vascular calcification, a prothrombotic milieu, and anemia, seem to confer additional risk. In this Review, we highlight factors that increase cardiovascular risk in patients with a reduced estimated glomerular filtration rate. In addition, we discuss therapeutic strategies for reducing cardiovascular risk in patients with kidney disease, whose unique atherosclerotic phenotype might require an approach that differs from traditional models developed in populations with normal kidney function. Therapeutic paradigms for patients with chronic kidney disease and cardiovascular risk factors must be evaluated in randomized trials, from which such patients have often been excluded.

19539140
Promoting mechanisms of vascular health: circulating progenitor cells, angiogenesis, and reverse cholesterol transport.
To understand and promote vascular health, we must reduce the aggression to the vessel wall and enhance the physiologic mechanisms leading to restoration of vessel wall function. Three main defense mechanisms are responsible for maintaining cardiovascular homeostasis: the regenerative production of endothelial progenitor cells, vessel wall angiogenesis, and macrophage-mediated reverse cholesterol transport. Endothelial progenitor cells can restore vessel wall function and reduce atherosclerosis. In patients with risk factors, high levels of circulating progenitor cells increase event-free survival from cardiovascular events. Mobilization of progenitor cells includes physical and pharmacological approaches, of which exercise and statin therapy have great potential. Angiogenesis is a pivotal defense mechanism to counteract hypoxia and is needed for plaque regression. However, neovessels are susceptible for intraplaque hemorrhage, particularly in diabetes mellitus. In these patients, the haptoglobin 2-2 genotype is the more affected, and may benefit from an antioxidant approach. Finally, the reverse cholesterol transport system is the main mechanism for plaque regression. In addition to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, apolipoprotein A-I therapies and the promotion of cholesterol efflux from macrophages by the ABCA1 and ABCG1 transporter systems hold great promise and may be available for therapeutic application in the near future.

19496900
Crushed clopidogrel administered via nasogastric tube has faster and greater absorption than oral whole tablets.
To compare the absorption of 300 mg clopidogrel administered crushed via nasogastric (NG) tube versus whole tablets taken orally in healthy volunteers. Earlier antiplatelet therapy has proven benefits in treatment of myocardial infarction and in patients undergoing PCI. Aspirin can be delivered early in crushed form via NG tube after CABG surgery to prevent graft occlusion. If clopidogrel given crushed via NG tube provides faster absorption, it could allow earlier clopidogrel loading. Nine healthy human subjects (34.7 +/- 11.1 years, 5 males) were given 300 mg clopidogrel in crushed form via NG tube with 30 mL water after 8 hours of fasting. Plasma levels of the primary circulating inactive clopidogrel metabolite SR26334 were measured after 20 minutes, 40 minutes, 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, and 24 hours of dosing. Following >or=2 week washout, same subjects swallowed 300 mg clopidogrel (four 75 mg tablets) after an 8-hour fasting and SR26334 levels were measured at the same time points. Plasma SR26334 concentrations peaked earlier after crushed delivery than after oral intake (44 vs. 70 minutes, P = 0.023) and the median peak was 80% higher (13,083 vs. 7,255 ng/mL, respectively, P = 0.021). At 40 minutes, area under the curve was almost twofold greater with NG administration than oral administration (geometric means ratio = 0.5299, 95% CI = 0.28-0.99, P = 0.048), but was similar over the 24-hour period with both administration methods (geometric means ratio = 1.05, 95% CI = 0.84-1.32, P = 0.646). A 300 mg loading dose of crushed clopidogrel administered via NG tube provides faster and greater bioavailability than an equal dose taken orally as whole tablets. The clinical benefits of this strategy need to be investigated.

19467659
Multimodality imaging of atherosclerotic plaque activity and composition using FDG-PET/CT and MRI in carotid and femoral arteries.
To evaluate the relationship between atherosclerotic plaque inflammation, as assessed by FDG-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT), and plaque morphology and composition, as assessed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), in the carotid and femoral arteries. Sixteen patients underwent FDG-PET/CT and MRI (T2-weighted (T2W) and proton density weighted (PDW)) of the carotid and femoral arteries. For every image slice, two observers determined the corresponding regions of the FDG-PET/CT and MRI image sets by matching CT and T2W axial images. Each plaque was then classified into one of three groups according to the CT appearance and T2W/PDW signal: (1) collagen, (2) lipid-necrotic core and (3) calcium. Arterial FDG uptake was measured for each plaque and normalized to vein FDG activity to produce a blood-normalized artery activity called the target to background ratio (TBR). The vessel wall thickness (VWT), the vessel wall area and the total vessel wall area were measured from the T2W MR images. The TBR value was higher in the lipid-necrotic core group compared to the collagen and calcium groups, (p<0.001). The lipid-necrotic core group demonstrated a significant TBR variation according to the median of the VWT (TBR=1.26+/-0.25 vs. 1.50+/-0.12). There was no correlation with other morphological MR parameters. This study demonstrates the complementary value of non-invasive FDG-PET/CT and MR imaging for the evaluation of atherosclerotic plaque composition and activity. Lipid-rich plaques are more inflamed than either calcified or collagen-rich plaques.

19442953
Macrophage-specific lipid-based nanoparticles improve cardiac magnetic resonance detection and characterization of human atherosclerosis.
We sought to determine whether gadolinium (Gd)-containing lipid-based nanoparticles (NPs) targeting the macrophage scavenger receptor-B (CD36) improve cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) detection and characterization of human atherosclerosis. Gd-containing lipid-based NPs targeting macrophages have improved MR detection of murine atherosclerosis. Gadolinium-containing untargeted NPs, anti-CD36 NPs, and nonspecific Fc-NPs were created. Macrophages were incubated with fluorescent targeted and nontargeted NPs to determine uptake via confocal microscopy and inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS) quantified Gd uptake. Human aortic specimens were harvested at autopsy. With a 1.5-T scanner, T1, T2, and PDW 3-dimensional scans were performed along with post-contrast scans after 24 h incubation. The T1 and cluster analyses were performed and compared with immunohistopathology. The NPs had a mean diameter of 125 nm and 14,900 Gd-ions, and relaxivity was 37 mmol/l(-1)s(-1) at 1.5-T and 37 degrees C. Confocal microscopy and ICP-MS demonstrated significant in vitro macrophage uptake of targeted NPs, whereas non-targeted NPs had minimal uptake. On T1 imaging, targeted NPs increased contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) by 52.5%, which was significantly greater than Fc-NPs (CNR increased 17.2%) and nontargeted NPs (CNR increased 18.7%) (p = 0.001). Confocal fluorescent microscopy showed that NPs target resident macrophages, whereas the untargeted NPs and Fc-NPs are found diffusely throughout the plaque. Targeted NPs had a greater signal intensity increase in the fibrous cap compared with non-targeted NPs. Macrophage-specific (CD36) NPs bind human macrophages and improve CMR detection and characterization of human aortic atherosclerosis. Thus, macrophage-specific NPs could help identify high-risk human plaque before the development of an atherothrombotic event.

19393089
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance parameters of atherosclerotic plaque burden improve discrimination of prior major adverse cardiovascular events.
Patients with prior major cardiovascular or cerebrovascular events (MACE) are more likely to have future recurrent events independent of traditional cardiovascular disease risk factors. The purpose of this study was to determine if patients with traditional risk factors and prior MACE had increased cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) plaque burden measures compared to patients with risk factors but no prior events. Black blood carotid and thoracic aorta images were obtained from 195 patients using a rapid extended coverage turbo spin echo sequence. CMR measures of plaque burden were obtained by tracing lumen and outer vessel wall contours. Patients with prior MACE had significantly higher MR plaque burden (wall thickness, wall area and normalized wall index) in carotids and thoracic aorta compared to those without prior MACE (Wall thickness carotids: 1.03 +/- 0.03 vs. 0.93+/- 0.03, p = 0.001; SD wall thickness carotids: 0.137 +/- 0.0008 vs. 0.102 +/- 0.0004, p < 0.001; wall thickness aorta: 1.63 +/- 0.10 vs. 1.50 +/- 0.04, p = 0.009; SD wall thickness aorta: 0.186 +/- 0.035 vs. 0.139 +/- 0.012, p = 0.009 respectively). Plaque burden (wall thickness) and plaque eccentricity (standard deviation of wall thickness) of carotid arteries were associated with prior MACE after adjustment for age, sex, and traditional risk factors. Area under ROC curve (AUC) for discriminating prior MACE improved by adding plaque eccentricity to models incorporating age, sex, and traditional CVD risk factors as model inputs (AUC = 0.79, p = 0.05). A greater plaque burden and plaque eccentricity is prevalent among patients with prior MACE.

19358949
The year in atherothrombosis.


19356573
Evaluation of pulmonary artery stiffness in pulmonary hypertension with cardiac magnetic resonance.
This study sought to evaluate indexes of pulmonary artery (PA) stiffness in patients with pulmonary hypertension (PH) using same-day cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) and right heart catheterization (RHC). Pulmonary artery stiffness is increased in the presence of PH, although the relationship to PH severity has not been fully characterized. Both CMR and RHC were performed on the same day in 94 patients with known or suspected PH. According to the RHC, patients were classified as having no PH (n = 13), exercise-induced PH (EIPH) only (n = 6), or PH at rest (n = 75). On CMR, phase-contrast images were obtained perpendicular to the pulmonary trunk. From CMR and RHC data, PA areas and indexes of stiffness (pulsatility, compliance, capacitance, distensibility, elastic modulus, and the pressure-independent stiffness index beta) were measured at rest. All quantified indexes showed increased PA stiffness in patients with PH at rest in comparison with those with EIPH or no PH. Despite the absence of significant differences in baseline pressures, patients with EIPH had lower median compliance and capacitance than patients with no PH: 15 (interquartile range: 9 to 19.8) mm2/mm Hg versus 8.4 (interquartile range: 6 to 10.3) mm2/mm Hg, and 5.2 (interquartile range: 4.4 to 6.3) mm3/mm Hg versus 3.7 (interquartile range: 3.1 to 4.1) mm3/mm Hg, respectively (p < 0.05). The different measurements of PA stiffness, including stiffness index beta, showed significant correlations with PA pressures (r2 = 0.27 to 0.73). Reduced PA pulsatility (<40%) detected the presence of PH at rest with a sensitivity of 93% and a specificity of 63%. Pulmonary artery stiffness increases early in the course of PH (even when PH is detectable only with exercise and before overt pressure elevations occur at rest). These observations suggest a potential contributory role of PA stiffness in the development and progression of PH.

19352331
Antiplatelet drug 'resistance'. Part 1: mechanisms and clinical measurements.
Antiplatelet drug therapy has become one of the cornerstones of treatment for patients with cardiovascular disease. Large clinical trials have shown that antiplatelet medications have important clinical benefits and prevent adverse outcomes in patients with coronary artery disease. Recurrent adverse cardiovascular events still occur in a substantial proportion of patients on standard dual antiplatelet therapy, however, which has been attributed to nonresponsiveness to this treatment. Both pharmacological and pharmacokinetic mechanisms are involved in variability in responsiveness to antiplatelet agents, and include drug bioavailability, medication noncompliance, drug-drug interactions, cytochrome P450 activity, and genetic polymorphisms. Numerous observational studies have consistently shown an association between antiplatelet drug nonresponsiveness and adverse clinical outcomes. However, these studies are limited by varying antiplatelet drug dosing regimens, heterogeneous laboratory assessments for ex vivo platelet function, and wide interindividual variation in platelet responses. Only within the last 2 years have randomized clinical trials indicated that increased dosing with antiplatelet drugs could reduce adverse clinical outcomes. Nonetheless, large clinical trials with standardized laboratory methods and well-defined protocols are needed that will definitively determine the association between antiplatelet drug nonresponsiveness and clinical events, and establish therapeutic strategies to overcome blunted antiplatelet effects.

19204318
Academic careers in cardiovascular medicine.


19174763
Cross-sectional, prospective study of MRI reproducibility in the assessment of plaque burden of the carotid arteries and aorta.
The reliability of imaging techniques to assess early atherosclerosis remains unclear. We did a cross-sectional, prospective study to test reproducibility of MRI when imaging arteries, to assess risk of cardiovascular disease and correlations with age and sex. Between January 2003 and December 2006 we performed black-blood MRI of both common carotid arteries and the thoracic descending aorta in patients with cardiovascular risk factors who were referred from clinics in New York, NY, USA. Mean wall area, wall thickness, lumen area, total vessel area, and ratio of the mean wall area to the mean total vessel area (WA/TVA) were manually measured. Reproducibility within and between readers was tested on subsets of images from randomly chosen patients. MRI was performed on 300 patients. Intrareader reproducibility, assessed in images from 20 patients, was high for all parameters (intraclass correlation coefficients >0.8), except WA/TVA ratio in the descending aorta. The inter-reader reproducibility, assessed in images from 187 patients, was acceptable (intraclass correlation coefficients >0.7) for the mean wall, lumen, and total vessel areas. Values for all MRI parameters in all vessels increased with increasing age for both sexes (all P <0.0005) but were always significantly higher in men than in women, except for aortic mean wall thickness and WA/TVA ratio in the carotid arteries. Mean wall area values correlated well between the carotid arteries and aorta, reflecting the systemic nature of atherosclerosis. Our findings support MRI as a reproducible measurement of plaque burden and demonstrate the systemic distribution of atherosclerosis.

19120689
Up-regulation of reverse cholesterol transport key players and rescue from global inflammation by ApoA-I(Milano).
Recombinant-ApoA-I(M) (rApoA-I(M)) administration has been shown to regress and stabilize atherosclerotic plaques. However, the mechanisms responsible for these beneficial effects are not fully understood. The aims of the present study were to define whether the benefits of rApoA-I(M) treatment were mediated via an enhanced reverse cholesterol transport (RCT) and/or anti-inflammation-related mechanisms. Advanced aortic lesions were induced in New Zealand White rabbits (n= 16). Animals were randomized to placebo or rApoA-I(M) (rApoA-I(M)/phospholipids; ETC-216), two infusions 4 days apart. Four days after last dose, aortas and livers were processed for cholesterol content, expression of RCT-related receptors (ATP-binding cassette A-1 [ABCA-1] and scavenger receptor BI [SR-BI]), and inflammation-related markers (inducible nitric oxide synthase [iNOS] and capase-3). Oxidative stress was assessed in the vessel wall and in plasma. rApoA-I(M) administration resulted in a significant reduction in the hepatic and aortic cholesterol content without differences in plasma levels. This effect was associated with an up-regulation of vessel wall ABCA-1, as well as a hepatic and arterial-wall SR-BI up-regulation. Systemic and atherosclerotic-plaque inflammation markers were significantly reduced by the rApoA-I(M) administration, as demonstrated by a reduction in circulating oxidative stress markers and prostaglandin F1-alpha levels, and the down-regulation of the iNOS and caspase 3 in the aortic lesions. rApoA-IM up-regulated the ABCA-1 and SR-BI levels to a greater extent than the wild-type form of apoA-I in in vitro studies done with lipid-rich macrophages. Our data suggest that rApoA-I(M) administration enhances RCT and induces a 'rescue' from the global inflammatory status associated with atherosclerotic disease. The Milano form of apoA-I seems to be more efficient in RCT than the apoA-I wild-type.

18979182
In vivo non-invasive serial monitoring of FDG-PET progression and regression in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis.
We investigated the ability of fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG PET) imaging to serially monitor macrophage content in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis was induced in rabbits (n = 8) by a combination of atherogenic diet and balloon denudation of the aorta. At the end of nine months, the rabbits were randomized to a further six months of the same atherogenic diet (progression group) or normal diet (regression group). In vivo uptake of FDG by the thoracic aorta was measured using aortic uptake-to-blood radioactivity ratios at the start and end of the randomized period. A significant increase in FDG uptake of the progression group after continued cholesterol feeding (aortic uptake-to-blood radioactivity: 0.57 +/- 0.02 to 0.68 +/- 0.02, P = 0.001), and a corresponding fall in FDG uptake of the regression group after returning to a normal chow diet (aortic uptake-to-blood radioactivity ratios: 0.67 +/- 0.02 to 0.53 +/- 0.02, P < 0.0001). FDG PET can quantify in vivo macrophage content and serially monitor changes in FDG activity in this rabbit model.

18848136
Haptoglobin genotype is a major determinant of the amount of iron in the human atherosclerotic plaque.
We sought to test the hypothesis that haptoglobin (Hp) genotype is a determinant of the amount of iron in the atherosclerotic plaque. In atherosclerotic lesions, intraplaque hemorrhage releases free hemoglobin (Hb), whose incorporated iron can act as an oxidant and inflammatory stimulus. These effects are antagonized by Hp, which binds free Hb and facilitates its clearance from the plaque. The Hp gene has 2 alleles (1 and 2), giving rise to 3 genotypes: Hp 1-1, Hp 2-1, and Hp 2-2. We previously hypothesized that Hp 2-2 individuals with diabetes mellitus (DM) have impaired clearance of Hb and its iron cargo from the plaque. We identified the presence or absence of Perl's iron stain in 189 plaques obtained from 37 decedents at autopsy. Among DM, the prevalence of Perl's iron stain was increased in Hp 2-2 compared with that seen in Hp 1-1 or 2-1 (46.2% vs. 11.8%). After accounting for the within-decedent correlation of plaques, the prevalence ratio of Perl's iron stain associated with Hp 2-2 was 3.97 (95% confidence interval: 1.38 to 11.5; p = 0.025). In non-DM plaques, there was a nonsignificant trend towards a higher prevalence of iron staining in Hp 2-2 compared with that in Hp 1-1 or 2-1 (26.8% vs. 11.1%; prevalence ratio =2.40 [95% confidence interval: 0.81 to 7.09]; p = 0.114). These data support an impaired clearance of Hb from plaques in Hp 2-2 individuals, particularly in DM. The higher prevalence of plaque iron in Hp 2-2 DM individuals may contribute to the increased incidence of atherothrombotic events in these patients.

18688681
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy.
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is a novel, yet well-described, reversible cardiomyopathy triggered by profound psychological or physical stress with a female predominance. This review is designed to increase general clinician awareness about the diagnosis, incidence, pathogenesis, and therapies of this entity. A complete search of multiple electronic databases (Pubmed, EMBASE, Science Citation Index) was carried out to identify all full-text, English-language articles published from 1980 to the present date and relevant to this review. The following search terms were used: takotsubo cardiomyopathy, stress-induced cardiomyopathy, and left ventricular apical ballooning syndrome. Citation lists from identified articles were subsequently reviewed and pertinent articles were further identified. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is typically characterized by the following: 1) acute onset of ischemic-like chest pain or dyspnea, 2) transient apical and mid-ventricular regional wall-motion abnormality, 3) minor elevation of cardiac biomarkers, 4) dynamic electrocardiographic changes, and 5) the absence of epicardial coronary artery disease. The pathogenesis of the syndrome is unknown but has mostly been associated with acute emotional or physiologic stressors. Dote, Sato, Tateishi, Uchida, Ishihara (J Cardiol. 21(2):203-214, 1991); Desmet, Adriaenssens, Dens (Heart. 89(9):1027-1031, Sep., 2003); Bybee, Kara, Prasad, et al. (Ann Intern Med. 141(11):858-865, Dec 7, 2004); Sharkey, Lesser, Zenovich, et al. (Circulation. 111(4):472-479, Feb 1, 2005) The short and long-term prognosis of these patients is overwhelmingly favorable and often only requires supportive therapy. Whether an emotional or physical event precedes one's symptoms, it is apparent that takotsubo cardiomyopathy case presentations mimic ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction, and thus is an important entity to be recognized by the medical community.

18641598
Prologue: relevance of molecular imaging in clinical medicine.


18611361
Optimal treatment of the diabetic patient with multivessel disease.
Diabetes is emerging as a major source of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. The atherosclerosis associated with diabetes has a complex etiology with even more complicated manifestations, such as multivessel and diffuse coronary disease. The optimal management of the diabetic patient with multivessel disease poses a special challenge in terms of the selection of the revascularization strategy and medical therapies. In this article, we assess the evidence accumulated to date and discuss ongoing studies that will help better inform this intricate decision-making process.

18607395
Cardiovascular disease in Sub-Saharan Africa: a complex picture demanding a multifaceted response.
A debate has emerged as to what should be the 'appropriate' cardiovascular agenda for sub-Saharan Africa. This Clinical Advance article reviews a recent study by Sliwa et al., which describes patients with newly diagnosed cardiovascular disease (CVD) presenting to a tertiary-care center in South Africa. The most common conditions among these patients were hypertension, heart failure, valvular heart disease, and coronary artery disease. Atherosclerotic risk factors were widely prevalent--only 13% of patients had no risk factors at all. Furthermore, a substantial proportion of patients presented at an advanced stage of disease. This study, which used state-of-the-art diagnostic technology, is an important addition to the growing database of information indicating that CVD in sub-Saharan Africa spans the spectrum from 'traditional', nonischemic etiologies to 'modern' diseases of lifestyle. The societal response to this diverse epidemiology should be similarly multifaceted. Moreover, efforts should be made to improve primary-care screening, early detection and treatment of CVD, and prompt referral of patients at early stages of disease.

18581415
Serial in vivo positive contrast MRI of iron oxide-labeled embryonic stem cell-derived cardiac precursor cells in a mouse model of myocardial infarction.
Myocardial regeneration with stem-cell transplantation is a possible treatment option to reverse deleterious effects that occur after myocardial infarction. Since little is known about stem cell survival after transplantation, developing techniques for "tracking" cells would be desirable. Iron-oxide-labeled stem cells have been used for in vivo tracking using MRI but produce negative contrast images that are difficult to interpret. The aim of the current study was to test a positive contrast MR technique using reduced z-gradient rephasing (GRASP) to aid in dynamically tracking stem cells in an in vivo model of mouse myocardial infraction. Ferumoxides and protamine sulfate were complexed and used to magnetically label embryonic stem cell-derived cardiac-precursor-cells (ES-CPCs). A total of 500,000 ES-CPCs were injected in the border zone of infarcted mice and MR imaging was performed on a 9.4T scanner using T(2)*-GRE sequences (negative contrast) and positive contrast GRASP technique before, 24 hours, and 1 week after ES-CPC implantation. Following imaging, mice were sacrificed for histology and Perl's staining was used to confirm iron within myocardium. Good correlation was observed between signal loss seen on conventional T(2)* images, bright areas on GRASP, and the presence of iron on histology. This demonstrated the feasibility of in vivo stem cell imaging with positive contrast MRI.

18545083
Fatty infiltration of the right ventricle assessed by computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging.


18541740
Targeted molecular probes for imaging atherosclerotic lesions with magnetic resonance using antibodies that recognize oxidation-specific epitopes.
Oxidized low-density lipoprotein plays a key role in the initiation, progression, and destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques and is present in macrophages and the lipid pool. The aim of this study was to assess the feasibility of magnetic resonance imaging of atherosclerotic lesions in mice using micelles containing gadolinium and murine (MDA2 and E06) or human (IK17) antibodies that bind unique oxidation-specific epitopes. MDA2 micelles, E06 micelles, IK17 micelles, nonspecific IgG micelles, and untargeted micelles (no antibody) were prepared and characterized with respect to pharmacokinetics and biodistribution in wild-type and atherosclerotic apolipoprotein E-deficient (apoE(-/-)) mice. Magnetic resonance imaging was performed at 9.4 T over a 96-hour time interval after the administration of 0.075-mmol Gd/kg micelles. MDA2, E06, and IK17 micelles exhibited a longer plasma half-life than IgG or untargeted micelles in apoE(-/-) but not wild-type mice. In apoE(-/-) mice, MDA2 and IK17 micelles showed maximal arterial wall uptake at 72 hours and E06 micelles at 96 hours, manifested by 125% to 231% enhancement in magnetic resonance signal compared with adjacent muscle. Confocal microscopy revealed that MDA2, IK17, and E06 micelles accumulated within atherosclerotic lesions and specifically within macrophages. Intravenous injection of free MDA2 before imaging with MDA2 micelles resulted in significantly diminished magnetic resonance signal enhancement. IgG micelles and untargeted micelles showed minimal enhancement in apoE(-/-) mice. There was no significant signal enhancement with all micelles in wild-type mice. Magnetic resonance imaging with micelles containing gadolinium and oxidation-specific antibodies demonstrates specific targeting and excellent image quality of oxidation-rich atherosclerotic lesions.

18483100
Atherosclerosis inflammation imaging with 18F-FDG PET: carotid, iliac, and femoral uptake reproducibility, quantification methods, and recommendations.
Atherosclerosis imaging with 18F-FDG PET is useful for tracking inflammation within plaque and monitoring the response to drug therapy. Short-term reproducibility of this technique in peripheral artery disease has not been assessed, and the optimal method of 18F-FDG quantification is still debated. We imaged 20 patients with vascular disease using 18F-FDG PET twice, 14 d apart, and used these data to assess reproducibility measures and compare 2 methods of 18F-FDG uptake measurement. We also reviewed the literature on quantification methods to determine the optimal measures of arterial 18F-FDG uptake for future studies. Twenty patients with vascular disease underwent PET/CT of the iliac, femoral, and carotid arteries 90 min after 18F-FDG administration. In 19 patients, repeat testing was performed at 2 wk. Coregistration and attenuation correction were performed with CT. Vessel 18F-FDG uptake was measured as both the mean and maximum blood-normalized standardized uptake value (SUV), known as the target-to-background ratio (TBR). We assessed interscan, interobserver, and intraobserver agreement. Nineteen patients completed both imaging sessions. The carotid and peripheral arteries all have excellent short-term reproducibility of the 18F-FDG signal, with intraclass correlation coefficients all greater than 0.8 for all measures of reproducibility. Both mean and maximum TBR measurements for quantifying 18F-FDG uptake are equally reproducible. 18F-FDG uptake was significantly higher in the carotid arteries than in both iliac and femoral vessels (P < 0.001 for both). We found that both mean and maximum TBR in the carotid, iliac, and femoral arteries were highly reproducible. We suggest the mean TBR be used for tracking systemic arterial therapies, whereas the maximum TBR is optimal for detecting and monitoring local, plaque-based therapy.

18467641
Detection of neovessels in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits using dynamic contrast enhanced MRI and 18F-FDG PET.
The association of inflammatory cells and neovessels in atherosclerosis is considered a histological hallmark of high-risk active lesions. Therefore, the development and validation of noninvasive imaging techniques that allow for the detection of inflammation and neoangiogenesis in atherosclerosis would be of major clinical interest. Our aim was to test 2 techniques, black blood dynamic contrast enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) and 18-fluorine-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) PET, to quantify inflammation expressed as plaque neovessels content in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Atherosclerotic plaques were induced in the aorta of 10 rabbits by a combination of 2 endothelial abrasions and 4 months hyperlipidemic diet. Six rabbits underwent MRI during the injection of Gd-DTPA, whereas 4 rabbits were imaged after injection of 18F-FDG with PET. We found a positive correlation between neovessels count in atherosclerotic plaques and (1) Gd-DTPA uptake parameters evaluated by DCE-MRI (r=0.89, P=0.016) and (2) 18F-FDG uptake evaluated by PET (r=0.5, P=0.103 after clustered robust, Huber-White, standard errors analysis). DCE-MRI and 18F-FDG PET may allow for the evaluation of inflammation in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits. These noninvasive imaging modalities could be proposed as clinical tools in the evaluation of lesion prognosis and monitoring of anti-angiogenic therapies.

18466906
Quantification of serial changes in plaque burden using multi-detector computed tomography in experimental atherosclerosis.
Assessment of changes in plaque volume is increasingly used as a surrogate-endpoint in clinical trials testing the efficacy of anti-atherosclerotic interventions. Multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT) can detect and quantify non-calcified atherosclerotic plaques, but its ability to monitor changes in plaque volume has not yet been tested. We sought to test the ability of MDCT to detect and quantify serial changes in atheroma burden in comparison with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Rabbits (n=12) with experimentally induced abdominal atherosclerosis were randomized to receive a plaque-regressing agent (recombinant apoA-I(Milano), n=8) or placebo (n=4). All animals underwent two 64-slice MDCT angiography and MRI studies (pre- and post-treatment). The primary endpoint was the change in plaque burden (defined as vessel wall volume in the 5cm distal to the left renal artery) between pre- and post-treatment MDCT in comparison with MRI. MDCT detected a significant decrease in plaque burden caused by recombinant apoA-I(Milano) (464 [423-535] to 405 [363-435]mm(3), p=0.03) that was confirmed by MRI (324 [286-412] to 298 [282-399]mm(3), p=0.03). No significant effect was noted in the placebo group either by MDCT or MRI. There were strong correlations between both modalities for the quantification of plaque burden (r=0.750, p<0.001) and change in plaque burden (r=0.657, p=0.020). MDCT overestimated plaque burden compared to MRI. On MDCT, the mean interobserver variability for plaque burden was 2.5+/-0.4%. In an animal model of atherosclerosis, MDCT accurately documented serial changes in aortic plaque burden, demonstrating good correlation and agreement with MRI-derived measurements and low interobserver variability.

18403546
Catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation.


18367192
Selective estrogen receptor modulation influences atherosclerotic plaque composition in a rabbit menopause model.
Osteoporosis trials suggest raloxifene decreased cardiovascular events in women with pre-existing atherosclerosis. We assessed the hypothesis that selective estrogen receptor modulation induces plaque stability in "menopausal" animals. Atherosclerosis was induced in 42 ovariectomized New Zealand white rabbits by cholesterol feeding and mechanical injury. Animals were imaged by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for baseline atherosclerosis, and randomized to control (OVX (ovariectomized control group), n=12), raloxifene 35-60 mg/kg/day by diet admixture (RLX (raloxifene therapy group), n=24), or immediate sacrifice (n=6) for immunohistopathologic correlation of MRI. Six months later, rabbits underwent repeat MRI then sacrifice for micro-computed tomography (microCT) and molecular analysis. Unlike OVX, RLX reduced atheroma volume. Analysis for lesion inflammation revealed reductions in COX-2 (cyclooxygenase-2), MMP-1 (matrix metalloproteinase-1), MCP-1 (monocyte chemoattractant protein-1) expression and macrophage infiltration in RLX versus OVX with concomitant upregulation of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha). microCT showed similar total vascular calcification between groups, but calcifications in RLX were less nodular with better radial organization (mean calcific arc angle 63+/-7 degrees versus 33+/-6 degrees in OVX), the predicted result of a 53% increase in BMP-2 (bone-morphogenetic protein-2). Raloxifene treatment results in reduced lesion volume, enhanced mechanical stability of vascular calcification, and less inflamed lesions characterized by less macrophage infiltration and reduced COX-2, MMP-1 and MCP-1 expression.

18342230
Rapid change in plaque size, composition, and molecular footprint after recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano (ETC-216) administration: magnetic resonance imaging study in an experimental model of atherosclerosis.
This study sought to assess the effect of short-term apolipoprotein (apo) A-I(Milano) administration on plaque size and on suspected markers of plaque vulnerability. Long-term lipid-lowering interventions can regress and stabilize atherosclerotic plaques. However, the majority of recurrent events occur early after the first episode. Interventions able to acutely induce plaque regression and stabilization are lacking. Regression of human coronary lesions after 5 weeks of treatment with apoA-I(Milano) administration has been shown. However, there are no data regarding its effect on plaque vulnerability. Advanced aortic lesions were induced in New Zealand White rabbits (n = 40). Plaque size was assessed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at the end of atherosclerosis induction. Animals were randomized to placebo or apoA-I(Milano) phospholipids (ETC-216), 2 infusions 4 days apart. After the last dose, another MRI study was performed and aortas were processed for cellular composition and gene protein expression of markers associated with plaque instability. Pre-treatment MRI showed similar plaque size in both groups, whereas post-treatment MRI showed 6% smaller plaques in apoA-I(Milano)-treated animals compared with placebo (p = 0.026). The apoA-I(Milano) treatment induced a 5% plaque regression (p = 0.003 vs. pre-treatment), whereas the placebo showed no significant effect. Plaque regression by apoA-I(Milano) was associated with a reduction in plaque macrophage density and a significant down-regulation in gene and protein expression of tissue factor, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, and cyclooxygenase-2, as well as marked decrease in gelatinolytic activity. Conversely, cyclooxygenase-1 was significantly up-regulated. Acute plaque regression observed after short-term apoA-I(Milano) administration was associated with a significant reduction in suspected makers of plaque vulnerability in an experimental model of atherosclerosis.

18332609
Statin therapy alone and in combination with an acyl-CoA:cholesterol O-acyltransferase inhibitor on experimental atherosclerosis.
The ability to modify the enzymatic processes involved in promoting atherosclerotic plaque disruption and to serially monitor atherosclerotic evolution could provide novel information in the management of patients with atherosclerosis. We studied the effects of a statin (atorvastatin) and its combination with an acyl-CoA:cholesterol O-acyltransferase (ACAT) inhibitor (avasimibe) on atherosclerotic regression and plaque stability as measured by matrix metalloproteinase 1 and 3 (MMP-1 and MMP-3) levels. Watanabe Heritable Hyperlipidemic (WHHL) rabbits treated with atorvastatin alone experienced an attenuated increase in atherosclerotic burden versus controls as determined by MR imaging. The mean vessel wall area (VWA) prior to drug therapy was 5.57 +/- 0.01 mm2. The VWA increased to 6.71 +/- 0.03 and 7.16 +/- 0.03 mm2, respectively, in atorvastatin-treated and control groups (p < 0.0001 for both). The combination of atorvastatin and avasimibe induced a significant regression of the previously established atherosclerotic lesions, with the VWA decreasing to 4.54 +/- 0.04 mm2 (p = 0.009). Atorvastatin alone induced a nonsignificant reduction in the percent staining of MMP-1 in atherosclerotic lesions, but the combination treatment with avasimibe led to a significant reduction versus controls (p = 0.005). However, a reduction in MMP-3 staining was significant for rabbits treated with both atorvastatin alone (p = 0.007) and in combination with avasimibe (p = 0.04) versus controls. In this animal model, the addition of avasimibe to atorvastatin has beneficial effects on both atherosclerotic plaque regression and stabilization.

18308164
The year in atherothrombosis.


18215589
Design of the Future REvascularization Evaluation in patients with Diabetes mellitus: Optimal management of Multivessel disease (FREEDOM) Trial.
Prior randomized trials suggested that revascularization of diabetic patients by coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) produced results superior to balloon angioplasty. The introduction of drug-eluting stents (DESs) calls into question the relevance of past studies to the current era. The FREEDOM Trial is designed to determine whether CABG or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is the superior approach for revascularization of diabetic patients. The FREEDOM Trial is a multicenter, open-label prospective randomized superiority trial of PCI versus CABG in at least 2000 diabetic patients in whom revascularization is indicated. Consenting diabetic patients with multivessel disease will be randomized on a 1:1 basis to either CABG or multivessel stenting using DESs and observed at 30 days, 1 year, and annually for up to 5 years. At the discretion of the primary physician or interventionalists, patients randomized to the PCI/DES arm will receive any approved DESs. The primary outcome measure is the composite of all-cause mortality, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or stroke. Patients will be observed for a mean of 4 years. At present, coronary revascularization with CABG surgery is the treatment of choice in diabetic patients with multivessel coronary artery disease. Drug-eluting stents have shown promising preliminary results in the diabetic population. The FREEDOM Trial is an international study designed to define the optimal revascularization strategy for the diabetic patient with multivessel coronary disease.

18094672
Late medical versus interventional therapy for stable ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction.
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) is associated with high morbidity and mortality, but timely reperfusion is known to result in dramatically improved patient outcomes. As many as 40% of patients with STEMI, however, present late after symptom onset, which reduces the likelihood of them receiving reperfusion therapy. The past two decades have been plagued with controversy regarding the relative benefits of reperfusion therapy after 12 h from symptom onset. Despite considerable data supporting late reperfusion and the 'late open-artery hypothesis', recent studies have demonstrated a lack of benefit with late reperfusion. Moreover, advances in the medical management of STEMI have dramatically reduced morbidity and mortality, further challenging the need for more-invasive techniques. Numerous questions have arisen regarding the appropriate management and risk stratification of asymptomatic post-STEMI patients who present late after symptom onset. In light of recent data, we present a Review of late reperfusion in STEMI, specifically highlighting the effects of current medical therapies, risk-stratification techniques, and indications for the use of late reperfusion over medical management.

18033231
Risk stratification of sudden cardiac death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common hereditary cardiac condition and the leading cause of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in young adults. Given that SCD can be the first and most devastating clinical expression of HCM, identifying individuals at high risk is paramount. Determining an individual's risk for HCM-related SCD requires a thorough understanding of the recognized risk factors, of which there are seven established or 'major' and five 'possible'. Major risk factors can be identified by thoroughly reviewing a patient's personal medical history and noninvasive cardiovascular testing. The presence of major risk factors identify patients who are at high enough risk of SCD to warrant consideration of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; whereas the absence of any major risk factors provides considerable reassurance to both patient and physician. The risk of HCM-related SCD in patients with no major risk factors is, however, not zero. Possible risk factors gain importance in the presence of an isolated major risk factor. Here, we provide a contemporary review of established and possible risk factors for HCM-related SCD. We also examine microvolt T-wave alternans and cardiovascular MRI as emerging risk stratification tools that could further hone our ability to accurately identify the high-risk patient.

17965407
Low priority of cardiovascular and chronic diseases on the global health agenda: a cause for concern.


17938815
Antithrombotic effects of factor Xa inhibition with DU-176b: Phase-I study of an oral, direct factor Xa inhibitor using an ex-vivo flow chamber.
Direct and specific inhibition of factor Xa is an emerging therapeutic strategy for atherothrombotic disease. Parenteral factor Xa inhibitors promise efficacy comparable to standard therapies, which could be extended to ambulatory patients with oral agents. We evaluated the antithrombotic effect of the oral, direct factor Xa inhibitor DU-176b in a phase-I study. Healthy subjects (n = 12) received a single, 60 mg dose of DU-176b. Antithrombotic effects were assessed by comparing ex-vivo thrombus formation at 1.5, 5, and 12 hours post-dose versus baseline, along with factor Xa activity, thrombin generation and clotting parameters. Under venous flow after 1.5 and 5 hours, the thrombus was 28% and 21% smaller versus baseline, respectively (p < 0.05). Under arterial condition, the reduction was 26% and 17% (p < 0.05). Thrombin generation decreased by 28% at 1.5 hours and 10% at 5 hours. Changes in PT and INR correlated well with plasma drug concentrations (R2 = 0.79 and 0.78). Direct and specific inhibition of factor Xa by DU-176b significantly reduced ex-vivo thrombus formation at both venous and arterial rheologies, up to 5 hours post-dose. The effects mirrored changes in clotting parameters, suggesting their potential usefulness for monitoring in a clinical setting.

17888836
Insights into degenerative aortic valve disease.
Despite the dramatic decline of rheumatic heart disease over the past 5 decades, there has not been a concordant decline in the prevalence of valvular heart disease. Degenerative aortic valve disease (DAVD) has become the most common cause of valvular heart disease in the Western world, causing significant morbidity and mortality. No longer considered a benign consequence of aging, valve calcification is the result of an active process that, much like atherosclerotic vascular disease, is preceded by basement membrane disruption, inflammatory cell infiltration, and lipid deposition and is associated with diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, and tobacco use. These realizations, in addition to pathological insights gained from emerging imaging modalities, have lead to the exploration of a variety of therapeutic interventions to delay or prevent the progression of DAVD. Inhibitors of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase, angiotensin-converting enzyme, and matrix metalloproteinase have all been studied as potential disease modifiers. Moreover, tissue engineering, aided by emerging stem cell technology, holds immense potential for the treatment of valvular heart disease as adjuncts to surgical interventions. Here we review the epidemiology and pathophysiology of DAVD, in addition to highlighting emerging therapeutic interventions for this growing problem.

17719477
(18)Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography imaging of atherosclerotic plaque inflammation is highly reproducible: implications for atherosclerosis therapy trials.
This study tested the near-term reproducibility of (18)fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) imaging of atherosclerosis. It is known that FDG-PET can measure inflammation within the aorta, carotid, and vertebral arteries with histologic validation in humans and animal models of disease. By tracking changes in inflammation over time, PET could be used as a surrogate marker of antiatheroma drug efficacy. However, the short-term variability and reproducibility of the technique are unknown. We imaged the carotid arteries and aorta in 11 subjects with FDG-PET/computed tomography twice, 14 days apart. We assessed interobserver and intraobserver agreement and interscan variability. Interscan plaque FDG variability over 2 weeks was very low; intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) ranged between 0.79 and 0.92. Interobserver agreement was high across all territories imaged except aortic arch (ICC values from 0.90 to 0.97, arch 0.71). Intraobserver agreement was high, with ICC values between 0.93 and 0.98. Spontaneous change in plaque FDG uptake is low over 2 weeks, with favorable inter- and intraobserver agreement. Power calculations suggest that drug studies using FDG-PET imaging would require few subjects compared with other imaging modalities. This study strengthens the case for FDG-PET as a noninvasive plaque imaging technique.

17697838
Prevalence and correlates of septal delayed contrast enhancement in patients with pulmonary hypertension.
Using cardiac magnetic resonance, the presence of myocardial delayed contrast enhancement (DCE) has been described in the ventricular septum at the level of the right ventricular insertion points in patients with pulmonary hypertension (PH). The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence, extent, and correlates of this finding. Septal DCE was evaluated in 55 patients with known or suspected PH of various causes. The extent of DCE was estimated visually with an insertion enhancement score (range 0 to 4) and quantified as DCE mass. The results were correlated with cine magnetic resonance and right-sided cardiac catheterization. Predictors of DCE were investigated using multivariate analysis. PH at rest was present in 42 patients (group 1) and absent in 13 (group 2). DCE was noted in 41 patients (97%) in group 1 and 3 (23%) in group 2 (p <0.0001). The extent of DCE was higher in group 1 than group 2 (median insertion enhancement score 3 vs 0, median DCE mass 8.7 vs 0 g, respectively; p <0.0001 for both). The extent of DCE showed moderate to good univariate correlations (r = 0.5 to 0.73) with pulmonary pressures and with right ventricular volumes, mass, and ejection fractions. In multivariate analysis, systolic pulmonary pressure was the only predictor of DCE. In conclusion, the presence of septal DCE at the right ventricular insertion points is common in PH of different causes, and the level of systolic pulmonary pressure elevation appears to be the main determinant of this finding.

17519913
Risk profiling patients for selective use of drug-eluting stents is warranted.


17515460
Early metoprolol administration before coronary reperfusion results in increased myocardial salvage: analysis of ischemic myocardium at risk using cardiac magnetic resonance.
Beta-blockers improve clinical outcome when administered early after acute myocardial infarction. However, whether beta-blockers actually reduce the myocardial infarction size is still in dispute. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging can accurately depict the left ventricular (LV) ischemic myocardium at risk (T2-weighted hyperintense region) early after myocardial infarction, as well as the extent of necrosis (delayed gadolinium enhancement). The aim of this study was to determine whether early administration of metoprolol could increase myocardial salvage, measured as the difference between the extent of myocardium at risk and myocardial necrosis. Twelve Yorkshire pigs underwent a 90-minute left anterior descending coronary occlusion, followed by reperfusion. They were randomized to metoprolol (7.5 mg during myocardial infarction) or placebo. Global and regional LV function, extent of myocardium at risk, and myocardial necrosis were quantified by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging studies performed 4 and 22 days after reperfusion in 10 survivors. Despite similar extent of myocardium at risk in metoprolol- and placebo-treated pigs (30.9% of LV versus 30.6%; P=NS), metoprolol resulted in 5-fold-larger salvaged myocardium (32.4% versus 6.2% of myocardium at risk; P=0.015). The LV ejection fraction significantly improved in metoprolol-treated pigs between days 4 and 22 (37.2% versus 43.0%; P=0.037), whereas it remained unchanged in pigs treated with placebo (35.1% versus 35.0%; P=NS). The extent of myocardial salvage was related directly to LV ejection fraction improvement (P=0.031) and regional LV wall motion recovery (P=0.039) at day 22. Early metoprolol administration during acute coronary occlusion increases myocardial salvage. The extent of myocardial salvage, measured as the difference between myocardium at risk and myocardial necrosis, was associated with regional and global LV motion improvement.

17448377
The year in atherothrombosis.


17443112
Magnetic resonance imaging of a bioprosthetic mitral valve: a smiling heart.


17417649
Noninvasive detection of macrophages using a nanoparticulate contrast agent for computed tomography.
Sudden fibrous cap disruption of 'high-risk' atherosclerotic plaques can trigger the formation of an occlusive thrombus in coronary arteries, causing acute coronary syndromes. High-risk atherosclerotic plaques are characterized by their specific cellular and biological content (in particular, a high density of macrophages), rather than by their impact on the vessel lumen. Early identification of high-risk plaques may be useful for preventing ischemic events. One major hurdle in detecting high-risk atherosclerotic plaques in coronary arteries is the lack of an imaging modality that allows for the identification of atherosclerotic plaque composition with high spatial and temporal resolutions. Here we show that macrophages in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits can be detected with a clinical X-ray computed tomography (CT) scanner after the intravenous injection of a contrast agent formed of iodinated nanoparticles dispersed with surfactant. This contrast agent may become an important adjunct to the clinical evaluation of coronary arteries with CT.

17392248
Pulmonary hypertension: accuracy of detection with left ventricular septal-to-free wall curvature ratio measured at cardiac MR.
To retrospectively evaluate the accuracy and reproducibility of the cardiac magnetic resonance (MR) imaging-derived left ventricular septal-to-free wall curvature ratio for prediction of the right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) in patients clinically known to have or suspected of having pulmonary hypertension (PH), with same-day right-side heart catheterization (RHC) as the reference standard. Institutional review board approval was received for this HIPAA-compliant study. Sixty-one patients clinically known or suspected of having PH underwent cardiac MR and RHC on the same day. Interventricular septal curvature (C(IVS)) and left ventricular free wall curvature (C(FW)) measured at end systole were used to derive the curvature ratio (C(IVS)/C(FW)). Effective distending transmural pressure (dP(FW)) and transseptal pressure gradient (dP(IVS)) were assumed to be equivalent, respectively, to the systolic blood pressure (SBP) and the difference between SBP and RVSP. Curvature ratio and SBP were used to noninvasively estimate RVSP. Linear regression analysis was performed to assess the difference between curvature ratio and rate of pressure rise (dP) ratio (dP(IVS)/dP(FW)). The accuracy of the dichotomized curvature ratio in PH detection was analyzed by using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. PH, defined as RVSP higher than 40 mm Hg, was confirmed with RHC in 46 patients. A direct linear correlation between dP ratio and curvature ratio was observed (r = 0.85, P < .001). Bland-Altman analysis revealed moderate agreement between cardiac MR- and RHC-derived RVSPs (mean difference, -1.1 mm Hg +/- 15.9 [standard deviation]). ROC analysis of the accuracy of the curvature ratio for detection of increased RVSP revealed 87% sensitivity and 100% specificity (area under ROC curve, 0.95; P < .001). Intraobserver (r = 0.97) and interobserver (r = 0.95) curvature ratio measurements were closely correlated. In patients clinically known to have or suspected of having PH, cardiac MR-derived curvature ratio, as compared with RHC measurement, was an accurate and reproducible index for estimation of RVSP.

17365244
Validation study of a semi-automated program for quantification of atherosclerotic burden.
Practical implementation of cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) for the noninvasive screening of atherosclerosis is limited by inter-and intra-observer variability and labor intensity of morphometric analysis by manual planimetry (MANU). We assessed the hypothesis that a semi-automated quantification program (AUTO) for CMR would be faster and more accurate than MANU without loss of reliability. In the analysis of carotid atherosclerosis in asymptomatic hypercholesterolemic patients (n = 17), AUTO was superior to MANU in speed and histopathologic correlation without significant differences in inter-and intra-observer variability. Implementation of AUTO may facilitate CMR for the screening of the burden of atherosclerotic disease.

17329691
Pulmonary arterial hypertension: noninvasive detection with phase-contrast MR imaging.
To retrospectively identify pulmonary arterial (PA) flow parameters measured with phase-contrast magnetic resonance (MR) imaging that allow noninvasive diagnosis of chronic PA hypertension (PAH). The study was HIPAA compliant and was approved by the institutional review board; a waiver of informed consent was obtained. Fifty-nine patients (49 female patients; mean age, 46 years; range, 16-85 years) known to have or suspected of having PAH underwent breath-hold phase-contrast MR imaging and right-sided heart catheterization (RHC). The presence of PAH (mean pulmonary artery pressure [mPAP], >25 mm Hg) was confirmed in 42 patients. Parameters, including PA areas, PA strain, average velocity, peak velocity, acceleration time, and ejection time, were measured in each patient by investigators blinded to RHC results. These measurements were correlated with mPAP, systolic pulmonary artery pressure (sPAP), and pulmonary vascular resistance index (PVRI). The diagnostic ability of phase-contrast MR imaging to depict PAH was quantified. Statistical tests included Spearman rho coefficients, receiver operating characteristic curve analysis, and Bland-Altman plots. Results showed average velocity to have the best correlation with mPAP, sPAP, and PVRI (r = -0.73, -0.76, and -0.86, respectively; P < .001). Average velocity (cutoff value = 11.7 cm/sec) revealed PAH with a sensitivity of 92.9% (39 of 42) and a specificity of 82.4% (14 of 17). Sensitivity and specificity for the minimum PA area (cutoff value = 6.6 cm(2)) were 92.9% (39 of 42) and 88.2% (15 of 17), respectively. The average blood velocity throughout the cardiac cycle is strongly correlated with pulmonary pressures and resistance.

19153439
Diabetic multivessel disease: stenting vs. coronary artery bypass grafting.


17307054
Role of insulin resistance and hyperglycemia in the development of atherosclerosis.
Insulin resistance (IR) is the underlying defect in >90% of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and the major pathologic mechanism for the associated susceptibility to premature cardiovascular disease (CVD). The progression of IR to diabetes parallels the progression of endothelial dysfunction to atherosclerosis. The downregulation of the antiatherogenic phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase-mediated insulin receptor-signaling pathway, and maintained activity of the proatherogenic mitogenic-activated protein kinase pathway in insulin-resistant states, leads to accelerated atherosclerosis. Efforts to prevent or slow the epidemic of atherothrombotic CVD must focus on the reversal of the disturbances in glucose and lipid homeostasis through the amelioration of IR.

17245402
Update on advances in atherothrombosis.
The study of atherothrombosis is a rapidly evolving field, and significant progress was achieved in various aspects of the disease during the past year. In the area of diagnostic imaging, MRI and multidetector CT were actively used to evaluate the characteristics of the arterial wall, including calcified and noncalcified lesions, and both in the coronary and extracoronary vascular territories. There was also extensive research into the application of imaging modalities to visualize cellular or molecular disease processes, known as molecular imaging. Considerable efforts were devoted to the identification of novel biomarkers that reflect different components of atherothrombosis, namely inflammation, thrombogenicity, oxidative stress and reparative ability, predicting the presence of early disease or the risk of clinical events. In the therapeutic arena, substantial evidence accumulated on the beneficial effects of several pharmacologic agents, most significantly statins. Finally, important advances were also made in the understanding of the roles of immunity and neovascularization in atherogenesis, including the development and progression of disease at different stages. Awareness of these recent advances and new lines of active research is fundamental for health professionals involved in the care of patients with atherothrombosis. In this Review we present an overview of data in these areas.

17230204
Gene therapy and stem cell therapy for cardiovascular diseases today: a model for translational research.
Clinical trials looking at ways to promote myocardial regeneration have reported that the administered therapies have either neutral effects or modest benefits of questionable impact. These somewhat disappointing results should emphasize the need for translational research, with bidirectional feedback between the basic research laboratory and the clinical arena. Such a translational pathway is illustrated by the quest to find an effective therapy for restenosis, which culminated in the development of sirolimus. At this point a move away from the bedside and a return to the bench seems necessary to better understand the mechanisms of action of progenitor cells and stimulating factors. Without such basic knowledge research might be prematurely discouraged and the opportunity to fully understand the true potential of cardiovascular regenerative therapy might be missed.

20409834
Vascular inflammation.
Inflammation of the vessel wall is involved in all stages of the course of atherothrombotic disease, from the development of early lesions to the occurrence of clinical events. Significant advances in recent years have largely improved our understanding of this phenomenon and of its influence not only on atherogenesis, but also on other intimately related disorders such as arterial hypertension or the metabolic syndrome. Emerging imaging technologies as well as measurement of serum concentrations of specific biomarkers offer the possibility to detect and, to some extent, quantify the degree of chronic vascular inflammation in vivo. In addition, many standard and novel antiatherosclerotic therapies may exert beneficial effects through anti-inflammatory actions. As a result, detection and treatment of vascular inflammation are certain to become increasingly important in the management with patients of cardiovascular disease.

19755254
The inoperable valvular heart disease patient:the pluses and minuses of percutaneous valvular replacement.
The spectrum of potentially successful treatment options for inoperable valvular disease is limited. Aortic valvuloplasty may offer temporary improvement in symptoms and some survival benefit in select non-surgical patients with aortic stenosis, but it does not improve long-term outcome. Mitral valve incompetence often responds well to surgical repair, though patients with significantly reduced left ventricular function have worsened outcomes. The design of a percutaneous implantable prosthetic heart valve is a promising alternative to valvuloplasty. Although not yet an established interventional method, Percutaneous Aortic Valve Replacement (PAVR) will likely take a position among the innovative catheter-based techniques currently in development. The appropriate clinical scenario for Percutaneous Mitral Valve Intervention (PMVI), however, may be significantly narrower. As with many other minimally invasive operations or procedures, the ethical considerations of a novel approach must be considered.

19460478
[Cardiovascular disease and chronic kidney disease: from treatment to promoting health].
Chronic kidney disease is associated with poor cardiovascular outcomes and should be screened for in all patients with cardiovascular disease or risk factors such as hypertension and diabetes mellitus using estimate of glomerular filtration rate and a random urine albumin-to creatinine ratio. Strategies to identify and prevent chronic kidney disease must be part of a comprehensive program of disease prevention, that include evaluation of tobacco use, diet and exercise patterns, body mass index, blood pressure, lipid profile, blood glucose and patient-appropriate cancer screening. The global increase in patients with chronic kidney disease is threatening to reach epidemic proportions over the next decade, and few countries will be able to meet the economic challenges posed. A change in global approach from treatment of renal failure to aggressive primary and secondary prevention is essential. We propose that the United Nations Millennium Developments Goals for 2000-2015 should be expanded to include combatting infectious diseases as well as chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, renal disease and cancer, using an integrated approach.

18279396
Ovariectomy increases vascular calcification via the OPG/RANKL cytokine signalling pathway.
Observational studies suggest a strong relationship between menopause and vascular calcification. Receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaBeta ligand (RANKL) and osteoprotegerin (OPG) are critical regulators of bone remodelling and modulate vascular calcification. We assessed the hypothesis that ovariectomy increases vascular calcification via the OPG/RANKL axis. Age-matched sexually mature rabbits were randomized to ovariectomy (OVX, n = 12) or sham procedure (SHAM, n = 12). One month post-procedure, atherosclerosis was induced by 15 months 0.2%-cholesterol diet and endothelial balloon denudations (at months 1 and 3). Aortic atherosclerosis was assessed in vivo by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at months 9 and 15. At sacrifice, aortas were harvested for ex vivo microcomputed tomography (microCT) and molecular analysis of the vascular tissue. Vascular calcification density and calcific particle number were significantly greater in OVX than SHAM (8.4 +/- 2.8 vs. 1.9 +/- 0.6 mg cm(-3), P = 0.042, and 94 +/- 26 vs. 33 +/- 7 particles cm(-3), P = 0.046, respectively). Calcification morphology, as assessed by the arc angle subtended by the largest calcific particle, showed no difference between groups (OVX 33 +/- 7 degrees vs. SHAM 33 +/- 5 degrees , P = 0.99). By Western blot analysis, OVX increased the vascular OPG:RANKL ratio by 66%, P = 0.029, primarily by decreasing RANKL (P = 0.019). At month 9, MRI demonstrated no difference in atheroma volume between OVX and SHAM, and no significant change was seen by the end of the study. In contrast to bone, vascular OPG:RANKL ratio increased in response to ovariectomy with a corresponding fourfold increase in arterial calcification. This diametrical organ-specific response may explain the comorbid association of osteoporosis with calcifying atherosclerosis in post-menopausal women.

17412741
Cardiovascular outcomes in high risk patients with osteoarthritis treated with ibuprofen, naproxen or lumiracoxib.
Evidence suggests that both selective cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitors and non-selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) increase the risk of cardiovascular events. However, evidence from prospective studies of currently available COX-2 inhibitors and non-selective NSAIDs is lacking in patients at high cardiovascular risk who are taking aspirin. To determine the cardiovascular outcomes in high risk patients with osteoarthritis treated with ibuprofen, naproxen or lumiracoxib. The Therapeutic Arthritis Research and Gastrointestinal Event Trial (TARGET) of 18 325 patients with osteoarthritis comprised two parallel substudies, comparing lumiracoxib (COX-2 inhibitor) with either ibuprofen or naproxen. A post hoc analysis by baseline cardiovascular risk, treatment assignment, and low-dose aspirin use was performed. The primary composite end point was cardiovascular mortality, non-fatal myocardial infarction, and stroke at 1 year; a secondary end point was the development of congestive heart failure (CHF). In high risk patients among aspirin users, patients in the ibuprofen substudy had more primary events with ibuprofen than lumiracoxib (2.14% vs 0.25%, p = 0.038), whereas in the naproxen substudy rates were similar for naproxen and lumiracoxib (1.58% vs 1.48%, p = 0.899). High risk patients not taking aspirin had fewer primary events with naproxen than with lumiracoxib (0% vs 1.57%, p = 0.027), but not for ibuprofen versus lumiracoxib (0.92% vs 0.80%, p = 0.920). Overall, CHF developed more often with ibuprofen than lumiracoxib (1.28% vs 0.14%; p = 0.031), whereas no difference existed between naproxen and lumiracoxib. These data suggest that ibuprofen may confer an increased risk of thrombotic and CHF events relative to lumiracoxib among aspirin users at high cardiovascular risk. The study indicates that naproxen may be associated with lower risk relative to lumiracoxib among non-aspirin users. This study is subject to inherent limitations, and therefore should be interpreted as a hypothesis-generating study.

17239165
Normalization of platelet reactivity in clopidogrel-treated subjects.
Aspirin (ASA) + clopidogrel are commonly used in acute coronary syndrome (ACS), but persistent antiplatelet effects may complicate surgery. To study the possibility of normalizing platelet reactivity after ASA + clopidogrel treatment, 11 healthy subjects received a 325-mg ASA + clopidogrel loading dose (300 or 600 mg dependent on study arm), followed by 81 mg of ASA + 75 mg of clopidogrel daily for 2 days. Platelet reactivity was assessed by light transmittance aggregometry (LTA) [challenged by adenosine diphosphate (ADP), arachidonic acid (AA), collagen, and thrombin receptor activating peptide (TRAP)] and flow cytometry for platelet activation by GPIIb/IIIa receptor exposure pretreatment, 4 and 72 h postload. To normalize platelet reactivity, increasing amounts of pooled platelets from five untreated volunteers [volunteers (V)-platelet-rich plasma (PRP)] were added ex vivo to the subject's PRP (S-PRP). At both 4 and 72 h, 40% and 50% V-PRP were needed to overcome platelet disaggregation in the 300 or 600 mg arms, respectively, after ADP challenge; an additional 10% V-PRP fully normalized aggregation. Recovery of function was linear with each incremental increase of V-PRP. ADP-induced GPIIb/IIIa activation showed the same pattern as LTA (r = 0.74). Forty percent V-PRP was required to normalize platelet function to AA, collagen, and TRAP. Our results suggest that the pre-operative transfusion of 10 platelet concentrate units (the equivalent of 40% V-PRP) after a 300-mg clopidogrel loading or 12.5 units (50% V-PRP) after a 600 mg loading may adequately reverse clopidogrel-induced platelet disaggregation to facilitate postoperative hemostasis. An additional 2.5 units fully normalized platelet function. The potential clinical implications of our observations could include shorter hospitalizations and reduced bleeding complications. But these observations should be fully explored in an in vivo clinical setting with clopidogrel-treated patients before and after surgery.

