19170214
Spectrum of fibrosing diffuse parenchymal lung disease.
The interstitial lung diseases are a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by inflammation and/or fibrosis of the pulmonary interstitium. In 2002, the American Thoracic Society and the European Respiratory Society revised the classification of interstitial lung diseases and introduced the term diffuse parenchymal lung disease. The idiopathic interstitial pneumonias are a subtype of diffuse parenchymal lung disease. The idiopathic interstitial pneumonias are subdivided into usual interstitial pneumonia (with its clinical counterpart idiopathic interstitial pneumonia), nonspecific interstitial pneumonia, cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, acute interstitial pneumonia, desquamative interstitial pneumonia, respiratory bronchiolitis interstitial lung disease, and lymphocytic pneumonia. Sarcoidosis and hypersensitivity pneumonitis are the 2 most common granulomatous diffuse parenchymal lung diseases. Rheumatoid arthritis, systemic sclerosis, and dermatomyositis/polymyositis (causing antisynthetase syndrome) are diffuse parenchymal lung diseases of known association because these conditions are associated with connective tissue disease. Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome is a rare genetic diffuse parenchymal lung disease characterized by the clinical triad of pulmonary disease, oculocutaneous albinism, and bleeding diathesis. This review provides an overview of the chronic fibrosing diffuse parenchymal lung diseases. Its primary objective is to illuminate the clinical challenges encountered by clinicians who manage the diffuse parenchymal lung diseases regularly and to offer potential solutions to those challenges. Treatment for the diffuse parenchymal lung diseases is limited, and for many patients with end-stage disease, lung transplantation remains the best option. Although much has been learned about the diffuse parenchymal lung diseases during the past decade, research in these diseases is urgently needed.

19170132
Advanced lung disease: meeting the challenges.


18539240
Cardiac sarcoidosis.
Sarcoidosis is a systemic disease with a favorable prognosis, high remission rate, and low mortality. Cardiac involvement alters this prognosis. Clinical manifestations most commonly include arrhythmias, conduction abnormalities, and congestive heart failure. Treatment includes immunosuppressant therapy, permanent pacemakers in the setting of conduction abnormalities, and implantable cardioverter-defibrillators in patients at risk for sudden cardiac death. Risk stratification for sudden cardiac death is essential in otherwise asymptomatic patients who have suspected cardiac sarcoidosis.

18408658
Idiopathic pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis: an unrecognized or misdiagnosed entity?
Idiopathic pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis is a rare recently described entity likely to be under- and misdiagnosed, as awareness of this entity is not yet widespread. We report two cases that show the need to include this disease in the differential diagnosis of patients with predominantly pleural and subpleural fibrotic processes. The condition is a fibrotic thickening of the pleura and subpleural parenchyma due to elastic fiber proliferation predominantly in the upper lobes. Performing elastic fiber stains routinely in patients with fibrosis of this distribution may, therefore, aid in establishing the diagnosis and differentiating it from usual interstitial pneumonia/idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. These patients may be prone to the development of secondary spontaneous pneumothoraces and persistent postoperative bronchopleural fistulae. Continued study of newly diagnosed cases may uncover shared characteristics or features helpful in generating an etiologic hypothesis. Only with better understanding of this disease can we hope in the future to be able to offer treatments other than supportive care and ultimately lung transplantation, which are the only therapeutic options available today.

17925421
Results of 188 whole-body fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography scans in 137 patients with sarcoidosis.
To study the role of whole-body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) scans in the identification of occult biopsy sites and reversible granulomatous disease in patients with sarcoidosis. A retrospective review was undertaken of 188 FDG PET scans performed in 137 patients with proven sarcoidosis. All patients had given a complete medical history and undergone a physical examination, standard chest radiograph, spirometry, diffusing capacity determination, and measurement of serum angiotensin-converting enzymes levels. One hundred thirty-nine whole-body scans had positive findings. The most common positive sites were mediastinal lymph nodes (54 scans), extrathoracic lymph nodes (30 scans), and lung (24 scans). The standardized uptake value (SUV) ranged from 2.0 to 15.8. Twenty occult disease sites were identified. Eleven repeat scans exhibited decreased SUV with corticosteroid therapy. The positive pulmonary FDG PET scan findings occurred in two thirds of patients with radiographic stage II and III sarcoidosis. Negative pulmonary FDG PET scan findings were common in patients with radiographic stage 0, I, and IV sarcoidosis. Whole-body FDG PET scans are of value in identifying occult and reversible granulomas in patients with sarcoidosis. However, a positive FDG PET scan finding, by itself, is not an indication for treatment.

