21598258
Principles and practice of disaster relief: lessons from haiti.
Disaster relief is an interdisciplinary field dealing with the organizational processes that help prepare for and carry out all emergency functions necessary to prevent, prepare for, respond to, and recover from emergencies and disasters caused by all hazards, whether natural, technological, or human-made. Although it is an important function of local and national governing in the developed countries, it is often wanting in resource-poor, developing countries where, increasingly, catastrophic disasters tend to occur and have the greatest adverse consequences. The devastating January 12, 2010, Haiti earthquake is a case study of the impact of an extreme cataclysm in one of the poorest and most unprepared settings imaginable. As such, it offers useful lessons that are applicable elsewhere in the developing world. Emergency preparedness includes 4 phases: mitigation or prevention, preparedness, response, and recovery. Periods of normalcy are the best times to develop disaster preparedness plans. In resource-poor countries, where dealing with the expenses of daily living is already a burden, such planning is often neglected; and, when disasters strike, it is often with great delay that the assistance from international community can be deployed. In this increasingly interconnected world, the Haiti earthquake and the important international response to it make a strong case for a more proactive intervention of the international community in all phases of emergency management in developing countries, including in mitigation and preparedness, and not just in response and recovery. Predisaster planning can maximize the results of the international assistance and decrease the human and material tolls of inevitable disasters. There should be a minimum standard of preparedness that every country has to maintain and the international assistance to achieve that. International academic medical centers interested in global health could strengthen their programs by prospectively including in them contingency planning for international relief operations. Healthcare professionals of these institutions who travel to disaster zones should rigorously prepare themselves and make provisions for collecting and reporting data, which will enrich the knowledge of this growing activity. Mt Sinai J Med 78:306-318, 2011. © 2011 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

19182639
Leadership trends in plastic surgery.
The authors examined the recent trends in the composition, appointment, and turnover of chairpersons in academic plastic surgery. A survey regarding the characteristics of the current and former department chairpersons in plastic surgery was mailed to the 89 existing academic plastic surgery programs. The survey focused on the age, gender, subspecialty, interim tenure, and overall tenure of the two groups. An initial response was received from 60 chairpersons. The majority of current chairpersons are male (81 of 89, 91 percent), which is slightly lower than the group of immediate past chairs, of whom 98 percent (87 of 89) were male. From the questionnaires, it was noted that for both the current and former groups of chairpersons, the 40- to 50-year age range was the most frequent age group at which an individual was appointed to that position. Approximately one-third (35.7 percent) of the current group consider themselves "general plastic surgeons." This differs from their predecessors, of whom 56.0 percent reported the same designation. An increase in the promotion of existing faculty to chairpersons was also noted. As compared with 44.2 percent of the previous group, 69.5 percent of the current chairpersons were promoted from within the department. The population of academic chairpersons in plastic surgery is changing. Today, more chairpersons appear to be younger and specialty trained. Examining the history of academic leadership and identifying trends in any field of medicine can only help to better prepare the specialty for the future.

18724128
A survey of microvascular protocols for lower extremity free tissue transfer II: postoperative care.
Due to the complex, and often tenuous nature of microsurgical tissue transfer, postoperative monitoring of free tissue flaps plays a vital role in the management of such patients. Some of the more challenging reconstructive problems occur in patients with lower extremity trauma, yet to date, no preferred protocol exists for the postoperative care of lower extremity free flaps. The present study sought to evaluate and assess current preferences in monitoring following lower extremity free tissue transfer. Members of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS) were surveyed with regard to their choice for postoperative monitoring and return to dependent positioning ("dangling"). The results demonstrate that there is some agreement among surgeons regarding the optimal means for postoperative monitoring. Most rely on clinical observation in addition to conventional Doppler probe for an average of 4.8 days. Most surgeons follow their own flaps in addition to relying on the residents and nursing staff. The study also notes a wide variety in the times and frequencies at which dangling of the extremity was commenced. Most respondents initiate dangling within 2 weeks of surgery and begin with only 1 to 5 minutes per session.

18095998
Dabska tumor arising in lymphangioma circumscriptum.
We describe a case of Dabska tumor (DT) occurring within a large congenital lymphangioma circumscriptum on the thigh of a 14-year-old female. Diagnostic biopsy showed numerous intravascular papillary projections lined by atypical endothelial cells within the anastomosing vascular channels of a lymphangioma circumscriptum. DT is regarded as a vascular tumor of intermediate malignant potential, most probably of lymphatic origin. Although it has been described in pre-existing lymphangiomas, to the best of our knowledge this is the first case to be described in a pre-existing lymphangioma circumscriptum. During a follow-up of 9 years, the lymphangioma circumscriptum has recurred, but there has been no evidence of DT recurrence or metastasis.

17721226
Mandibular distraction for amniotic band syndrome in the neonate.
Prior reports have advocated the use of distraction osteogenesis (DO) in the management of neonates with mandibular hypoplasia to avoid early tracheostomy and its associated morbidity. Our center recently reported on the successful use of DO in a neonate with muscular dystrophy, a condition which affects the bone as well as the adjacent skeletal muscle. Herein, we describe the use of neonatal DO for mandibular hypoplasia in the setting of amniotic band sequence (ABS). The child had significant soft tissue contracture in the region of the cheek, associated with bilateral transverse facial clefts. This report highlights the successful utilization of DO for the treatment of mandibular hypoplasia and airway compromise in a patient with ABS.

17721222
A survey of microvascular protocols for lower-extremity free tissue transfer I: perioperative anticoagulation.
Reconstruction of the lower extremity using free tissue transfer is performed throughout the country by numerous surgical teams. However, no established protocol exists for the use of anticoagulation in the perioperative period. The present study sought to analyze trends in current protocols regarding perioperative anticoagulation for lower-extremity free flap reconstruction. Members of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons were surveyed with regard to their preferences for perioperative anticoagulation in conjunction with lower-extremity free tissue transfer. The results demonstrated tremendous variability in both the agents used and therapeutic periods employed. They highlighted the absence of 1 or more common anticoagulation protocols and tried to establish common trends in the use of such agents.

17574175
Establishing an international training program for surgical residents.


