20547151
Isolation and characterization of a large soluble form of fibronectin that stimulates adhesion, spreading, and alignment of mouse erythroleukemia cells.
Fibronectin (FN) is a major component of the extracellular matrix which plays important roles in a variety of cellular processes including cell adhesion, and migration. The soluble cellular form of FN has a monomer molecular weight of approximately 250 kDa, and generally exists as a dimer of 500 kDa. We have isolated a different form of soluble FN from mouse breast cancer cell line SC115 conditioned medium (CM) and purified it to homogeneity as evidenced by both native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and sodium dodecyl sulfate PAGE. It still exhibits a monomeric form of about 250 kDa while its form in the CM is stable and soluble with an apparent tetrameric molecular weight in the range of 800-1000 kDa. This form of FN is a potent cell adhesion factor (AF) that induces adhesion to polystyrene, elongation, spreading, alignment or "track" formation, and migration of mouse erythroleukemia cells. Column fractions homogeneous for AF protein were able to stimulate 10% cell adhesion at concentrations of 23 ng/ml and 1.9 ng/cm(2). Purified AF induced 50% cell adhesion at 94 ng/ml and 7.5 ng/cm(2). AF also increased the migration of human aortic smooth muscle and vascular endothelial cells. However, this form of FN differs from other forms as it does not bind tightly to either gelatin or heparin. Studies of this AF should shed light on adhesion of cells to extracellular matrix molecules and on cell migration, both of which are critical in several biological processes such as wound healing, metastasis, matrix formation and structure, and organ development.

19347245
Sequences of polycythemia-type Friend spleen focus-forming virus in clone-745-derived mouse erythroleukemia cells.
Friend leukemia virus complex consists of a replication-competent virus plus one of two replication-incompetent viruses, spleen focus-forming virus anemia virus or spleen focus-forming virus polycythemia virus. The replication-incompetent viruses induce rapid malignant transformation of erythroid precursor cells. Transformed cell lines from mice infected with the complex can be induced to undergo erythrodifferentiation in vitro. However, lines containing the anemia-type virus require erythropoietin and another agent such as dimethyl sulfoxide for optimal erythrodifferentiation, whereas those containing the polycythemia-type virus do not require or respond to erythropoietin. Mice infected with the original Friend virus isolates were anemic, so sub-lines derived from these mice should be erythropoietin-dependent for induction of erythrodifferentiation. However, many of the widely studied sub-lines are erythropoietin-independent. In order to clarify this apparent anomaly, the genomes of viruses present in two commonly used erythropoietin-independent sub-lines were sequenced. Sequence analysis demonstrates that they contain the polycythemia-type virus and not the anemia-type virus.

