20809521
Islet-expressed TLR2 and TLR4 sense injury and mediate early graft failure after transplantation.
Although islet transplantation is an effective treatment for Type 1 diabetes, primary engraftment failure contributes to suboptimal outcomes. We tested the hypothesis that islet isolation and transplantation activate innate immunity through TLR expressed on islets. Murine islets constitutively express TLR2 and TLR4, and TLR activation with peptidoglycan or LPS upregulates islet production of cytokines and chemokines. Following transplantation into streptozotocin-induced diabetic, syngeneic mice, islets exposed to LPS or peptidoglycan had primary graft failure with intra- and peri-islet mononuclear cell inflammation. The use of knockout mice showed that recipient CD8(+) T cells caused engraftment failure and did so in the absence of islet-derived DC. To mimic physiological islet injury, islets were transplanted with exocrine debris. Transplantation of TLR2/4(-/-) islets reduced proinflammatory cytokine production and improved islet survival. Stressed islets released the alarmin high-mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1) and recombinant HMGB1 (rHMGB1) induced NFkB activation. NFkB activation was prevented in the absence of both TLR2 and TLR4. rHMGB1 pretreatment also prevented primary engraftment through a TLR2/4-dependent pathway. Our results show that islet graft failure can be initiated by TLR2 and TLR4 signaling and suggest that HMGB1 is one likely early mediator. Subsequent downstream signaling results in intra-islet inflammation followed by T-cell-mediated graft destruction.

20584999
Immune cell-derived c3 is required for autoimmune diabetes induced by multiple low doses of streptozotocin.
The complement system contributes to autoimmune injury, but its involvement in promoting the development of autoimmune diabetes is unknown. In this study, our goal was to ascertain the role of complement C3 in autoimmune diabetes. Susceptibility to diabetes development after multiple low-dose streptozotocin treatment in wild-type (WT) and C3-deficient mice was analyzed. Bone marrow chimeras, luminex, and quantitative reverse transcription PCR assays were performed to evaluate the phenotypic and immunologic impact of C3 in the development of this diabetes model. Coincident with the induced elevations in blood glucose levels, we documented alternative pathway complement component gene expression within the islets of the diabetic WT mice. When we repeated the experiments with C3-deficient mice, we observed complete resistance to disease, as assessed by the absence of histologic insulitis and the absence of T-cell reactivity to islet antigens. Studies of WT chimeras bearing C3-deficient bone marrow cells showed that bone marrow cell-derived C3, and not serum C3, is involved in the induction of diabetes in this model. The data reveal a key role for immune cell-derived C3 in the pathogenesis of murine multiple low-dose streptozotocin-induced diabetes and support the concept that immune cell mediated diabetes is in part complement-dependent.

20104494
Complement component C3 allotypes and outcomes in liver transplantation.
The complement system has been implicated in the pathogenesis of liver diseases. Human complement component C3 (C3) exists as 2 allotypes, fast (F) and slow (S). We conducted a study to address the influence of these alleles on ischemia-reperfusion (IR) injury and graft survival in liver transplant recipients. Four hundred thirty patients receiving liver transplants from 2000 to 2004 were included. C3 allotypes of 296 donor-recipient pairs were determined and correlated with clinical outcomes. Four groups were analyzed according to the C3 genotype: C3 SS donor and recipient, C3 FS or C3 FF donor and C3 SS recipient, C3 SS donor and C3 FS or C3 FF recipient, and C3 FS or C3 FF donor and recipient. Baseline characteristics of the 4 groups were similar. The mean follow-up time was 4.3 +/- 2.2 years. The 4 groups had similar rates of IR injury (P = 0.16). The hazard ratios for liver allograft survival in the C3 SS donor and recipient group in comparison with the other 3 groups (C3 FS or C3 FF donor and C3 SS recipient, C3 SS donor and C3 FS or C3 FF recipient, and C3 FS or C3 FF donor and recipient) were not significantly different: 1.13 (P = 0.60), 0.99 (P = 0.97), and 1.02 (P = 0.95), respectively. In conclusion, donor and recipient C3 genotypes are not associated with liver transplantation outcomes.

20098285
The variable pathology of kidney disease after liver transplantation.
Chronic kidney disease is a frequent complication in orthotopic liver transplant (OLT) recipients, observed in 10% to 60% after 5 years. We analyzed clinical and pathological data from 81 OLT recipients who developed impaired kidney function with a serum creatinine greater than or equal to 1.5 mg/dL or new proteinuria on dipstick urinalysis. All patients underwent percutaneous kidney biopsy. The most common reason for liver transplantation was hepatitis C virus infection. The mean time until biopsy was 4.89 years. At the time of biopsy, the mean serum creatinine was 2.0 mg/dL, Modified Diet of Renal Disease glomerular filtration rate was 38.7 mL/min, and 24-hr urine protein was 1.37 g. All biopsies demonstrated glomerular abnormalities, 42% showed primary glomerular diseases, and only 16% had evidence of calcineurin inhibitor toxicity. Electron microscopy was performed on 74 biopsies and podocyte effacement was detected in 88%. Mean postbiopsy follow-up was 20 months; eight patients progressed to end-stage renal disease. This study demonstrates universal glomerular abnormalities in kidney biopsies after OLT. The pathology is suggestive of diabetic nephropathy and hypertensive change, but there are also specific glomerular disease processes present. There is little calcineurin inhibitor toxicity in this group. These findings underscore the importance of understanding the causes of kidney disease in the constantly changing liver transplant population, and the need to change current management of these patients.

19046557
Rationale and strategies for early detection and management of diabetic kidney disease.
Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) occurs in 20% to 40% of patients with diabetes mellitus and is the leading cause of chronic kidney disease and end-stage renal disease in the United States. Despite the American Diabetes Association and the National Kidney Foundation advocating annual screening of diabetic patients, DKD remains underdiagnosed in the diabetic population. Early recognition of diabetic nephropathy by health care professionals is vital for proper management. The presence of microalbuminuria is particularly important as even low levels of dipstick-negative albuminuria indicate early disease long before a diminished glomerular filtration rate and are associated with an elevated cardiovascular disease risk. Like all forms of chronic kidney disease, DKD causes a progressive decline in renal function that, despite current treatment strategies, is largely irreversible. Many patients with DKD might be expected to develop end-stage renal disease, but many more patients will likely die of a cardiovascular event before renal replacement therapy is needed. Therefore, a renewed focus on cardiovascular risk factor reduction and a timely nephrology consultation with an emphasis on patient education is essential to proper DKD management.

19017939
Inhibition of the alloimmune response through the generation of regulatory T cells by a MHC class II-derived peptide.
We have previously shown that HLA-DQA1, a peptide derived from a highly conserved region of MHC class II, prevents alloreactive T cell priming and effector function in vivo, although underlying mechanisms are obscure. In this study, we demonstrate that 28% of mice treated with HLA-DQA1 combined with low-dose rapamycin achieved permanent engraftment of fully MHC-disparate islet allografts and significantly prolonged survival in the remaining animals (log rank, p < 0.001). Immunohistologic examination of the grafts from HLA-DQA1/rapamycin-treated animals revealed up-regulated expression of TGF-ss and FoxP3. In vivo administration of blocking anti-TGF-ss or depleting anti-CD25 mAb augmented T cell alloimmunity and prevented the long-term engraft induced by HLA-DQA1. In vitro experiments further showed that HLA-DQA1 induced differentiation of CD4(+) T cells into CD4(+)CD25(+)FoxP3(+) regulatory T cells. Together, these data provide the first demonstration that HLA-DQA1, a MHC class II-derived peptide, can prolong allograft survival via a TGF-beta and regulatory T cell-dependent mechanisms.

19013329
End-stage renal disease and kidney transplant in HIV-infected patients.
Chronic kidney and end-stage renal disease are important complications of HIV disease and treatment. African Americans with HIV infection are at significantly increased risk for development of chronic kidney disease and for progression to end-stage renal disease. Survival of HIV-positive patients on dialysis has improved dramatically since the introduction of combination antiretroviral therapy, with hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis appearing to offer similar survival. Renal transplant has been shown to be successful in HIV-positive patients and emerging data suggest a survival benefit over remaining on dialysis, despite data indicating an increased incidence of acute rejection. Immunosuppression dosing is complicated by interactions with antiretroviral therapy, and drug levels must be followed closely. Experience to date suggests that HIV-positive transplant recipients are best cared for in academic institutions with multi-disciplinary teams devoted to their care.

18337549
Addition of plasmapheresis decreases the incidence of acute antibody-mediated rejection in sensitized patients with strong donor-specific antibodies.
The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of desensitization protocols using intravenous Ig with or without plasmapheresis in patients with donor-specific anti-HLA antibodies on prevention of antibody-mediated rejection and downregulation of donor-specific antibodies. Thirty-five complement-dependent cytotoxicity T cell cross-match-negative but complement-dependent cytotoxicity B cell and/or flow cytometry cross-match-positive kidney transplant recipients were treated with high-dosage intravenous Ig plus Thymoglobulin induction treatment. Donor-specific antibody strength was stratified as strong, medium, or weak by Luminex flow beads. Group 1 patients had weak/moderate and group 2 strong donor-specific antibodies Whereas no group 1 patients had acute rejection, 66% of group 2 had acute rejection (44% antibody-mediated rejection, 22% cellular rejection). The protocol was then changed to the addition of peritransplantation plasmapheresis to patients with strong donor-specific antibodies (group 3). This change resulted in a dramatic decrease in the acute rejection rate to 7%. During a median 18 mo of follow-up, patient survival was 100, 100, and 93% and graft survival was 100, 78, and 86% in groups 1, 2, and 3, respectively. During follow-up, 17 (52%) patients lost donor-specific antibodies completely, and 10 (30%) lost some of donor-specific antibodies and/or decreased the strength of existing donor-specific antibodies. These results indicated that in patients with strong donor-specific antibodies, the addition of plasmapheresis to high-dosage intravenous Ig decreases the incidence of acute rejection. The majority of the patients, whether they received intravenous Ig alone or with plasmapheresis, lost their donor-specific antibodies during follow-up.

17942771
Transplant glomerulopathy may occur in the absence of donor-specific antibody and C4d staining.
Transplant glomerulopathy (TGP) has been proposed to be a component of chronic antibody-mediated rejection (AMR). We have studied 36 patients with TGP and 51 patients with chronic allograft nephropathy (CAN) but without TGP for C4d staining and donor-specific anti-HLA antibodies (DSA) to investigate the alloantibody-mediated mechanisms. Allograft biopsies were stained with C4d staining and DSAs were studied by Luminex Flow Beads. Allograft biopsies were done at a mean of 5.3 +/- 5.0 and 5.6 +/- 4.6 yr after transplantation in patients with CAN and TGP, respectively. The mean creatinine level at the time of the biopsy was 2.7 +/- 1.2 mg/dl in each group. Proteinuria of >1.0 g/d was more common in patients with TGP (61 versus 25%; P = 0.002). Whereas three patients with TGP had a history of acute AMR, none of the patients with CAN had. Mean chronicity score of the biopsies were 1.7 +/- 0.7 in patients with CAN and 1.9 +/- 0.8 in patients with TGP. Biopsies from only two (4%) patients with CAN and four (11%) patients with TGP had diffuse C4d positivity. DSA were found in 36% of TGP and 33% of CAN patients. These results suggest that a substantial number of patients with TGP did not have positive C4d staining or DSA, indicating that a non-alloantibody-mediated process may be involved in the development of TGP in some patients.

17699301
Medical risks in living kidney donors: absence of proof is not proof of absence.
Living-kidney donation has become increasingly widespread, yet there has been little critical analysis of existing studies of long-term medical outcomes in living donors. This review analyzes issues in study design that affect the quality of the evidence and summarizes possible risk factors in living donors. Virtually all studies of long-term outcomes in donors are retrospective, many with large losses to follow-up, and therefore are subject to selection bias. Most studies have small sample sizes and are underpowered to detect clinically meaningful differences between donors and comparison groups. Many studies compare donors with the general population, but donors are screened to be healthier than the general population and this may not be a valid comparison group. Difficulties in measurement of BP and renal function may underestimate the impact of donation on these outcomes. Several studies have identified possible risk factors for development of hypertension, proteinuria, and ESRD, but potential vulnerability factors in donors have not been well explored and there is a paucity of data on cardiovascular risk factors in donors. Prospective registration of living kidney donors and prospective studies of diverse populations of donors are essential to protect living donors and preserve living-kidney donation.

17702722
Routine use of ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in potential living kidney donors.
Most transplant centers exclude prospective living kidney donors with hypertension from donation. Centers routinely identify hypertension using BP measured in the clinic, but it is not clear that clinic BP accurately detects the presence or absence of hypertension in potential donors. We therefore conducted a prospective study to determine the impact of routine ambulatory BP monitoring on diagnosis of hypertension in potential donors and the value of other baseline characteristics in predicting ambulatory BP results. We compared classification of hypertension status by clinic BP and by ambulatory BP monitoring in 178 potential living kidney donors. Of 63 individuals with hypertension by clinic BP, 62% had white-coat hypertension by ambulatory BP and were therefore eligible to donate. Of 115 individuals who were normotensive by clinic BP, 17% had masked hypertension by ambulatory BP and were excluded from donation. Individuals with masked hypertension were older, were more likely to be male, and had a somewhat higher clinic BP than individuals with sustained normotension. Individuals with white-coat hypertension had a somewhat lower clinic diastolic BP than individuals with sustained hypertension. Routine ambulatory BP monitoring may identify a large number of individuals with white-coat hypertension and a smaller but significant number of individuals with masked hypertension, ensuring adequate protection of potential donors and accurate assessment of donor risk. Differences in baseline characteristics are small and are not clinically useful in distinguishing individuals with masked hypertension from individuals with sustained normotension or individuals with white-coat hypertension from individuals with sustained hypertension, demonstrating the importance of ambulatory BP monitoring in this population.

19879295
Inhibition of TLR4 signaling prolongs Treg-dependent murine islet allograft survival.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) provide an important link between innate and adaptive immune system. We hypothesized that the recognition of endogenous TLR4 ligands is occurring at the time of transplantation, and these innate signals drive the inflammation and affect alloimmune responses. We confirmed that early after transplantation of allogenic islets, transcripts for TLR4 as well as potential ligands were released or up-regulated. In an allogenic islet transplantation model, genetic disruption of TLR4 on donor islets had no effect on allograft survival, whereas TLR4 deficiency in recipients lead to prolonged graft survival. Low dose rapamycin-treatment of TLR4(-/-) recipients induced permanent engraftment of 45% islet graft (p=0.005) compared to WT recipients. This prolonged graft survival was dependent on the presence of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) Treg. Naïve CD4(+)CD25(-) T cells cultured with the TLR4 ligand lipopolysaccharide showed enhanced IL-4, IL-6, IL-17, IFN gamma secretion and inhibited TGFbeta induced Foxp3(+)Treg generation. Thus, inhibition of recipient TLR4 activation at the time of transplantation decreases proinflammatory signals and allows Treg generation.

19545762
Tumor lysis syndrome occurring after the administration of rituximab for posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder.
Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS) may occur after the administration of rituximab for lymphoproliferative disorders. We describe the case of a heart transplant recipient who developed TLS after a single dose of rituximab for the treatment of posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder. Because rituximab is being used more frequently, it is important for transplant physicians to be aware of this potential complication particularly after administering the first dose.

19459817
Factors associated with failure to list HIV-positive kidney transplant candidates.
With improved survival in the antiretroviral era, data from ongoing studies suggest that HIV patients can be safely transplanted. The disproportionate burden of HIV-related end-stage renal disease in minority populations may impose additional obstacles to successful completion of the transplant evaluation. We retrospectively reviewed 309 potentially eligible HIV patients evaluated for kidney transplant at our institution since 2000. Only 20% of HIV patients have been listed, compared to 73% of HIV-negative patients evaluated over the same period (p < 0.00001). Failure to provide documentation of CD4 and viral load (36% of candidates) was the most common reason for failure to progress beyond initial evaluation. Other factors independently associated with failure to complete the evaluation included CD4 < 200 at initial evaluation (OR 15.17; 95% CI 1.94-118.83), black race (OR 2.33; 95% CI 1.07-5.06), and history of drug use (OR 2.56; 95% CI 1.22-5.37). More efficient medical record sharing and an awareness of factors associated with failure to list HIV-positive transplant candidates may enable transplant centers to more effectively advocate for these patients.

18589138
The burden of chronic kidney disease in long-term liver transplant recipients.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is an important risk factor for morbidity and mortality post-liver transplantation (OLT). This study focused on investigating the incidence and risk factors associated with the development CKD after OLT. We performed a retrospective cohort study of recipients followed at least 5 years at our institution. CKD was diagnosed and classified according to National Kidney Foundation and the Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative guidelines. There were 231 patients, 64% men, 67% Caucasian, 16% African-American, and 17% others, with a mean age of 56 +/- 13 years. The mean glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of the population was 56 +/- 28 mL/min/1.73 m2. CKD was defined as GFR less than 60 mL/min; 144 patients (61%) were identified as having CKD. When these patients were compared to the non-CKD group, the former were significantly older (62 +/- 9 vs 52 +/- 12 years, P = .03), more likely to be hypertensive (59% vs 38%, P = .003), and required more antihypertensive medications (0.83 +/- 0.81 vs 0.52 +/- 0.77, P = .02); 26% of all patients had diabetes. However, the incidence of diabetes (43.3% vs 19.3%, P = .02) as well as the incidence of insulin dependency (21.6% vs 12.5%, P = .001) was significantly higher in the CKD population. Mean uric acid levels were higher in CKD patients compared to non-CKD patients (8.00 +/- 2.00 mg/dL vs 6.70 +/- 1.99 mg/dL respectively, P = .001); patients with uric acid more than 6.0 had a 1.7 risk of having CKD. CKD defined as GFR < 60 mL/min is highly prevalent in long-term OLT survivors. Older age, elevated systolic blood pressure, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and elevated uric acid levels are independently associated with CKD.

