17982486
Synergistic effect between EGF and TGF-beta1 in inducing oncogenic properties of intestinal epithelial cells.
Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 has a biphasic effect on rat intestinal epithelial (RIE) cells. By itself, TGF-beta1 functions as a tumor suppressor by inhibiting the growth, migration and invasion of RIE cells. We show in this study that in conjunction with epidermal growth factor (EGF), TGF-beta1 helped to augment migration, invasion and anchorage-independent growth (AIG) compared to that by EGF alone. EGF plus TGF-beta1 induced a dramatic morphological change characteristic of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The mechanism for this enhanced effect of TGF-beta1 and EGF on oncogenic properties was explored by analysis of EGF- and TGF-beta1-mediated signaling pathways and complementary DNA arrays. TGF-beta1 augmented EGF-mediated signaling of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and AKT by enhancing and prolonging the activation of the former and prolonging the activation of the latter. Inhibition of MAPK, but not phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K), abolished TGF-beta1 plus EGF-induced EMT and downregulation of E-cadherin at mRNA and protein levels. By contrast, cell migration and invasion were sensitive to inhibition of either MAPK or PI3 kinase. TGF-beta1 plus EGF-induced AIG was significantly more resistant to inhibition of PI3K and MAPK compared to that induced by EGF alone. EGF and TGF-beta1 synergistically induced the expression of a series of proteases including matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 1 (collagenase), MMP3, MMP9, MMP10, MMP14 and cathepsin. Among them, the expression of MMP1, MMP3, MMP9 and MMP10 was MAPK dependent. Inhibition of the MMPs or cathepsin significantly blocked EGF plus TGF-beta1-induced invasion, but had no effect on colony formation. Phospholipase C (PLC) and Cox2 induced by EGF plus TGF-beta1 also played a significant role in invasion, whereas PLC was also important for colony formation. Our study reveals specific signaling functions and induction of genes differentially required for enhanced effect of EGF- and TGF-beta1-induced oncogenic properties, and helps to explain the tumor-promoting effect of TGF-beta1 in human cancer with elevated expression or activation of TGF-beta1 and receptor protein tyrosine kinases.

17280588
Effective use of microarrays in neuroendocrine research.
The development of microarray technology makes it possible to simultaneously assay the expression level of hundreds to tens of thousands of mRNA transcripts in one experiment. Genome-wide transcriptional analysis has increasing importance for many areas of neuroendocrinology research. The expense and technical complexity of microarray experiments can make it difficult to navigate the terrain of rival platforms and technologies. In this review, we provide a practical view and comparison of various microarray technologies. Affymetrix arrays, high-density cDNA arrays, membrane arrays and experimental design and data analysis are all discussed by researchers currently using these techniques to study gene regulation in neuroendocrine tissues.

