21555953
Current Practice and Perception of Screening for Medication Adherence in Inflammatory Bowel Disease.
BACKGROUND: Adherence to medication in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) improves outcomes. Current practices of screening for adherence to IBD medications are unknown. The goal of this study was to determine current practice and perception of screening for medication adherence among US-based gastroenterologists. METHODS: A survey was mailed electronically to gastroenterologists whose electronic-mail address was listed in the American College of Gastroenterology database. Physicians who cared for IBD patients were invited to answer. RESULTS: About 6830 surveys were sent to gastroenterologists nationwide, and 395 physicians who cared for IBD patients completed the survey. The true response rate is unknown, as the number of physicians caring for IBD patients in the database is unknown. About 77% (n=303) of physicians who responded stated they screen for adherence to medication. Of the 77% of physicians who screened for adherence, only 19% (n=58) use accepted measures of screening for adherence (pill counts, prescription refill rates, or adherence surveys). The remaining 81% used patient interview to screen for adherence, a measure considered least accepted to determine adherence, as it overestimates adherence. The average number of IBD patients observed in 1 week had no statistical significance in predilection for screening (P=0.82). Private practice physicians (P=0.05), younger physicians (P=0.03), and physicians with fewer years of experience (P=0.02) all were more likely to screen. About 95% of responders thought determining a low adherer to medicine was important because an intervention can increase adherence. CONCLUSIONS: The majority of gastroenterologists surveyed recognize that adherence to medication is important and improves outcomes. The majority of physicians in this study are screening for nonadherence in IBD, but are not using accepted measures for adherence detection. If this study truly reflects the majority of physicians nationwide, changing the way physicians screen for adherence, may detect more low adherers to medication.

21530747
Intestinal inflammation and cancer.
Patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease are at increased risk for developing colorectal cancer (CRC). Chronic inflammation is believed to promote carcinogenesis. The risk for colon cancer increases with the duration and anatomic extent of colitis and presence of other inflammatory disorders (such as primary sclerosing cholangitis), whereas it decreases when patients take drugs to reduce inflammation (such as mesalamine and steroids). The genetic features that lead to sporadic CRC-chromosome instability, microsatellite instability, and DNA hypermethylation-also occur in colitis-associated CRC. Unlike the normal colonic mucosa, cells of the inflamed colonic mucosa have these genetic alterations before there is any histologic evidence of dysplasia or cancer. The reasons for these differences are not known, but oxidative stress is likely to be involved. Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species produced by inflammatory cells can affect regulation of genes that encode factors that prevent carcinogenesis (such as p53, DNA mismatch repair proteins, and DNA base excision-repair proteins), transcription factors (such as nuclear factor-?B), or signaling proteins (such as cyclooxygenases). Administration of agents that cause colitis in healthy rodents or genetically engineered, cancer-prone mice accelerates development of colorectal tumors. Mice genetically prone to inflammatory bowel disease also develop CRC, especially in the presence of bacterial colonization. Individual components of the innate and adaptive immune response have also been implicated in carcinogenesis. These observations offer compelling support for the role of inflammation in colon carcinogenesis.

21103439
Should chromoendoscopy be the standard of care in ulcerative colitis dysplasia surveillance?


20848512
Are your patients taking their medicine? Validation of a new adherence scale in patients with inflammatory bowel disease and comparison with physician perception of adherence.
To date no adherence survey has been validated in IBD. The aim was to administer an improved medication adherence survey to IBD patients, to validate the scale in IBD, and to compare the results to perceived adherence by the gastroenterologists. IBD patients were given the Morisky Medication Adherence Scale (MMAS-8). To validate the scale, prescription claim information, calculated as continuous single-interval medication availability (CSA) and mean possession ratio (MPR), was correlated to the MMAS-8 scale. Nonpersistence or low adherence was defined as a CSA or MPR<0.8. Treating gastroenterologists, blinded to the instrument, then assessed adherence in these patients. Of 110 IBD patients in the study, MMAS-8 identified 54 patients as low adherers (LAs) to their IBD medication and 56 patients as medium or high adherers (MHAs). Eighty-five percent of LAs had nonpersistent fill rates, as per CSA, compared with 11% of MHAs. Physicians correctly classified 95% of patients who were MHAs but only 33% of LAs. Underestimation of adherence only occurred in 5% of patients, whereas overestimation occurred in 67% (P<0.0001). In a linear regression analysis, CSA was significantly correlated with disease activity score (P<0.001). LAs are a challenge to identify. This study demonstrates that the MMAS-8 scale is a valid instrument for assessing medication adherence in IBD. This is the first adherence scale to be validated in IBD.

19279411
Severity of inflammation as a predictor of colectomy in patients with chronic ulcerative colitis.
We evaluated a large cohort of patients with longstanding ulcerative colitis in a colonoscopic surveillance program to determine predictors of colectomy. We queried a retrospective database of patients who had symptoms of ulcerative colitis for seven years or more. Histologic inflammation in biopsies was graded on a validated four-point scale: absent, mild, moderate, severe. We performed a multivariate analysis of the inflammation scores and other variables to determine predictive factors for colectomy. Patients who underwent colectomy for neoplasia were censored at the time of surgery; those who did not undergo colectomy were censored at the time of last contact. A total of 561 patients were evaluated, with a median follow-up of 21.4 years since disease onset. A total of 97 patients (17.3 percent) underwent surgery; 25 (4.5 percent) for reasons other than dysplasia. These 25 constitute events for this analysis. For univariate analysis, mean inflammation (P < 0.001) and steroid use (P = 0.01) were predictors of colectomy. For multivariable proportional hazards analysis, mean inflammation (P < 0.001) and steroid use (P = 0.03) were predictors of colectomy, whereas salicylate use (P = 0.007) was protective. Higher median inflammation scores and corticosteroid use were predictors of colectomy in this patient population. The overall rate of colectomy during a long period of follow-up was low (<1 percent per year).

18844620
Chromoendoscopy-targeted biopsies are superior to standard colonoscopic surveillance for detecting dysplasia in inflammatory bowel disease patients: a prospective endoscopic trial.
Patients with extensive, longstanding chronic ulcerative or Crohn's colitis face greater risks of developing colorectal cancer. Current standard surveillance relies on detecting dysplasia using random sampling at colonoscopy but may fail to detect dysplasia in many patients. Dye spraying techniques have been reported to aid in detecting otherwise subtle mucosal abnormalities in the setting of colitis. We prospectively compared dye-spray technique using methylene blue to standard colonoscopic surveillance in detecting dysplasia. One hundred fifteen patients were referred to the Chromoendoscopy Study Group and prospectively screened for the study. One hundred two (64 M, 38 F) (79 UC 23 CC) patients meeting the inclusion criteria were enrolled. Following a standard bowel preparation, each patient was examined using standard office endoscopic equipment by three methods: (a) standard surveillance colonoscopy with four random biopsies every 10 cm (for a total of at least 32 samples); (b) a targeted biopsy protocol; and finally (c) methylene blue (0.01%) dye spray was segmentally applied throughout the colon and any pit-pattern abnormality or lesion rendered visible by the dye spray was targeted and biopsied. Each patient had a single examination, which included two passes of the colonoscope. Specimens were reviewed in a blinded fashion by a single gastrointestinal pathologist. The three methods were then compared with each patient serving as his or her own control. Targeted biopsies with dye spray revealed significantly more dysplasia (16 patients with low grade and 1 patient with high grade) than random biopsies (3 patients with low-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.001) and more than targeted nondye spray (8 patients with low-grade and 1 patient with high-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.057). Targeted biopsies with and without dye spray detected dysplasia in 20 patients compared with 3 using Method (a) (P= 0.0002, two-tailed exact McNemar's Test). There were no adverse events. Colonoscopic surveillance of chronic colitis patients using methylene blue dye-spray targeted biopsies results in improved dysplasia yield compared to conventional random and targeted biopsy methods. Accordingly, this technique warrants incorporation into clinical practice in this setting and consideration as a standard of care for these patients. The value of multiple random biopsies as a surveillance technique should be revisited.

17567865
Chromoendoscopy should be the standard method and more widely used for cancer surveillance colonoscopy in ulcerative colitis--con.


