19737878
Gene expression changes in areas of focal loss of retinal ganglion cells in the retina of DBA/2J mice.
Purpose. To determine whether differences in gene expression occur between areas of focal retinal ganglion cell (RGC) loss and of relative RGC preservation in the DBA/2 mouse retina and whether they can provide insight into the pathophysiology of glaucoma. Methods. Areas of focal RGC loss (judged by lack of Fluorogold labeling; Fluorochrome, Denver, CO), adjacent areas with relative RGC preservation in DBA/2 retina, and Fluorogold-labeled retina from DBA/2(-pe) (pearl) mice were dissected and used for microarray analysis. RT-PCR and immunoblot analysis were used to confirm differential gene expression. Bioinformatic analysis was used to identify gene networks affected in the glaucomatous retina. Results. Microarray analysis identified 372 and 115 gene chip IDs as up- and downregulated, respectively, by 0.5-fold in areas of RGC loss. Differentially expressed genes included those coding for cytoskeletal proteins, enzymes, transport proteins, extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, and immune response proteins. Several genes were confirmed by RT-PCR. For at least two genes, differential protein expression was verified. Bioinformatics analysis identified multiple affected functional gene networks. Pearl mice appeared to have significantly different gene expression, even when compared with relatively preserved areas of the DBA/2 retina. Conclusions. Regional gene expression changes occur in areas of focal RGC loss in the DBA/2 retina. The genes involved code for proteins with diverse cellular functions. Further investigation is needed to determine the cellular localization of the expression of these genes during the development of spontaneous glaucoma in the DBA/2 mouse and to determine whether some of these gene expression changes are causative or protective of RGC loss.

17724199
Effect of 15-keto latanoprost on intraocular pressure and aqueous humor dynamics in monkey eyes.
To compare the ocular hypotensive effects of 15-keto latanoprost (KL) with the commercial preparation of latanoprost (Xalatan; Pfizer, New York, NY) in monkey eyes with laser-induced unilateral glaucoma and to evaluate the effects of topical 0.005% KL on aqueous humor dynamics in normal monkey eyes. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was measured hourly for 6 hours beginning at 9:30 AM on day 1 (untreated baseline); day 2 (vehicle only); and treatment days 1, 3, and 5 (topical, 30 microL of study drug) in the glaucomatous eyes of four to eight monkeys with unilateral laser-induced glaucoma. KL concentrations of 0.0001%, 0.001%, and 0.01% and latanoprost at 0.005% were studied separately, with a minimum washout period of 2 weeks between studies. Tonographic outflow facility (C) and fluorophotometric aqueous humor flow rates (F) were measured in nine normal monkeys before and after a single topical dose of 0.005% KL in one eye, with a vehicle-only control in the fellow eye. When applied once daily to glaucomatous monkey eyes, all three concentrations of KL and a 0.005% concentration of latanoprost produced significant (P < 0.05) reductions in IOP, with the maximum reduction on treatment day 5, regardless of the drug or concentration studied. The maximum reduction (P < 0.001) from vehicle-only baseline IOP was (mean +/- SEM) 3.0 +/- 0.3 mm Hg (9%) for 0.0001% KL, 7.6 +/- 0.6 mm Hg (23%) for 0.001% KL, 6.3 +/- 0.4 mm Hg (18%) for 0.01% KL, and 6.6 +/- 0.6 mm Hg (20%) for 0.005% latanoprost. After application of a single dose of 0.005% KL in nine normal monkey eyes, neither C nor F was altered (P > 0.80) when compared with untreated baseline values or vehicle-treated control eyes. The reduction in IOP produced by 0.001% KL was equivalent to, and at some measured time points, greater than the effect produced by 0.005% latanoprost. The IOP reduction by KL in normal monkeys appeared to have no effect on aqueous humor production or tonographic outflow facility and may thus indicate a drug-induced increase in uveoscleral outflow.

