21396640
The detection of premalignant colon polyps during colonoscopy is stable throughout the workday.
BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that colonoscopic polyp detection decreases as the workday progresses. This may reflect time-dependent factors such as colonoscopist fatigue and decreased colon cleanliness, which can be addressed through adaptations in colonoscopy practice. OBJECTIVE: To test for time-of-day differences in adenomatous polyp (AP) and sessile serrated polyp (SSP) detection in a practice that uses split-dose bowel preparation and moderated daily colonoscopist procedure loads. DESIGN: Retrospective chart review. SETTING: Community-based, group gastroenterology practice. PATIENTS: This study involved 2439 patients undergoing surveillance or screening colonoscopy. INTERVENTION: Colonoscopy. MAIN OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: Detection rate of all premalignant polyps (PMPs), and of APs and SSPs, individually. RESULTS: A total of 1183 PMPs were identified in 1486 eligible patients (mean PMP/colonoscopy = 0.80; PMP detection rate = 47%). In univariate and multivariate analyses, PMP detection as well as detection of APs or SSPs individually did not vary significantly in relation to the hour of the day. In a binary comparison of morning (am) versus afternoon (pm) procedures, the total polyp detection rate was 67% and 66%, respectively. For PMPs, APs, SSPs, and hyperplastic polyps (HPs), the am and pm detection rates were 46% and 47%, 41% and 44%, 8% and 8%, and 27% and 24%, respectively. Bowel preparation quality was independent of time of day and was rated excellent or good in 86% to 87% of cases. LIMITATIONS: Retrospective, nonrandomized study. CONCLUSION: Stable PMP, AP, SSP, and HP detection rates throughout the workday occur under certain practice conditions, including the use of split-dose bowel preparation and/or moderated daily colonoscopist procedure loads.

20717045
Is gastroduodenal biopsy safe in patients receiving aspirin and clopidogrel?: a prospective, randomized study involving 630 biopsies.
To assess prospectively the bleeding risk attributable to gastroduodenal biopsy in subjects taking antiplatelet medications. No prospective data exist regarding the bleeding risk attributable to endoscopic biopsy in patients taking antiplatelet agents. A majority of Western endoscopists withdraw antiplatelet agents before upper endoscopy, despite expert guidelines to the contrary. We performed a prospective, single-blind, randomized study in healthy volunteers participating in a larger study regarding the effect of antiplatelet agents on gastroduodenal mucosal healing. Multiple gastroduodenal biopsies were performed during 2 esophagogastroduodenoscopy in subjects dosed with aspirin enteric-coated 81 mg once daily or clopidogrel 75 mg once daily. Data for endoscopic bleeding, clinical bleeding, blood vessel size, and depth of biopsy in histology specimens were collected. Four hundred and five antral biopsies and 225 duodenal biopsies were performed during 90 esophagogastroduodenoscopy in 45 subjects receiving aspirin or clopidogrel. Median maximum blood vessel diameter per biopsy was 31.9 ? (range: 9.2 to 133.8). About 50.8% of biopsy specimens breached the muscularis mucosa. In the clopidogrel group, no bleeding events were noted after 350 biopsies [upper confidence limit (UCL) for probability of bleeding=0.0085]. In the aspirin group, there were no clinical events (UCL=0.0106) and one minor endoscopic bleeding event (UCL=0.0169). Consistent with expert guidelines, the absolute risk attributable to gastroduodenal biopsy in adults taking antiplatelet agents seems to be low. Half of routine biopsies enter submucosa. The largest blood vessels avulsed during biopsy correspond to midsized and large arterioles and venules.

