21458888
Corticosteroids, but not NSAIDs, are associated with less Alzheimer neuropathology.
The objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that corticosteroid and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) medications are associated with less global and regional Alzheimer's disease (AD) neuropathology. This postmortem study was based on 694 brains of subjects from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine Brain Bank who did not have neuropathologies other than neuritic plaques (NPs), neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), or cerebrovascular disease. Densities of NPs and of NFTs were assessed in several neocortical regions and in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and amygdala. Counts of NPs in several neocortical regions were also assessed. For each neuropathology measure, analyses of covariance controlling for age at death and sex compared subjects who received only corticosteroids (n = 54) or those who received only NSAIDs (n = 56) to the same comparison group, subjects who received neither (n = 576). Subjects receiving corticosteroids had significantly lower ratings and counts of NPs for all neuropathological measures, and NFTs overall and in the cerebral cortex and amygdala. In contrast, no measures were significant for subjects who received NSAIDs. Use of corticosteroids was associated with approximately 50% fewer NPs and NFTs in most brain regions examined, compared with nonmedicated subjects. In contrast, use of NSAIDs was not substantially associated with the reductions in hallmark lesions of AD. Because corticosteroids have anti-inflammatory as well as a myriad of other neurobiological effects, more direct studies in model systems could reveal novel therapeutic targets and mechanisms for AD lesion reduction.

19129700
Serum lipids are related to Alzheimer's pathology in nursing home residents.
Studies of associations between serum lipids and Alzheimer's disease (AD) or other dementias in the elderly show conflicting results, perhaps due to misclassification of the various dementias. For 358 nursing home residents, serum lipids were studied at admission and diagnoses established at autopsy. We used defined neuropathological criteria to distinguish the presence of AD and to avoid errors of clinical dementia assessment. Residents with any AD pathology, as compared to those without AD pathology, had higher mean serum total cholesterol (TC; 200.4 vs. 185.9 mg/dl; p = 0.02) and higher mean low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL; 124.5 vs. 111.5 mg/dl; p = 0.03). Further, mean TC, LDL and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels all increased progressively with increasing pathological certainty of AD (p for trend = 0.001, 0.02 and 0.02). TC and LDL were significantly related to pathologically defined AD. If serum lipids have a role in the pathogenesis of AD, interventions may modify the course of disease.

21244352
Cholesterol and LDL Relate to Neuritic Plaques and to APOE4 Presence but Not to Neurofibrillary Tangles.
Elevated serum total cholesterol (TC) has been considered a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD), but conflicting results have confused understanding of the relationships of serum lipids to the presence of AD in the elderly. Methods: To clarify these issues, we evaluated correlations of admission TC, low-density (LDL) and high-density (HDL) cholesterol directly with the densities of Alzheimer hallmarks-neuritic plaques (NP) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT)--in nursing home residents (n=281). Results: Significant positive associations of TC and LDL with NP densities were found in both the neocortex (TC: r=0.151, p=0.013 and LDL: r=0.190, p=0.005) and the hippocampal/entorhinal (allocortical) region (TC: r=0.182, p=0.002 and LDL: r=0.203, p=0.003). Associations of HDL with NP were less strong but also significant. In contrast, after adjustment for confounders, no correlations of NFT with any lipid were significant.When subjects with any non-AD neuropathology (largely vascular) were excluded, the TC-plaque and LDL-plaque associations for the remaining "Pure AD" subgroup were consistently stronger than for the full sample. The TC- and LDL-plaque correlations were also stronger for the subgroup of 87 subjects with an APOE ?4 allele. Conclusions: The findings indicate that serum TC and LDL levels clearly relate to densities of NP, but not to densities of NFT. The stronger associations found in the subgroup that excluded all subjects with non-AD neuropathology suggest that cerebrovascular involvement does not explain these lipid-plaque relationships. Since the associations of TC/LDL with NP were particularly stronger in ?4 carriers, varying prevalence of this allele may explain some discrepancies among prior studies.

19228583
Less Alzheimer disease neuropathology in medicated hypertensive than nonhypertensive persons.
To test the hypothesis that use of antihypertensive medication is associated with lower Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology. This was a postmortem study of 291 brains limited to those with normal neuropathology or with uncomplicated AD neuropathology (i.e., without other dementia-associated neuropathology) in persons with or without hypertension (HTN) who were and were not treated with antihypertensive medications. Neuritic plaque (NP) and neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) densities, quantified in selected brain regions according to the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD) neuropathologic criteria, with additional cortical NP counts, yielded 24 neuropathologic regional measures or summaries. Medicated hypertension (HTN-med; n = 77), nonmedicated HTN (HTN-nomed; n = 42), and non-HTN (no-HTN; n = 172) groups were compared by analyses of variance. The HTN-med group had significantly less neuropathology than the no-HTN group. The no-HTN group averaged over 50% higher mean NP and NFT ratings, and double the mean NP count, of the HTN-med group. The HTN-nomed group had significantly more neuropathology than the HTN-med group, but not significantly less than the no-HTN group. There was substantially less Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology in the medicated hypertension group than the nonhypertensive group, which may reflect a salutary effect of antihypertensive medication against AD-associated neuropathology.

