19421968
Targeting the incretin system in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
The incretins have emerged as key targets in the modern treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Understanding the physiology of the incretins is essential to the physician's ability to appropriately use emerging pharmacotherapies that target this system. This review describes incretin physiology and discusses recent trials of drugs that modulate this system in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. A MEDLINE search using the terms "GLP-1" (ie, glucagon-like peptide 1), "incretins," "exenatide," and "DPP-IV inhibitors" (ie, dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitors) was performed, and pertinent articles from the past 10 years were reviewed. Articles describing incretin physiology and clinical trials with exenatide and dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitors were identified and discussed. As the articles show, new medications manipulating the incretin system are an important part of treating type 2 diabetes. The cost of these drugs and their potential side effects in comparison with existing agents must be considered when they are being selected as part of a treatment regimen. However, the evidence to date offers much promise and enthusiasm.

19364696
Excess thyroid hormone and carbohydrate metabolism.
To review the pertinent basic and clinical research describing the complex effects of excess thyroid hormone on carbohydrate metabolism. We performed a MEDLINE search of the English-language literature using a combination of words (ie, "thyrotoxicosis and diabetes," "diabetic ketoacidosis and thyroid storm," "carbohydrate metabolism and hyperthyroid," "glucose homeostasis and thyrotoxicosis") to identify key articles addressing various aspects of the thyroid's influence on carbohydrate metabolism. Thyroid hormone affects glucose homeostasis via its actions on a variety of organs including increased hepatic glucose output, increased futile cycling of glucose degradation products between the skeletal muscle and the liver, decreased glycogen stores in the liver and skeletal muscle, altered oxidative and non-oxidative glucose metabolism, decreased active insulin output from the pancreas, and increased renal insulin clearance. Thyroid hormone also affects adipokines and adipose tissue, further predisposing the patient to ketosis. Thyrotoxicosis can alter carbohydrate metabolism in a type 2 diabetic patient to such an extent that diabetic ketoacidosis develops if untreated. Based on the current understanding of this relationship, all diabetic patients should be screened for thyroid dysfunction because correcting hyperthyroidism can profoundly affect glucose homeostasis. Similarly, patients presenting in diabetic ketoacidosis should undergo a thyroid function assessment.

