20729750
?2-Adrenergic receptor signaling in the cardiac myocyte is modulated by interactions with CXCR4.
Chemokines are small secreted proteins with chemoattractant properties that play a key role in inflammation, metastasis, and embryonic development. We previously demonstrated a nonchemotactic role for one such chemokine pair, stromal cell-derived factor-1? and its G-protein coupled receptor, CXCR4. Stromal cell-derived factor-1/CXCR4 are expressed on cardiac myocytes and have direct consequences on cardiac myocyte physiology by inhibiting contractility in response to the nonselective ?-adrenergic receptor (?AR) agonist, isoproterenol. As a result of the importance of ?-adrenergic signaling in heart failure pathophysiology, we investigated the underlying mechanism involved in CXCR4 modulation of ?AR signaling. Our studies demonstrate activation of CXCR4 by stromal cell-derived factor-1 leads to a decrease in ?AR-induced PKA activity as assessed by cAMP accumulation and PKA-dependent phosphorylation of phospholamban, an inhibitor of SERCA2a. We determined CXCR4 regulation of ?AR downstream targets is ?2AR-dependent. We demonstrated a physical interaction between CXCR4 and ?2AR as determined by coimmunoprecipitation, confocal microscopy, and BRET techniques. The CXCR4-?2AR interaction leads to G-protein signal modulation and suggests the interaction is a novel mechanism for regulating cardiac myocyte contractility. Chemokines are physiologically and developmentally relevant to myocardial biology and represent a novel receptor class of cardiac modulators. The CXCR4-?2AR complex could represent a hitherto unknown target for therapeutic intervention.

20307322
Elevated osteoprotegerin is associated with abnormal ankle brachial indices in patients infected with HIV: a cross-sectional study.
Patients infected with HIV have an increased risk for accelerated atherosclerosis. Elevated levels of osteoprotegerin, an inflammatory cytokine receptor, have been associated with a high incidence of cardiovascular disease (including peripheral arterial disease, or PAD), acute coronary syndrome, and cardiovascular mortality. The objective of this study was to determine whether PAD is prevalent in an HIV-infected population, and to identify an association with HIV-specific and traditional cardiovascular risk factors, as well as levels of osteoprotegerin. One hundred and two patients infected with HIV were recruited in a cross-sectional study. To identify the prevalence of PAD, ankle-brachial indices (ABIs) were measured. Four standard ABI categories were utilized: < or = 0.90 (definite PAD); 0.91-0.99 (borderline); 1.00-1.30 (normal); and >1.30 (high). Medical history and laboratory measurements were obtained to determine possible risk factors associated with PAD in HIV-infected patients. The prevalence of PAD (ABI < or = 0.90) in a young HIV-infected population (mean age: 48 years) was 11%. Traditional cardiovascular risk factors, including advanced age and previous cardiovascular history, as well as elevated C-reactive protein levels, were associated with PAD. Compared with patients with normal ABIs, patients with high ABIs had significantly elevated levels of osteoprotegerin [1428.9 (713.1) pg/ml vs. 3088.6 (3565.9) pg/ml, respectively, p = 0.03]. There is a high prevalence of PAD in young HIV-infected patients. A number of traditional cardiovascular risk factors and increased osteoprotegerin concentrations are associated with abnormal ABIs. Thus, early screening and aggressive medical management for PAD may be warranted in HIV-infected patients.

20133817
Effects of CXCR4 gene transfer on cardiac function after ischemia-reperfusion injury.
Acute coronary occlusion is the leading cause of death in the Western world. There is an unmet need for the development of treatments to limit the extent of myocardial infarction (MI) during the acute phase of occlusion. Recently, investigators have focused on the use of a chemokine, CXCL12, the only identified ligand for CXCR4, as a new therapeutic modality to recruit stem cells to individuals suffering from MI. Here, we examined the effects of overexpression of CXCR4 by gene transfer on MI. Adenoviruses carrying the CXCR4 gene were injected into the rat heart one week before ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery followed by 24 hours reperfusion. Cardiac function was assessed by echocardiography couple with 2,3,5-Triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining to measure MI size. In comparison with control groups, rats receiving Ad-CXCR4 displayed an increase in infarct area (13.5% +/- 4.1%) and decreased fractional shortening (38% +/- 5%). Histological analysis revealed a significant increase in CXCL12 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha expression in ischemic area of CXCR4 overexpressed hearts. CXCR4 overexpression was associated with increased influx of inflammatory cells and enhanced cardiomyocyte apoptosis in the infarcted heart. These data suggest that in our model overexpressing CXCR4 appears to enhance ischemia/reperfusion injury possibly due to enhanced recruitment of inflammatory cells, increased tumor necrosis factor-alpha production, and activation of cell death/apoptotic pathways.

19434726
Hepatic stellate cells express functional CXCR4: role in stromal cell-derived factor-1alpha-mediated stellate cell activation.
Chemokine interactions with their receptors have been implicated in hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation. The hepatic expression of CXCR4 messenger RNA is increased in hepatitis C cirrhotic livers and plasma levels of its endogenous ligand, stromal cell-derived factor-1alpha (SDF-1alpha), correlate with increased fibrosis in these patients. The expression of CXCR4 by HSCs has not been reported. We therefore examined whether HSCs express CXCR4 in vivo and in vitro and explored whether SDF-1alpha/CXCR4 receptor engagement promotes HSC activation, fibrogenesis, and proliferation. The hepatic protein expression of both CXCR4 and SDF-1alpha is increased in hepatitis C cirrhotic livers and immunoflourescent and immunohistochemical staining confirms that HSCs express CXCR4 in vivo. Immortalized human stellate cells as well as primary human HSCs express CXCR4, and cell surface receptor expression increases with progressive culture-induced activation. Treatment of stellate cells with recombinant SDF-1alpha increases expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin and collagen I and stimulates a dose-dependent increase in HSC proliferation. Inhibitor studies suggest that SDF-1alpha/CXCR4-dependent extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and Akt phosphorylation mediate effects on collagen I expression and stellate cell proliferation. CONCLUSION: HSCs express CXCR4 receptor in vivo and in vitro. CXCR4 receptor activation by SDF-1alpha is profibrogenic through its effects on HSC activation, fibrogenesis, and proliferation. Extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathways mediate SDF-1alpha-induced effects on HSC expression of collagen I and proliferation. The availability of small molecule inhibitors of CXCR4 make this receptor an appealing target for antifibrotic approaches.

18458091
beta-Adrenergic receptor activation induces internalization of cardiac Cav1.2 channel complexes through a beta-Arrestin 1-mediated pathway.
Voltage-dependent calcium channels (VDCCs) play a pivotal role in normal excitation-contraction coupling in cardiac myocytes. These channels can be modulated through activation of beta-adrenergic receptors (beta-ARs), which leads to an increase in calcium current (I(Ca-L)) density through cardiac Ca(v)1 channels as a result of phosphorylation by cAMP-dependent protein kinase A. Changes in I(Ca-L) density and kinetics in heart failure often occur in the absence of changes in Ca(v)1 channel expression, arguing for the importance of post-translational modification of these channels in heart disease. The precise molecular mechanisms that govern the regulation of VDCCs and their cell surface localization remain unknown. Our data show that sustained beta-AR activation induces internalization of a cardiac macromolecular complex involving VDCC and beta-arrestin 1 (beta-Arr1) into clathrin-coated vesicles. Pretreatment of myocytes with pertussis toxin prevents the internalization of VDCCs, suggesting that G(i/o) mediates this response. A peptide that selectively disrupts the interaction between Ca(V)1.2 and beta-Arr1 and tyrosine kinase inhibitors readily prevent agonist-induced VDCC internalization. These observations suggest that VDCC trafficking is mediated by G protein switching to G(i) of the beta-AR, which plays a prominent role in various cardiac pathologies associated with a hyperadrenergic state, such as hypertrophy and heart failure.

17923693
Protein kinase A, Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase II, and calcineurin regulate the intracellular trafficking of myopodin between the Z-disc and the nucleus of cardiac myocytes.
Spatial and temporal resolution of intracellular signaling can be achieved by compartmentalizing transduction units. Myopodin is a dual-compartment, actin-bundling protein that shuttles between the nucleus and the Z-disc of myocytes in a differentiation- and stress-dependent fashion. Importin alpha binding and nuclear import of myopodin are regulated by serine/threonine phosphorylation-dependent binding of myopodin to 14-3-3. Here we show that in the heart myopodin forms a Z-disc signaling complex with alpha-actinin, calcineurin, Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII), muscle-specific A-kinase anchoring protein, and myomegalin. Phosphorylation of myopodin by protein kinase A (PKA) or CaMKII mediates 14-3-3 binding and nuclear import in myoblasts. Dephosphorylation of myopodin by calcineurin abrogates 14-3-3beta binding. Activation of PKA or inhibition of calcineurin in adult cardiac myocytes releases myopodin from the Z-disc and induces its nuclear import. The identification of myopodin as a direct target of PKA, CaMKII, and calcineurin defines a novel intracellular signaling pathway whereby changes in Z-disc dynamics may translate into compartmentalized signal transduction in the heart.

