21511672
Inflammation, neovascularization and intra-plaque hemorrhage are associated with increased reparative collagen content: Implication for plaque progression in diabetic atherosclerosis.
Sustained inflammation may stimulate a reparative process increasing early reparative type III collagen synthesis, promoting atherosclerotic plaque progression. We evaluated inflammation, neovascularization, intra-plaque hemorrhage (IPH), and collagen deposition in human aortic atherosclerotic plaques from patients with and without diabetes mellitus (DM). Plaques were procured at autopsy from lower thoracic and abdominal aorta from DM (n = 20) and non-DM (n = 22) patients. Inflammation and neovascularization were quantified by double-label immunochemistry and the IPH grade was scored using H&E-stained sections. Type I and type III collagens were quantified using Picro-Sirius red stain with polarization microscopy and computerized planimetry. In non-DM plaques, 27%, 40%, and 33% had mild, moderate and severe inflammation in the fibrous cap and shoulder compared with 2%, 30% and 68% in DM plaques (p < 0.001). The geometric mean neovessel count was increased in DM versus non-DM plaques (140 [95% CI: 119-165] versus 59 [95% CI: 51-70]; p < 0.001). The IPH grade was increased in DM verses non-DM plaques (0.82 ± 0.11 versus 0.29 ± 0.11; p < 0.001) (percentage grade). The density of type III was increased in DM plaques (0.16 ± 0.01 versus 0.06 ± 0.01; p < 0.001) with a non-significant reduction in type I density in DM when compared with non-DM (0.28 ± 0.03 versus 0.33 ± 0.03; p = 0.303) (content per mm(2)). The increase in type III collagen content correlated with total neovessel content (r = 0.58; p < 0.001) in DM plaques. In conclusion, our study suggests that enhanced type III collagen deposition was associated with inflammation, neovascularization and IPH, and may be a contributing factor in DM plaque progression.

21481422
Increased macrophage infiltration and neovascularization in congenital bicuspid aortic valve stenosis.
OBJECTIVES: Patients with congenital bicuspid aortic valves have aortic valve stenosis at a relatively young age compared with patients with tricuspid aortic valves. We hypothesize that aortic valve stenosis evolves from a more aggressive inflammatory process, with increased macrophage/T-cell and neovessel content in congenital bicuspid aortic valveswhen compared with that seen in tricuspid valves. METHODS: Fifty-one severely stenotic aortic valves were obtained at the time of aortic valve replacement. A total of 17 bicuspid and 34 tricuspid aortic valves were evaluated. Macrophage/T-cell infiltration (CD68 plus CD3) and neovessel density (CD34) were evaluated with immunohistochemical staining. Leaflet calcification and ossification were also quantified. Real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to assess expression of chondromodulin 1 and vascular endothelial growth factor. RESULTS: The density of macrophages/T cells was greater in congenital bicuspid aortic valves than in tricuspid valves (51 ± 31 vs 23 ± 13 cells/mm(2), P = .002). Neovascularization was more frequently noted in congenital bicuspid aortic valves when compared with tricuspid valves (31 ± 10 vs 21 ± 9 vessels/mm(2), P = .0005), and calcification was more severe (P = .03). Expression of chondromodulin 1 demonstrated a 6-fold downregulation (P = .0003) and expression of vascular endothelial growth factor demonstrated a 2-fold increase (P = .02) in congenital bicuspid aortic valves compared with that seen in tricuspid valves. Multivariable analyses demonstrated significant associations between bicuspid aortic valve anatomy and increased inflammatory cell infiltration (? = 25.8, P = .0007) and neovascularization (? = 9.4, P = .001), despite adjusting for measured covariates. CONCLUSIONS: The pathogenesis of aortic valve stenosis in bicuspid aortic valves is associated with a more aggressive inflammatory process with increased macrophage infiltration and neovascularization when compared with that seen in tricuspid valves.

21416131
Ischemic bowel due to embolization from an isolated mobile thrombus of the ascending aorta: a case report and review of the literature.
Aortic thrombi are commonly present in atherosclerotic and aneurysmatic aortas. Thrombus formation in an aorta with or focal atherosclerosis in a patient without risk factors is rare. A 63-year-old woman with dementia and hypothyroidism presented with hypotension and respiratory distress. Work-up revealed leukocytosis, sinus tachycardia, and proximal small bowel obstruction. At emergent laparotomy, a superior mesenteric artery thomboembolus was identified with necrosis of surrounding bowel. The patient expired on hospital day five. Autopsy revealed a 1.4 cm thrombus overlying an isolated atherosclerotic plaque in the ascending aorta and infarctions of the spleen, liver, and right kidney as well as occlusive thromboembolism of the superior mesenteric artery. This case report illustrates lethal complications from an unsuspected aortic thrombus. Work-up for patients presenting with signs of peripheral embolization, or in this case, necrotic bowel, should include the aorta as a source of embolic thrombi.

20526285
Clinical setting and extent of premortem evaluation do not predict autopsy discrepancy rates.
Autopsy rates have been affected by a number of factors, including technological advances and clinician beliefs of the diminished value of the autopsy. Such factors have resulted in a cultural shift in medicine away from the autopsy. Despite this shift, a number of studies have shown significant differences between antemortem clinical diagnoses and postmortem findings. Surveys of clinician beliefs about the autopsy have pointed toward antemortem diagnostic advancements as an important factor in declining rates. No study to date has addressed the hypothesis that such perceptions in diagnostic certainty have been matched by an actual decay in the yield of valuable or new information obtained by the autopsy. To address this hypothesis, we retrospectively compared the class I and class II discrepancies identified in 284 patients who died in three clinical settings with differing intensities of antemortem diagnostic workup. Despite a significantly different intensity of antemortem workup for patients in each clinical setting, including patients on a medical intensive care unit, patients on a surgical service and patients in an affiliated nursing home, discrepancy rates were found to be similar. Overall discrepancy rates for the medical intensive care unit, surgery service and nursing home patients were 27.8, 32.7 and 31.3%, respectively (P=0.84). In addition, we found no statistical difference in the complexity of workup in discrepant and nondiscrepant cases in each clinical setting. Our study data refute the hypothesis that the intensity of antemortem diagnostic evaluation correlates with an actual decrease in the rate of major diagnostic discrepancies identified at autopsy.

18848136
Haptoglobin genotype is a major determinant of the amount of iron in the human atherosclerotic plaque.
We sought to test the hypothesis that haptoglobin (Hp) genotype is a determinant of the amount of iron in the atherosclerotic plaque. In atherosclerotic lesions, intraplaque hemorrhage releases free hemoglobin (Hb), whose incorporated iron can act as an oxidant and inflammatory stimulus. These effects are antagonized by Hp, which binds free Hb and facilitates its clearance from the plaque. The Hp gene has 2 alleles (1 and 2), giving rise to 3 genotypes: Hp 1-1, Hp 2-1, and Hp 2-2. We previously hypothesized that Hp 2-2 individuals with diabetes mellitus (DM) have impaired clearance of Hb and its iron cargo from the plaque. We identified the presence or absence of Perl's iron stain in 189 plaques obtained from 37 decedents at autopsy. Among DM, the prevalence of Perl's iron stain was increased in Hp 2-2 compared with that seen in Hp 1-1 or 2-1 (46.2% vs. 11.8%). After accounting for the within-decedent correlation of plaques, the prevalence ratio of Perl's iron stain associated with Hp 2-2 was 3.97 (95% confidence interval: 1.38 to 11.5; p = 0.025). In non-DM plaques, there was a nonsignificant trend towards a higher prevalence of iron staining in Hp 2-2 compared with that in Hp 1-1 or 2-1 (26.8% vs. 11.1%; prevalence ratio =2.40 [95% confidence interval: 0.81 to 7.09]; p = 0.114). These data support an impaired clearance of Hb from plaques in Hp 2-2 individuals, particularly in DM. The higher prevalence of plaque iron in Hp 2-2 DM individuals may contribute to the increased incidence of atherothrombotic events in these patients.

