19719476
Endocytosis and intracellular trafficking of human natural killer cell receptors.
Natural killer (NK) cells play a vital role in the defense against viral infections and tumor development. NK cell function is primarily regulated by the sum of signals from a broad array of activation and inhibitory receptors. Key to generating the input level of either activating or inhibitory signals is the maintenance of receptor expression levels on the cell surface. Although the mechanisms of endocytosis and trafficking for some cell surface receptors, such as transferrin receptor and certain immune receptors, are very well known, that is not the situation for receptors expressed by NK cells. Recent studies have uncovered that endocytosis and trafficking routes characteristic for specific activation and inhibitory receptors can regulate the functional responses of NK cells. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge of receptor endocytosis and trafficking, and integrate this with our current understanding of NK cell receptor trafficking.

18500464
Systemic reduction of soluble complement receptor II/CD21 during pregnancy to levels reminiscent of autoimmune disease.
Complement receptor type II/CD21 is the functional receptor for complement fragments such as C3d, iC3b and the Epstein Barr Virus. A soluble form of CD21 (sCD21) is shed from lymphocytes surface and is able to bind to its ligands found in the plasma. The amount of sCD21 in serum may modulate immunity as the plasma levels are correlated with autoimmune conditions, such as Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, Rheumatoid Arthritis and Sjoegren's Syndrome. Because of the fact that pregnancy may lead to remission of autoimmune diseases we determined the serum levels of sCD21 during pregnancy and postpartum. The serum sCD21 levels during pregnancy are significantly lower as compared to that of the healthy controls. There were no significant differences in sCD21 levels between the mother and the cord blood also immediately after parturition. Restoration of sCD21 levels to normal values takes between 6 weeks and 1 year after childbirth. Our study indicates that CD21-shedding is affected during pregnancy comparable to that of autoimmunity.

