20494193
Staged repair significantly reduces paraplegia rate after extensive thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair.
Paraplegia remains a devastating, and still too frequent, complication after repair of extensive thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. Strategies to prevent ischemic spinal cord damage after extensive segmental artery sacrifice-or occlusion, essential for endovascular repair-are still evolving. Ninety patients who underwent extensive segmental artery sacrifice (median, 13; range, 9-15) during open surgical repair from June 1994 to December 2007 were reviewed retrospectively. Fifty-five patients (mean age, 65 +/- 12 years; 49% were male), most with extensive Crawford type II thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms, had a single procedure (single-stage group). Thirty-five patients (mean age, 62 +/- 14 years; 57% were male) had 2 procedures (2-stage group), usually Crawford type III or IV repair after operation for Crawford type I descending thoracic aneurysm. The median interval between the 2-stage procedures was 5 years (3 months to 17 years). There were no significant differences between the groups with regard to age, gender, cause of the aneurysm, hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, urgency, previous cerebrovascular accidents, year of procedure, or cerebrospinal fluid drainage. In single-stage procedures, hypothermic circulatory arrest was used in 29% of patients, left-sided heart bypass was used in 40% of patients, and partial cardiopulmonary bypass was used in 27% of patients. Somatosensory-evoked potentials were monitored in all patients, and motor-evoked potentials were monitored in 39% of patients. Cerebrospinal fluid was drained in 84% of patients. Overall hospital mortality was 11.1%. There were no significant differences in mortality, stroke, postoperative bleeding, infection, renal failure, or pulmonary insufficiency between the groups. However, 15% of patients in the single-stage group had permanent spinal cord injury versus none in the 2-stage group (P = .02). The significantly lower rate of paraplegia and paraparesis in the 2-stage group occurred despite a significantly higher number of segmental arteries sacrificed in this group: a median of 14 (11-15) versus 12 (9-15) (P < .0001). A staged approach to extensive thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair may reduce the incidence of spinal cord injury. This is of particular importance in designing strategies involving hybrid or entirely endovascular procedures.

19463592
Direct spinal cord perfusion pressure monitoring in extensive distal aortic aneurysm repair.
Although maintenance of adequate spinal cord perfusion pressure (SCPP) by the paraspinal collateral network is critical to the success of surgical and endovascular repair of descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms, direct monitoring of SCPP has not previously been described. A catheter was inserted into the distal end of a ligated thoracic segmental artery (SA) (T6 to L1) in 13 patients, 7 of whom underwent descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair using deep hypothermic circulatory arrest. Spinal cord perfusion pressure was recorded from this catheter before, during, and after serial SA sacrifice, in pairs, from T3 through L4, at 32 degrees C. Somatosensory and motor evoked potentials were also monitored during SA sacrifice and until 1 hour after cardiopulmonary bypass. Target mean arterial pressure was 90 mm Hg during SA sacrifice and after nonpulsatile cardiopulmonary bypass, and 60 mm Hg during cardiopulmonary bypass. A mean of 9.8 +/- 2.6 SAs were sacrificed without somatosensory and motor evoked potential loss. Spinal cord perfusion pressure fell from 62 +/- 12 mm Hg (76% +/- 11% of mean arterial pressure) before SA sacrifice to 53 +/- 13 mm Hg (58% +/- 15% of mean arterial pressure) after SA clamping. The most significant drop occurred with initiation of nonpulsatile cardiopulmonary bypass, reaching 29 +/- 11 mm Hg (46% +/- 18% of mean arterial pressure) before deep hypothermic circulatory arrest. Spinal cord perfusion pressure recovered during rewarming to 40 +/- 14 mm Hg (51% +/- 20% of mean arterial pressure), and further within the first hour of reestablished pulsatile flow. Somatosensory and motor evoked potentials returned in all patients intraoperatively. Recovery of SCPP began intraoperatively, and in 5 patients with prolonged monitoring, continued during the first 24 hours postoperatively. All but 1 patient, who had remarkably low postoperative SCPPs and experienced paraparesis, regained normal spinal cord function. This study supports experimental data showing that SCPP drops markedly but then recovers gradually during the first several hours after extensive SA sacrifice. Direct monitoring may help prevent a fall of SCPP below levels critical for spinal cord recovery after surgery and endovascular repair of descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms.

