21298693
"Sarcoid like" granulomatous pulmonary disease in World Trade Center disaster responders.
More than 20,000 responders have been examined through the World Trade Center (WTC) Medical Monitoring and Treatment Program since September 11, 2001. Studies on WTC firefighters have shown elevated rates of sarcoidosis. The main objective of this study was to report the incidence of "sarcoid like" granulomatous pulmonary disease in other WTC responders. Cases of sarcoid like granulomatous pulmonary disease were identified by: patient self-report, physician report and ICD-9 codes. Each case was evaluated by three pulmonologists using the ACCESS criteria and only "definite" cases are reported. Thirty-eight patients were classified as "definite" cases. Six-year incidence was 192/100,000. The peak annual incidence of 54 per 100,000 person-years occurred between 9/11/2003 and 9/11/2004. Incidence in black responders was nearly double that of white responders. Low FVC was the most common spirometric abnormality. Sarcoid like granulomatous pulmonary disease is present among the WTC responders. While the incidence is lower than that reported among firefighters, it is higher than expected.

21181996
"Sarcoid like" granulomatous pulmonary disease in World Trade Center disaster responders.
BACKGROUND: More than 20,000 responders have been examined through the World Trade Center (WTC) Medical Monitoring and Treatment Program since September 11, 2001. Studies on WTC firefighters have shown elevated rates of sarcoidosis. The main objective of this study was to report the incidence of "sarcoid like" granulomatous pulmonary disease in other WTC responders. METHODS: Cases of sarcoid like granulomatous pulmonary disease were identified by: patient self-report, physician report and ICD-9 codes. Each case was evaluated by three pulmonologists using the ACCESS criteria and only "definite" cases are reported. RESULTS: Thirty-eight patients were classified as "definite" cases. Six-year incidence was 192/100,000. The peak annual incidence of 54 per 100,000 person-years occurred between 9/11/2003 and 9/11/2004. Incidence in black responders was nearly double that of white responders. Low FVC was the most common spirometric abnormality. CONCLUSIONS: Sarcoid like granulomatous pulmonary disease is present among the WTC responders. While the incidence is lower than that reported among firefighters, it is higher than expected. Am. J. Ind. Med. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

20587099
Four-year calibration stability of the EasyOne portable spirometer.
Clinical practice guidelines recommend daily spirometer calibration checks and weekly linearity checks. The long-term stability of the volume and flow accuracy of a specific model of spirometer should be carefully characterized before modification of the frequency of calibration checks is considered for that model of spirometer. The EasyOne ultrasonic flow-sensing spirometer was chosen for use by the clinical centers at the 2002 inception of the World Trade Center Worker and Volunteer Medical Screening Program. The screening program quality-control procedure required that the expiratory and inspiratory volume accuracy of each spirometer be checked every day of testing, and the flow accuracy (linearity) checked every week. The calibration check results were transferred to a central database for summary. Over 5,000 calibration-check results (4,109 single-speed and 1,189 three-speed) were accumulated from a total of 34 spirometers during the period February 2003 through March 2007. The mean single-speed calibration errors (and 5th-95th percentiles) were -2 mL (-80 to 70 mL) for exhalation and -10 mL (-80 to 60 mL) for inhalation. 98% of the exhalation and 97% of the inhalation calibration checks were accurate within 3.0%. There was no evidence of significant non-linearity according to the results of the 3-speed calibration checks (mean errors of -3, -5, and -6 mL at each speed). The EasyOne retained inhalation and exhalation volume accuracy of better than 3% for at least 4 years. Routine multiple-speed volume calibration checks may not be necessary with the EasyOne. The acceptability and repeatability of patient efforts should be the primary focus of quality-assurance programs with spirometers that have been demonstrated to remain accurate for long periods.

19141527
Longitudinal assessment of spirometry in the World Trade Center medical monitoring program.
Multiple studies have demonstrated an initial high prevalence of spirometric abnormalities following World Trade Center (WTC) disaster exposure. We assessed prevalence of spirometric abnormalities and changes in spirometry between baseline and first follow-up evaluation in participants in the WTC Worker and Volunteer Medical Monitoring Program. We also determined the predictors of spirometric change between the two examinations. Prebronchodilator and postbronchodilator spirometry, demographics, occupational history, smoking status, and respiratory symptoms and exposure onset were obtained at both examinations (about 3 years apart). At the second examination, 24.1% of individuals had abnormal spirometry findings. The predominant defect was a low FVC without obstruction (16.1%). Between examinations, the majority of individuals did not have a greater-than-expected decline in lung function. The mean declines in prebronchodilator FEV(1) and FVC were 13 mL/yr and 2 mL/yr, respectively (postbronchodilator results were similar and not reported). Significant predictors of greater average decline between examinations were lack of bronchodilator responsiveness at examination 1 and weight gain [corrected]. Elevated rates of spirometric abnormalities were present at both examinations, with reduced FVC most common. Although the majority had a normal decline in lung function, lack of bronchodilator response at examination 1 and weight gain were significantly associated with greater-than-normal lung function declines [corrected]. Due to the presence of spirometric abnormalities > 5 years after the disaster in many exposed individuals, longer-term monitoring of WTC responders is essential.

17379494
The bronchoprotective effect of deep inspiration is flow rate dependent.
Deep inspiration (DI) protects against methacholine-induced bronchoconstriction in healthy subjects. We hypothesized that this bronchoprotective effect of DI depends upon the inspiratory flow rate. Prospective, controlled study. Pulmonary function laboratory within a large tertiary medical center. Ten healthy nonsmokers without asthma or rhinitis. First, we performed a methacholine challenge in the absence of DI to determine the concentration sufficient to reduce FEV(1) by 20%. On two subsequent days, the challenge was repeated with the addition of either a fast or slow DI immediately before the threshold concentration of methacholine. We calculated the % reduction in FEV(1) and FVC from baseline. Mean % reduction in FEV(1) and FVC was significantly less with a fast DI than with no DI (20+/-3% vs. 34+/-4% for FEV(1), p=0.02; 12+/-3% vs. 23+/-3% for FVC, p=0.03); slow DIs did not significantly affect the methacholine-induced reduction in lung function. A fast DI is bronchoprotective while a slow DI is not. Elucidating the conditions that maximize or alternatively, eliminate bronchoprotection in healthy subjects may ultimately provide insight into the pathophysiology of asthma.

