21436031
Broad-spectrum antiviral that interferes with de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis.
Compound A3 was identified in a high-throughput screen for inhibitors of influenza virus replication. It displays broad-spectrum antiviral activity, and at noncytotoxic concentrations it is shown to inhibit the replication of negative-sense RNA viruses (influenza viruses A and B, Newcastle disease virus, and vesicular stomatitis virus), positive-sense RNA viruses (Sindbis virus, hepatitis C virus, West Nile virus, and dengue virus), DNA viruses (vaccinia virus and human adenovirus), and retroviruses (HIV). In contrast to mammalian cells, inhibition of viral replication by A3 is absent in chicken cells, which suggests species-specific activity of A3. Correspondingly, the antiviral activity of A3 can be linked to a cellular protein, dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH), which is an enzyme in the de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway. Viral replication of both RNA and DNA viruses can be restored in the presence of excess uracil, which promotes pyrimidine salvage, or excess orotic acid, which is the product of DHODH in the de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway. Based on these findings, it is proposed that A3 acts by depleting pyrimidine pools, which are crucial for efficient virus replication.

21209114
Budding capability of the influenza virus neuraminidase can be modulated by tetherin.
We have determined that, in addition to its receptor-destroying activity, the influenza virus neuraminidase is capable of efficiently forming virus-like particles (VLPs) when expressed individually from plasmid DNA. This observation applies to both human subtypes of neuraminidase, N1 and N2. However, it is not found with every strain of influenza virus. Through gain-of-function and loss-of-function analyses, a critical determinant within the neuraminidase ectodomain was identified that contributes to VLP formation but is not sufficient to accomplish release of plasmid-derived VLPs. This sequence lies on the plasma membrane-proximal side of the neuraminidase globular head. Most importantly, we demonstrate that the antiviral restriction factor tetherin plays a role in determining the strain-specific limitations of release competency. If tetherin is counteracted by small interfering RNA knockdown or expression of the HIV anti-tetherin factor vpu, budding and release capability is bestowed upon an otherwise budding-deficient neuraminidase. These data suggest that budding-competent neuraminidase proteins possess an as-yet-unidentified means of counteracting the antiviral restriction factor tetherin and identify a novel way in which the influenza virus neuraminidase can contribute to virus release.

21159873
Newcastle disease virus expressing a dendritic cell-targeted HIV gag protein induces a potent gag-specific immune response in mice.
Viral vaccine vectors have emerged as an attractive strategy for the development of a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) vaccine. Recombinant Newcastle disease virus (rNDV) stands out as a vaccine vector since it has a proven safety profile in humans, it is a potent inducer of both alpha interferon (IFN-?) and IFN-?) production, and it is a potent inducer of dendritic cell (DC) maturation. Our group has previously generated an rNDV vector expressing a codon-optimized HIV Gag protein and demonstrated its ability to induce a Gag-specific CD8(+) T cell response in mice. In this report we demonstrate that the Gag-specific immune response can be further enhanced by the targeting of the rNDV-encoded HIV Gag antigen to DCs. Targeting of the HIV Gag antigen was achieved by the addition of a single-chain Fv (scFv) antibody specific for the DC-restricted antigen uptake receptor DEC205 such that the DEC205 scFv-Gag molecule was encoded for expression as a fusion protein. The vaccination of mice with rNDV coding for the DC-targeted Gag antigen induced an enhanced Gag-specific CD8(+) T cell response and enhanced numbers of CD4(+) T cells and CD8(+) T cells in the spleen relative to vaccination with rNDV coding for a nontargeted Gag antigen. Importantly, mice vaccinated with the DEC205-targeted vaccine were better protected from challenge with a recombinant vaccinia virus expressing the HIV Gag protein. Here we demonstrate that the targeting of the HIV Gag antigen to DCs via the DEC205 receptor enhances the ability of an rNDV vector to induce a potent antigen-specific immune response.

21084485
Transmission of a 2009 pandemic influenza virus shows a sensitivity to temperature and humidity similar to that of an H3N2 seasonal strain.
In temperate regions of the world, influenza epidemics follow a highly regular seasonal pattern, in which activity peaks in midwinter. Consistently with this epidemiology, we have shown previously that the aerosol transmission of a seasonal H3N2 influenza virus is most efficient under cold, dry conditions. With the 2009 H1N1 pandemic, an exception to the standard seasonality of influenza developed: during 2009 in the Northern Hemisphere, an unusually high level of influenza virus activity over the spring and summer months was followed by a widespread epidemic which peaked in late October, approximately 2.5 months earlier than usual. Herein we show that aerosol transmission of a 2009 pandemic strain shows a dependence on relative humidity and temperature very similar to that of a seasonal H3N2 influenza virus. Our data indicate that the observed differences in the timings of outbreaks with regard to the seasons are most likely not due to intrinsic differences in transmission between the pandemic H1N1 and seasonal H3N2 influenza viruses.

21084483
A single N66S mutation in the PB1-F2 protein of influenza A virus increases virulence by inhibiting the early interferon response in vivo.
The PB1-F2 protein of influenza A virus can contribute to viral pathogenesis of influenza virus strains. Of note, an N66S amino acid mutation in PB1-F2 has been shown to increase the pathogenesis associated with H5N1 Hong Kong/1997 and H1N1 Brevig Mission/1918 influenza viruses. To identify the mechanism of enhanced immunopathology, we evaluated the host response to two isogenic viruses that differ by a single amino acid at position 66 of the PB1-F2 protein. Various components of the adaptive immune response were ruled out as factors contributing to pathogenesis through knockout mouse studies. Transcriptional profiling of lungs from PB1-F2 66S-infected mice revealed an early delay in innate immune responses. In particular, enhanced activation of type I interferon (IFN) pathway genes, including IFN-?, RIG-I, and numerous interferon-inducible genes, was not observed until day 3 postinfection. The N66S mutant virus caused increased cellularity in the lungs, as a result of monocyte and neutrophil infiltration. Furthermore, numerous cytokines and chemokines related to monocyte and neutrophil migration and maturation were upregulated. The cellular infiltration and increased cytokine expression corresponded to increased PB1-F2 66S titer. These data suggest that PB1-F2 N66S may contribute to the delay of innate immune responses, allowing for unchecked viral growth and ultimately severe immunopathology observed in the lungs.

20975689
Pandemic 2009 H1N1 vaccine protects against 1918 Spanish influenza virus.
The 1918 influenza A virus caused the most devastating pandemic, killing approximately 50 million people worldwide. Immunization with 1918-like and classical swine H1N1 virus vaccines results in cross-protective antibodies against the 2009 H1N1 pandemic influenza, indicating antigenic similarities among these viruses. In this study, we demonstrate that vaccination with the 2009 pandemic H1N1 vaccine elicits 1918 virus cross-protective antibodies in mice and humans, and that vaccination or passive transfer of human-positive sera reduced morbidity and conferred full protection from lethal challenge with the 1918 virus in mice. The spread of the 2009 H1N1 influenza virus in the population worldwide, in addition to the large number of individuals already vaccinated, suggests that a large proportion of the population now have cross-protective antibodies against the 1918 virus, greatly alleviating concerns and fears regarding the accidental exposure/release of the 1918 virus from the laboratory and the use of the virus as a bioterrorist agent.

20956293
Vaccination with a synthetic peptide from the influenza virus hemagglutinin provides protection against distinct viral subtypes.
Current influenza virus vaccines protect mostly against homologous virus strains; thus, regular immunization with updated vaccine formulations is necessary to guard against the virus' hallmark remodeling of regions that mediate neutralization. Development of a broadly protective influenza vaccine would mark a significant advance in human infectious diseases research. Antibodies with broad neutralizing activity (nAbs) against multiple influenza virus strains or subtypes have been reported to bind the stalk of the viral hemagglutinin, suggesting that a vaccine based on this region could elicit a broadly protective immune response. Here we describe a hemagglutinin subunit 2 protein (HA2)-based synthetic peptide vaccine that provides protection in mice against influenza viruses of the structurally divergent subtypes H3N2, H1N1, and H5N1. The immunogen is based on the binding site of the recently described nAb 12D1, which neutralizes H3 subtype viruses, demonstrates protective activity in vivo, and, in contrast to a majority of described nAbs, appears to bind to residues within a single ?-helical portion of the HA2 protein. Our data further demonstrate that the specific design of our immunogen is integral in the induction of broadly active anti-hemagglutinin antibodies. These results provide proof of concept for an HA2-based influenza vaccine that could diminish the threat of pandemic influenza disease and generally reduce the significance of influenza viruses as human pathogens.

20739532
Oseltamivir-resistant variants of the 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza A virus are not attenuated in the guinea pig and ferret transmission models.
Oseltamivir is routinely used worldwide for the treatment of severe influenza A virus infection, and should drug-resistant pandemic 2009 H1N1 viruses become widespread, this potent defense strategy might fail. Oseltamivir-resistant variants of the pandemic 2009 H1N1 influenza A virus have been detected in a substantial number of patients, but to date, the mutant viruses have not moved into circulation in the general population. It is not known whether the resistance mutations in viral neuraminidase (NA) reduce viral fitness. We addressed this question by studying transmission of oseltamivir-resistant mutants derived from two different isolates of the pandemic H1N1 virus in both the guinea pig and ferret transmission models. In vitro, the virus readily acquired a single histidine-to-tyrosine mutation at position 275 (H275Y) in viral neuraminidase when serially passaged in cell culture with increasing concentrations of oseltamivir. This mutation conferred a high degree of resistance to oseltamivir but not zanamivir. Unexpectedly, in guinea pigs and ferrets, the fitness of viruses with the H275Y point mutation was not detectably impaired, and both wild-type and mutant viruses were transmitted equally well from animals that were initially inoculated with 1:1 virus mixtures to naïve contacts. In contrast, a reassortant virus containing an oseltamivir-resistant seasonal NA in the pandemic H1N1 background showed decreased transmission efficiency and fitness in the guinea pig model. Our data suggest that the currently circulating pandemic 2009 H1N1 virus has a high potential to acquire drug resistance without losing fitness.

20689752
Influenza virus vaccine based on the conserved hemagglutinin stalk domain.
Although highly effective in the general population when well matched to circulating influenza virus strains, current influenza vaccines are limited in their utility due to the narrow breadth of protection they provide. The strain specificity of vaccines presently in use mirrors the exquisite specificity of the neutralizing antibodies that they induce, that is, antibodies which bind to the highly variable globular head domain of hemagglutinin (HA). Herein, we describe the construction of a novel immunogen comprising the conserved influenza HA stalk domain and lacking the globular head. Vaccination of mice with this headless HA construct elicited immune sera with broader reactivity than those obtained from mice immunized with a full-length HA. Furthermore, the headless HA vaccine provided full protection against death and partial protection against disease following lethal viral challenge. Our results suggest that the response induced by headless HA vaccines is sufficiently potent to warrant their further development toward a universal influenza virus vaccine.

20519387
A nine-segment influenza a virus carrying subtype H1 and H3 hemagglutinins.
Influenza virus genomic RNAs possess segment-specific packaging signals that include both noncoding regions (NCRs) and adjacent terminal coding region sequences. Using reverse genetics, an A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (A/PR/8/34) virus was rescued that contained a modified PB1 gene such that the PB1 packaging sequences were exchanged for those of the neuraminidase (NA) gene segment. To accomplish this, the PB1 open reading frame, in which the terminal packaging signals were inactivated by serial synonymous mutations, was flanked by the NA segment-specific packaging sequences including the NCRs and the coding region packaging signals. Next, the ATGs located on the 3' end of the NA packaging sequences of the resulting PB1 chimeric segment were mutated to allow for correct translation of the full-length PB1 protein. The virus containing this chimeric PB1 segment was viable and able to stably carry a ninth, green fluorescent protein (GFP), segment flanked by PB1 packaging signals. Utilizing this method, we successfully generated an influenza virus that contained the genes coding for both the H1 hemagglutinin (HA) from A/PR/8/34 and the H3 HA from A/Hong Kong/1/68 (A/HK/1/68); both subtypes of HA protein were also incorporated into the viral envelope. Immunization of mice with this recombinant virus conferred complete protection from lethal challenge with recombinant A/PR/8/34 virus and with X31 virus that expresses the A/HK/1/68 HA and NA. Using the described methodology, we show that a ninth segment can also be incorporated by manipulation of the PB2 or PA segment-specific packaging signals. This approach offers a means of generating a bivalent influenza virus vaccine.

20181699
PB1-F2 expression by the 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza virus has minimal impact on virulence in animal models.
Unlike previous pandemic viruses, the 2009 H1N1 pandemic influenza virus does not code for the virulence factor PB1-F2. The genome of the 2009 H1N1 virus contains three stop codons preventing PB1-F2 expression; however, PB1-F2 production could occur following genetic mutation or reassortment. Thus, it is of great interest to understand the impact that expression of the PB1-F2 protein might have in the context of the 2009 pandemic influenza virus, A/California/04/2009 (Cal/09). We have addressed this question by generating two Cal/09 viruses with productive PB1-F2 open reading frames containing either an asparagine at position 66 of PB1-F2 (66N) or a serine at position 66 (66S): this N66S change has previously been shown to be associated with increased virulence in mice. We used these viruses to investigate the effect on virulence conferred by expression of the 66N or the 66S PB1-F2 protein in both in vitro and in vivo systems. Our results show enhanced replication of the 66S virus in A549 cells, while studies of BALB/c and DBA/2 mice and ferrets revealed no significant differences in symptoms of infection with wild-type Cal/09 versus the 66N or 66S virus variant. Also, coinfection of mice with Streptococcus pneumoniae and the different viruses (recombinant wild-type [rWT] Cal/09 and the 66N and 66S viruses) did not result in significant differences in mortality. Mice infected with either PB1-F2-expressing virus did demonstrate altered protein levels of proinflammatory cytokines; differences were observed to be greater in infection caused by the 66S virus. In summary, our study demonstrates that PB1-F2 expression by the Cal/09 virus modulates the immune response to infection while having a minimal effect on virus virulence in two mammalian models.

20126449
Protection of mice against lethal challenge with 2009 H1N1 influenza A virus by 1918-like and classical swine H1N1 based vaccines.
The recent 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus infection in humans has resulted in nearly 5,000 deaths worldwide. Early epidemiological findings indicated a low level of infection in the older population (>65 years) with the pandemic virus, and a greater susceptibility in people younger than 35 years of age, a phenomenon correlated with the presence of cross-reactive immunity in the older population. It is unclear what virus(es) might be responsible for this apparent cross-protection against the 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus. We describe a mouse lethal challenge model for the 2009 pandemic H1N1 strain, used together with a panel of inactivated H1N1 virus vaccines and hemagglutinin (HA) monoclonal antibodies to dissect the possible humoral antigenic determinants of pre-existing immunity against this virus in the human population. By hemagglutinination inhibition (HI) assays and vaccination/challenge studies, we demonstrate that the 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus is antigenically similar to human H1N1 viruses that circulated from 1918-1943 and to classical swine H1N1 viruses. Antibodies elicited against 1918-like or classical swine H1N1 vaccines completely protect C57B/6 mice from lethal challenge with the influenza A/Netherlands/602/2009 virus isolate. In contrast, contemporary H1N1 vaccines afforded only partial protection. Passive immunization with cross-reactive monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) raised against either 1918 or A/California/04/2009 HA proteins offered full protection from death. Analysis of mAb antibody escape mutants, generated by selection of 2009 H1N1 virus with these mAbs, indicate that antigenic site Sa is one of the conserved cross-protective epitopes. Our findings in mice agree with serological data showing high prevalence of 2009 H1N1 cross-reactive antibodies only in the older population, indicating that prior infection with 1918-like viruses or vaccination against the 1976 swine H1N1 virus in the USA are likely to provide protection against the 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus. This data provides a mechanistic basis for the protection seen in the older population, and emphasizes a rationale for including vaccination of the younger, naïve population. Our results also support the notion that pigs can act as an animal reservoir where influenza virus HAs become antigenically frozen for long periods of time, facilitating the generation of human pandemic viruses.

20025197
Transmission of influenza virus in temperate zones is predominantly by aerosol, in the tropics by contact: a hypothesis.
Using the guinea pig model, we have previously shown that the aerosol transmission of a seasonal human influenza virus is blocked by humid (80% relative humidity) or warm (30 degrees C) ambient conditions. In contrast, we found that transmission by a contact route proceeded at high efficiency despite increased temperature or humidity. Based on these findings, and the observed seasonal behavior of influenza viruses in various regions of the world, we hypothesize herein that the predominant mode of influenza virus transmission differs in temperate and tropical climates. Specifically, we predict that aerosol transmission predominates during the winter season in temperate regions, while contact is the major mode of spread in the tropics. With this idea in mind, possible explanations for the current summer-time spread of swine-origin influenza viruses are discussed.

19939917
Hemagglutinin-pseudotyped green fluorescent protein-expressing influenza viruses for the detection of influenza virus neutralizing antibodies.
Influenza virus is a highly contagious virus that causes yearly epidemics and occasional pandemics of great consequence. Influenza virus neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) are promising prophylactic and therapeutic reagents. Detection of NAbs in serum samples is critical to evaluate the prevalence and spread of new virus strains. Here we describe the development of a simple, sensitive, specific, and safe screening assay for the rapid detection of NAbs against highly pathogenic influenza viruses under biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) conditions. This assay is based on the use of influenza viruses in which the hemagglutinin (HA) gene is replaced by a gene expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP). These GFP-expressing influenza viruses replicate to high titers in HA-expressing cell lines, but in non-HA-expressing cells, their replication is restricted to a single cycle.

19828604
Transmission of pandemic H1N1 influenza virus and impact of prior exposure to seasonal strains or interferon treatment.
Novel swine-origin influenza viruses of the H1N1 subtype were first detected in humans in April 2009. As of 12 August 2009, 180,000 cases had been reported globally. Despite the fact that they are of the same antigenic subtype as seasonal influenza viruses circulating in humans since 1977, these viruses continue to spread and have caused the first influenza pandemic since 1968. Here we show that a pandemic H1N1 strain replicates in and transmits among guinea pigs with similar efficiency to that of a seasonal H3N2 influenza virus. This transmission was, however, partially disrupted when guinea pigs had preexisting immunity to recent human isolates of either the H1N1 or H3N2 subtype and was fully blocked through daily intranasal administration of interferon to either inoculated or exposed animals. Our results suggest that partial immunity resulting from prior exposure to conventional human strains may blunt the impact of pandemic H1N1 viruses in the human population. In addition, the use of interferon as an antiviral prophylaxis may be an effective way to limit spread in at-risk populations.

19805230
Rewiring the RNAs of influenza virus to prevent reassortment.
Influenza viruses contain segmented, negative-strand RNA genomes. Genome segmentation facilitates reassortment between different influenza virus strains infecting the same cell. This phenomenon results in the rapid exchange of RNA segments. In this study, we have developed a method to prevent the free reassortment of influenza A virus RNAs by rewiring their packaging signals. Specific packaging signals for individual influenza virus RNA segments are located in the 5' and 3' noncoding regions as well as in the terminal regions of the ORF of an RNA segment. By putting the nonstructural protein (NS)-specific packaging sequences onto the ORF of the hemagglutinin (HA) gene and mutating the packaging regions in the ORF of the HA, we created a chimeric HA segment with the packaging identity of an NS gene. By the same strategy, we made an NS gene with the packaging identity of an HA segment. This rewired virus had the packaging signals for all eight influenza virus RNAs, but it lost the ability to independently reassort its HA or NS gene. A similar approach can be applied to the other influenza A virus segments to diminish their ability to form reassortant viruses.

19768410
Recombinant vectors as influenza vaccines.
The antiquated system used to manufacture the currently licensed inactivated influenza virus vaccines would not be adequate during an influenza virus pandemic. There is currently a search for vaccines that can be developed faster and provide superior, long-lasting immunity to influenza virus as well as other highly pathogenic viruses and bacteria. Recombinant vectors provide a safe and effective method to elicit a strong immune response to a foreign protein or epitope. This review explores the advantages and limitations of several different vectors that are currently being tested, and highlights some of the newer viruses being used as recombinant vectors.

19524497
Unraveling the mystery of swine influenza virus.
Influenza virus outbreaks occur with regularity, but the severity of outbreaks is not consistent. The recent flu epidemic caused by an H1N1 swine influenza virus presents an opportunity to examine what is known about virulence factors and the spread of infection to better prepare for major influenza outbreaks in the future.

19464560
Alpha-C-galactosylceramide as an adjuvant for a live attenuated influenza virus vaccine.
There is a substantial need to develop better influenza virus vaccines that can protect populations that are not adequately protected by the currently licensed vaccines. While live attenuated influenza virus vaccines induce superior immune responses compared to inactivated vaccines, the manufacturing process of both types of influenza virus vaccines is time consuming and may not be adequate during a pandemic. Adjuvants would be particularly useful if they could enhance the immune response to live attenuated influenza virus vaccines so that the amount of vaccine needed for a protective dose could be reduced. The glycolipid, alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer), has recently been shown to have adjuvant activity for both inactivated and replicating recombinant vaccines. The goal of these experiments was to determine whether a derivative of alpha-GalCer, alpha-C-galactosylceramide (alpha-C-GalCer) can enhance the immune response elicited by a live attenuated influenza virus vaccine containing an NS1 protein truncation and reduce the amount of vaccine required to provide protection after challenge. Our results indicated that the adjuvant reduced both morbidity and mortality in BALB/c mice after challenge with wild type influenza virus. The adjuvant also increased the amount of influenza virus specific total IgG, IgG1, and IgG2a antibodies as well as IFN-gamma secreting CD8(+) T cells. By using knockout mice that are not able to generate NKT cells, we were able to demonstrate that the mechanism of adjuvant activity is dependent on NKT cells. Thus, our data indicate that stimulators of NKT cells represent a new avenue of adjuvants to pursue for live attenuated virus vaccines.

19434931
Transmission of influenza virus via aerosols and fomites in the guinea pig model.
Limited data on the relative contributions of different routes of transmission for influenza virus are available. Person-to-person transmission is central to seasonal and pandemic spread; nevertheless, the modes of spread are a matter of ongoing debate. Resolution of this discussion is paramount to the development of effective control measures in health care and community settings. Using the guinea pig model, we demonstrated that transmission of influenza A/Panama/2007/1999 (H3N2) virus through the air is efficient, compared with spread through contaminated environmental surfaces (fomites). We also examined the aerosol transmission efficiencies of 2 human influenza virus A strains and found that A/Panama/2007/1999 influenza virus transmitted more efficiently than A/Texas/36/1991 (H1N1) virus in our model. The data provide new and much-needed insights into the modes of influenza virus spread and strain-specific differences in the efficiency of transmission.

19230160
The biology of influenza viruses.
The influenza viruses are characterized by segmented, negative-strand RNA genomes requiring an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of viral origin for replication. The particular structure ofthe influenza virus genome and function of its viral proteins enable antigenic drift and antigenic shift. These processes result in viruses able to evade the long-term adaptive immune responses in many hosts.

19211754
Nipah virus edits its P gene at high frequency to express the V and W proteins.
Nipah virus (NiV) is predicted to encode four proteins from its P gene (P, V, W, and C) via mRNA editing and an alternate open reading frame. By use of specific antibodies, the expression of the V, W, and C proteins in NiV-infected cells has now been confirmed. Analysis of the P-gene transcripts shows a ratio of P:V:W mRNA of 1:1:1, but this differs over time, with greater proportions of V and W transcripts observed as the infection progresses. Eighty-two percent of transcripts are edited, with up to 11 G insertions observed. This exceptionally high editing frequency ensures expression of the V and W proteins.

19209145
Enhancement of oncolytic properties of recombinant newcastle disease virus through antagonism of cellular innate immune responses.
Newcastle disease virus (NDV) has been previously shown to possess oncolytic activity, causing specific lysis of cancerous but not normal cells. Here we show that despite these findings, the oncolytic efficiency of naturally occurring NDV strains can still be relatively low, as many tumors exhibit strong innate immune responses that suppress viral replication and spread. To overcome this problem, we generated a recombinant fusogenic NDV expressing influenza NS1 protein, a protein exhibiting interferon (IFN)-antagonist and antiapoptotic functions in human and mouse cells. Interestingly, the resultant virus was dramatically enhanced in its ability to form syncytia, lyse a variety of human and mouse tumor cell lines, and suppressed the induction of the cellular IFN responses. Using the aggressive syngeneic murine melanoma model, we show that the NDV-NS1 virus is more effective than virus not expressing NS1 in clearing the established footpad tumors and results in higher overall long-term animal survival. In addition, mice treated with NDV-NS1 exhibited no signs of toxicity to the virus and developed tumor-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) responses. These findings demonstrate that modulation of innate immune responses by NDV results in enhancement of its oncolytic properties and warrant further investigation of this strategy in design of oncolytic NDV vectors against human tumors.

19203260
Transmission of Influenza Virus via Aerosols and Fomites in the Guinea Pig Model.
Limited data on the relative contributions of different routes of transmission for influenza virus are available. Person-to-person transmission is central to seasonal and pandemic spread; nevertheless, the modes of spread are a matter of ongoing debate. Resolution of this discussion is paramount to the development of effective control measures in health care and community settings. Using the guinea pig model, we demonstrated that transmission of influenza A/Panama/2007/1999 (H3N2) virus through the air is efficient, compared with spread through contaminated environmental surfaces (fomites). We also examined the aerosol transmission efficiencies of 2 human influenza virus A strains and found that A/Panama/2007/1999 influenza virus transmitted more efficiently than A/Texas/36/1991 (H1N1) virus in our model. The data provide new and much-needed insights into the modes of influenza virus spread and strain-specific differences in the efficiency of transmission.

19153237
Blocking interhost transmission of influenza virus by vaccination in the guinea pig model.
Interventions aimed at preventing viral spread have the potential to effectively control influenza virus in all age groups, thereby reducing the burden of influenza illness. For this reason, we have examined the efficacy of vaccination in blocking the transmission of influenza viruses between guinea pigs. Three modes of immunization were compared: (i) natural infection; (ii) intramuscular administration of whole, inactivated influenza virus in 2 doses; and (iii) intranasal inoculation with live attenuated influenza virus in 2 doses. The ability of each immunization method to block the spread of a homologous (A/Panama/2007/99) H3N2 subtype and a heterologous (A/Wisconsin/67/05) H3N2 subtype influenza virus was tested. We found that previous infection through a natural route provided sterilizing immunity against both homologous and heterologous challenges; thus, no transmission to or from previously infected animals was observed. Vaccination with an inactivated influenza virus vaccine, in contrast, did not prevent guinea pigs from becoming infected upon challenge with either virus. Thus, both intranasal inoculation and exposure to an acutely infected guinea pig led to the infection of vaccinated animals. Vaccination with inactivated virus did, however, reduce viral load upon challenge and decrease the number of secondary transmission events from vaccinated animals to naïve cage mates. Vaccination with a live attenuated virus was found to be more efficacious than vaccination with inactivated virus, resulting in sterilizing immunity against homologous challenge and full protection against the transmission of the homologous and heterologous viruses to naïve contacts. In conclusion, we have shown that the guinea pig model can be used to test influenza virus vaccines and that the efficiency of transmission is a valuable readout when vaccine efficacy is evaluated.

19119420
Transmission of influenza virus in a mammalian host is increased by PB2 amino acids 627K or 627E/701N.
Since 2003, more than 380 cases of H5N1 influenza virus infection of humans have been reported. Although the resultant disease in these cases was often severe or fatal, transmission of avian influenza viruses between humans is rare. The precise nature of the barrier blocking human-to-human spread is unknown. It is clear, however, that efficient human-to-human transmission of an antigenically novel influenza virus would result in a pandemic. Influenza viruses with changes at amino acids 627 or 701 of the PB2 protein have been isolated from human cases of highly pathogenic H5 and H7 avian influenza. Herein, we have used the guinea pig model to test the contributions of PB2 627 and 701 to mammalian transmission. To this end, viruses carrying mutations at these positions were generated in the A/Panama/2007/99 (H3N2) and A/Viet Nam/1203/04 (H5N1) backgrounds. In the context of either rPan99 or rVN1203, mutation of lysine 627 to the avian consensus residue glutamic acid was found to decrease transmission. Introduction of an asparagine at position 701, in conjunction with the K627E mutation, resulted in a phenotype more similar to that of the parental strains, suggesting that this residue can compensate for the lack of 627K in terms of increasing transmission in mammals. Thus, our data show that PB2 amino acids 627 and 701 are determinants of mammalian inter-host transmission in diverse virus backgrounds.

19073731
Live attenuated influenza viruses containing NS1 truncations as vaccine candidates against H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza.
Due to the high mortality associated with recent, widely circulating strains of H5N1 influenza virus in poultry, the recurring introduction of H5N1 viruses from birds to humans, and the difficulties in H5N1 eradication by elimination of affected flocks, an effective vaccine against HPAI (highly pathogenic avian influenza) is highly desirable. Using reverse genetics, a set of experimental live attenuated vaccine strains based on recombinant H5N1 influenza virus A/Viet Nam/1203/04 was generated. Each virus was attenuated through expression of a hemagglutinin protein in which the polybasic cleavage site had been removed. Viruses were generated which possessed a full-length NS1 or a C-terminally truncated NS1 protein of 73, 99, or 126 amino acids. Viruses with each NS genotype were combined with a PB2 polymerase gene which carried either a lysine or a glutamic acid at position 627. We predicted that glutamic acid at position 627 of PB2 would attenuate the virus in mammalian hosts, thus increasing the safety of the vaccine. All recombinant viruses grew to high titers in 10-day-old embryonated chicken eggs but were attenuated in mammalian cell culture. Induction of high levels of beta interferon by all viruses possessing truncations in the NS1 protein was demonstrated by interferon bioassay. The viruses were each found to be highly attenuated in a mouse model. Vaccination with a single dose of any virus conferred complete protection from death upon challenge with a mouse lethal virus expressing H5N1 hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins. In a chicken model, vaccination with a single dose of a selected virus encoding the NS1 1-99 protein completely protected chickens from lethal challenge with homologous HPAI virus A/Viet Nam/1203/04 (H5N1) and provided a high level of protection from a heterologous virus, A/egret/Egypt/01/06 (H5N1). Thus, recombinant influenza A/Viet Nam/1203/04 viruses attenuated through the introduction of mutations in the hemagglutinin, NS1, and PB2 coding regions display characteristics desirable for live attenuated vaccines and hold potential as vaccine candidates in poultry as well as in mammalian hosts.

18768976
Influenza B virus NS1-truncated mutants: live-attenuated vaccine approach.
Type B influenza viruses can cause substantial morbidity and mortality in the population, and vaccination remains by far the best means of protection against infections with these viruses. Here, we report the construction of mutant influenza B viruses for potential use as improved live-virus vaccine candidates. Employing reverse genetics, we altered the NS1 gene, which encodes a type I interferon (IFN) antagonist. The resulting NS1 mutant viruses induced IFN and, as a consequence, were found to be attenuated in vitro and in vivo. The absence of pathogenicity of the NS1 mutants in both BALB/c and C57BL/6 PKR(-/-) mice was confirmed. We also provide evidence that influenza B virus NS1 mutants induce a self-adjuvanted immune response and confer effective protection against challenge with both homologous and heterologous B virus strains in mice.

18684820
Oseltamivir-resistant influenza A viruses are transmitted efficiently among guinea pigs by direct contact but not by aerosol.
Influenza viruses resistant to the neuraminidase (NA) inhibitor oseltamivir arise under drug selection pressure both in vitro and in vivo. Several mutations in the active site of the viral NA are known to confer relative resistance to oseltamivir, and influenza viruses with certain oseltamivir resistance mutations have been shown to transmit efficiently among cocaged ferrets. However, it is not known whether NA mutations alter aerosol transmission of drug-resistant influenza virus. Here, we demonstrate that recombinant human influenza A/H3N2 viruses without and with oseltamivir resistance mutations (in which NA carries the mutation E119V or the double mutations E119V I222V) have similar in ovo growth kinetics and infectivity in guinea pigs. These viruses also transmit efficiently by the contact route among cocaged guinea pigs, as in the ferret model. However, in an aerosol transmission model, in which guinea pigs are caged separately, the oseltamivir-resistant viruses transmit poorly or not at all; in contrast, the oseltamivir-sensitive virus transmits efficiently even in the absence of direct contact. The present results suggest that oseltamivir resistance mutations reduce aerosol transmission of influenza virus, which could have implications for public health measures taken in the event of an influenza pandemic.

18585796
Modulation of influenza virus replication by alteration of sodium ion transport and protein kinase C activity.
In recent years, increasing levels of resistance to the four FDA-approved anti-influenza virus drugs have been described and vaccine manufacturers have experienced demands that exceed their capacity. This situation underlines the urgent need for novel antivirals as well as innovations in vaccine production in preparation for the next influenza epidemic. Here we report the development of a cell-based high-throughput screen which we have used for the identification of compounds that modulate influenza virus growth either negatively or positively. We screened a library of compounds with known biological activity and identified distinct groups of inhibitors and enhancers that target sodium channels or protein kinase C (PKC). We confirmed these results in viral growth assays and find that treatment with a sodium channel opener or PKC inhibitor significantly reduces viral replication. In contrast, inhibition of sodium channels or activation of PKC leads to enhanced virus production in tissue culture. These diametrically opposing effects strongly support a role for PKC activity and the regulation of Na(+) currents in influenza virus replication and both may serve as targets for antiviral drugs. Furthermore, we raise the possibility that compounds that result in increased viral titers may be beneficial for boosting the production of tissue culture-grown influenza vaccines.

18535660
Cellular proteins in influenza virus particles.
Virions are thought to contain all the essential proteins that govern virus egress from the host cell and initiation of replication in the target cell. It has been known for some time that influenza virions contain nine viral proteins; however, analyses of other enveloped viruses have revealed that proteins from the host cell can also be detected in virions. To address whether the same is true for influenza virus, we used two complementary mass spectrometry approaches to perform a comprehensive proteomic analysis of purified influenza virus particles. In addition to the aforementioned nine virus-encoded proteins, we detected the presence of 36 host-encoded proteins. These include both cytoplasmic and membrane-bound proteins that can be grouped into several functional categories, such as cytoskeletal proteins, annexins, glycolytic enzymes, and tetraspanins. Interestingly, a significant number of these have also been reported to be present in virions of other virus families. Protease treatment of virions combined with immunoblot analysis was used to verify the presence of the cellular protein and also to determine whether it is located in the core of the influenza virus particle. Immunogold labeling confirmed the presence of membrane-bound host proteins on the influenza virus envelope. The identification of cellular constituents of influenza virions has important implications for understanding the interactions of influenza virus with its host and brings us a step closer to defining the cellular requirements for influenza virus replication. While not all of the host proteins are necessarily incorporated specifically, those that are and are found to have an essential role represent novel targets for antiviral drugs and for attenuation of viruses for vaccine purposes.

18448539
A seven-segmented influenza A virus expressing the influenza C virus glycoprotein HEF.
Influenza viruses are classified into three types: A, B, and C. The genomes of A- and B-type influenza viruses consist of eight RNA segments, whereas influenza C viruses only have seven RNAs. Both A and B influenza viruses contain two major surface glycoproteins: the hemagglutinin (HA) and the neuraminidase (NA). Influenza C viruses have only one major surface glycoprotein, HEF (hemagglutinin-esterase fusion). By using reverse genetics, we generated two seven-segmented chimeric influenza viruses. Each possesses six RNA segments from influenza virus A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (PB2, PB1, PA, NP, M, and NS); the seventh RNA segment encodes either the influenza virus C/Johannesburg/1/66 HEF full-length protein or a chimeric protein HEF-Ecto, which consists of the HEF ectodomain and the HA transmembrane and cytoplasmic regions. To facilitate packaging of the heterologous segment, both the HEF and HEF-Ecto coding regions are flanked by HA packaging sequences. When introduced as an eighth segment with the NA packaging sequences, both viruses are able to stably express a green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene, indicating a potential use for these viruses as vaccine vectors to carry foreign antigens. Finally, we show that incorporation of a GFP RNA segment enhances the growth of seven-segmented viruses, indicating that efficient influenza A viral RNA packaging requires the presence of eight RNA segments. These results support a selective mechanism of viral RNA recruitment to the budding site.

18367530
High temperature (30 degrees C) blocks aerosol but not contact transmission of influenza virus.
Influenza causes significant morbidity in tropical regions; however, unlike in temperate zones, influenza in the tropics is not strongly associated with a given season. We have recently shown that influenza virus transmission in the guinea pig model is most efficient under cold, dry conditions, which are rare in the tropics. Herein, we report the lack of aerosol transmission at 30 degrees C and at all humidities tested. Conversely, transmission via the contact route was equally efficient at 30 degrees C and 20 degrees C. Our data imply that contact or short-range spread predominates in the tropics and offer an explanation for the lack of a well-defined, recurrent influenza season affecting tropical and subtropical regions of the world.

18220963
Influenza virus transmission: basic science and implications for the use of antiviral drugs during a pandemic.
Recent and ongoing zoonotic infections of humans with avian influenza viruses have highlighted the importance of transmission in the development of an influenza pandemic. Despite the ability of H5N1 influenza viruses to grow to high titers and cause severe disease in human hosts, these viruses do not spread efficiently from human-to-human. The question of what viral, host and environmental factors are required to render an influenza virus transmissible has therefore become very topical. Recent work in the ferret model has suggested that receptor binding specificity is an important factor, but that the trait of human-like receptor recognition alone is not sufficient to confer a transmissible phenotype. In addition to the ferret, the guinea pig has been identified as a useful model host for transmission studies. Further research using these models is needed, toward understanding the molecular circumstances under which transmission can occur. A crucial role of antiviral drugs in mitigating an influenza pandemic will be to slow the spread of infection while an appropriate vaccine is in production. The efficacy of antivirals in preventing transmission is therefore of great importance. While the adamantanes, amantadine and rimantadine, have been found to fail in this respect due to the high transmissibility of drug resistant variants, the neuraminidase inhibitors, oseltamivir and zanamivir, show more promise. Anti-influenza drugs in development which show efficacy in terms of mitigating disease or viral growth should also be tested for their potential to block transmission.

18199643
Expression of transgenes from newcastle disease virus with a segmented genome.
Paramyxoviruses belong to the Paramyxoviridae family of the order Mononegavirales. They have a nonsegmented negative-stranded RNA genome and can cause a number of diseases in humans and animals. We generated a recombinant Newcastle disease virus (NDV) possessing a two-segmented genome. Each genomic segment is flanked by authentic NDV 3' and 5' noncoding termini allowing for efficient replication and transcription. A reporter gene encoding green fluorescent protein (GFP) was inserted into one segment, and a red fluorescent protein dsRed gene was inserted into the other segment in order to easily detect the replication and transcription of segments in infected cells. The rescued viruses grew well and were stable in embryonated chicken eggs over multiple passages. We were able to detect the expression of both reporter genes in the same cell infected with the virus possessing a segmented genome, and viral particles can contain either one or two types of RNA segments. We also rescued a two-segmented virus expressing GFP and the severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus spike S protein, which is about 200 kDa. The chimeric virus extends the coding capacity of NDV by 30%, suggesting that the two-segmented NDV can be used for development of vaccines or gene therapy vectors carrying long and multiple transgenes.

18094182
Highly conserved regions of influenza a virus polymerase gene segments are critical for efficient viral RNA packaging.
The genome of the influenza A virus is composed of eight different segments of negative-sense RNA. These eight segments are incorporated into budding virions in an equimolar ratio through a mechanism that is not fully understood. Two different models have been proposed for packaging the viral ribonucleoproteins into newly assembling virus particles: the random-incorporation model and the selective-incorporation model. In the last few years, increasing evidence from many different laboratories that supports the selective-incorporation model has been accumulated. In particular, different groups have shown that some large viral RNA regions within the coding sequences at both the 5' and 3' ends of almost every segment are sufficient for packaging foreign RNA sequences. If the packaging regions are crucial for the viability of the virus, we would expect them to be conserved. Using large-scale analysis of influenza A virus sequences, we developed a method of identifying conserved RNA regions whose conservation cannot be explained by population structure or amino acid conservation. Interestingly, the conserved sequences are located within the regions identified as important for efficient packaging. By utilizing influenza virus reverse genetics, we have rescued mutant viruses containing synonymous mutations within these highly conserved regions. Packaging of viral RNAs in these viruses was analyzed by reverse transcription using a universal primer and quantitative PCR for individual segments. Employing this approach, we have identified regions in the polymerase gene segments that, if mutated, result in reductions of more than 90% in the packaging of that particular polymerase viral RNA. Reductions in the level of packaging of a polymerase viral RNA frequently resulted in reductions of other viral RNAs as well, and the results form a pattern of hierarchy of segment interactions. This work provides further evidence for a selective packaging mechanism for influenza A viruses, demonstrating that these highly conserved regions are important for efficient packaging.

18093698
A combination in-ovo vaccine for avian influenza virus and Newcastle disease virus.
The protection of poultry from H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza A (HPAI) and Newcastle disease virus (NDV) can be achieved through vaccination, as part of a broader disease control strategy. We have previously generated a recombinant influenza virus expressing, (i) an H5 hemagglutinin protein, modified by the removal of the polybasic cleavage peptide and (ii) the ectodomain of the NDV hemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN) protein in the place of the ectodomain of influenza neuraminidase (Park MS, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006;103(21):8203-8). Here we show this virus is attenuated in primary normal human bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cell culture, and demonstrate protection of C57BL/6 mice from lethal challenge with an H5 HA-containing influenza virus through immunisation with the recombinant virus. In addition, in-ovo vaccination of 18-day-old embryonated chicken eggs provided 90% and 80% protection against highly stringent lethal challenge by NDV and H5N1 virus, respectively. We propose that this virus has potential as a safe in-ovo live, attenuated, bivalent avian influenza and Newcastle disease virus vaccine.

18005736
Influenza A virus PB1-F2: a small protein with a big punch.
Virulence factors, such as the recently discovered PB1-F2, contribute to the pathogenesis and comorbidity of influenza A virus. In this issue of Cell Host & Microbe, McAuley et al. characterize the role of PB1-F2, including in the pandemic 1918 virus, in causing increased lung pathology and fatal pneumococcus infection in mice. This work sheds light on the mechanisms of pathogenicity during influenza A virus infections.

17953482
Influenza virus transmission is dependent on relative humidity and temperature.
Using the guinea pig as a model host, we show that aerosol spread of influenza virus is dependent upon both ambient relative humidity and temperature. Twenty experiments performed at relative humidities from 20% to 80% and 5 degrees C, 20 degrees C, or 30 degrees C indicated that both cold and dry conditions favor transmission. The relationship between transmission via aerosols and relative humidity at 20 degrees C is similar to that previously reported for the stability of influenza viruses (except at high relative humidity, 80%), implying that the effects of humidity act largely at the level of the virus particle. For infected guinea pigs housed at 5 degrees C, the duration of peak shedding was approximately 40 h longer than that of animals housed at 20 degrees C; this increased shedding likely accounts for the enhanced transmission seen at 5 degrees C. To investigate the mechanism permitting prolonged viral growth, expression levels in the upper respiratory tract of several innate immune mediators were determined. Innate responses proved to be comparable between animals housed at 5 degrees C and 20 degrees C, suggesting that cold temperature (5 degrees C) does not impair the innate immune response in this system. Although the seasonal epidemiology of influenza is well characterized, the underlying reasons for predominant wintertime spread are not clear. We provide direct, experimental evidence to support the role of weather conditions in the dynamics of influenza and thereby address a long-standing question fundamental to the understanding of influenza epidemiology and evolution.

17922571
A single mutation in the PB1-F2 of H5N1 (HK/97) and 1918 influenza A viruses contributes to increased virulence.
The proapoptotic PB1-F2 protein of influenza A viruses has been shown to contribute to pathogenesis in the mouse model. Expression of full-length PB1-F2 increases the pathogenesis of the influenza A virus, causing weight loss, slower viral clearance, and increased viral titers in the lungs. After comparing viruses from the Hong Kong 1997 H5N1 outbreak, one amino acid change (N66S) was found in the PB1-F2 sequence at position 66 that correlated with pathogenicity. This same amino acid change (N66S) was also found in the PB1-F2 protein of the 1918 pandemic A/Brevig Mission/18 virus. Two isogenic recombinant chimeric viruses were created with an influenza A/WSN/33 virus background containing the PB1 segment from the HK/156/97: WH and WH N66S. In mice infected with WH N66S virus there was increased pathogenicity as measured by weight loss and decreased survival, and a 100-fold increase in virus replication when compared to mice infected with the WH virus. The 1918 pandemic strain A/Brevig Mission/18 was reconstructed with a pathogenicity-reducing mutation in PB1-F2 (S66N). The resultant 1918 S66N virus was attenuated in mice having a 3-log lower 50% lethal dose and caused less morbidity and mortality in mice than the wild-type virus. Viral lung titers were also decreased in 1918 S66N-infected mice compared with wild-type 1918 virus-infected mice. In addition, both viruses with an S at position 66 (WH N66S and wt 1918) induced elevated levels of cytokines in the lungs of infected mice. Together, these data show that a single amino acid substitution in PB1-F2 can result in increased viral pathogenicity and could be one of the factors contributing to the high lethality seen with the 1918 pandemic virus.

17634232
Specific residues of the influenza A virus hemagglutinin viral RNA are important for efficient packaging into budding virions.
A final step in the influenza virus replication cycle is the assembly of the viral structural proteins and the packaging of the eight segments of viral RNA (vRNA) into a fully infectious virion. The process by which the RNA genome is packaged efficiently remains poorly understood. In an approach to analyze how vRNA is packaged, we rescued a seven-segmented virus lacking the hemagglutinin (HA) vRNA (deltaHA virus). This virus could be passaged in cells constitutively expressing HA protein, but it was attenuated in comparison to wild-type A/WSN/33 virus. Supplementing the deltaHA virus with an artificial segment containing green fluorescent protein (GFP) or red fluorescent protein (RFP) with HA packaging regions (45 3' and 80 5' nucleotides) partially restored the growth of this virus to wild-type levels. The absence of the HA vRNA in the deltaHA virus resulted in a 40 to 60% reduction in the packaging of the PA, NP, NA, M, and NS vRNAs, as measured by quantitative PCR (qPCR), and the packaging of these vRNAs was partially restored in the presence of GFP/RFP packaging constructs. To further define nucleotides of the HA coding sequence which are important for vRNA packaging, synonymous mutations were introduced into the full-length HA cDNA of influenza A/WSN/33 and A/Puerto Rico/8/34 viruses, and mutant viruses were rescued. qPCR analysis of vRNAs packaged in these mutant viruses identified a key region of the open reading frame (nucleotides 1659 to 1671) that is critical for the efficient packaging of an influenza virus H1 HA segment.

17313986
Effective replication of human influenza viruses in mice lacking a major alpha2,6 sialyltransferase.
The hemagglutinins of influenza viruses isolated from humans typically prefer binding to sialic acid in an alpha2,6 linkage. Presumably, the virus uses the presence of these receptors on the respiratory tract to gain entrance into the host cell. The ST6Gal I sialyltransferase knock-out mouse lacks the main enzyme necessary for the attachment of alpha2,6 sialic acid to N-linked glycoproteins on the cell surface. Yet even in the absence of detectable alpha2,6 sialic acid in the mouse respiratory tract, human influenza viruses can still infect these mice and grow to similar titers in the lung and trachea as compared to wild-type animals. This work demonstrates that the presence of a major alpha2,6 sialic acid on N-linked glycoproteins is not essential for human influenza virus infection in mice.

