21610496
The Drosophila nephrocyte.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The functioning kidney requires proper organization in multiple cell types that mediate filtration and removal of wastes. Interest has increasingly focused on the podocyte as an important mediator of kidney function; defects in podocyte function likely mediate a broad palate of kidney dysfunctions. Here I explore recent work that establishes the Drosophila nephrocyte as a useful model for podocyte function and dysfunction. RECENT FINDINGS: Although described many decades in the past, recent evidence has emphasized important similarities in the molecules that construct the 'nephrocyte diaphragm' and its vertebrate cousin the 'podocyte diaphragm'. For example, loss of Nephrin and its associated proteins lead to collapse of these structures and loss of proper filtration. SUMMARY: These data emphasize both differences between the podocyte and nephrocyte and also useful similarities. These similarities provide the promise of bringing Drosophila genetics - strongly successful in other disciplines - to the complex problem of how podocyte dysfunction leads to disease. To further explore this point I discuss work on Nephrin in a better understood tissue, the Drosophila eye, in which the role of Nephrin and its connection to actin dynamics is under intense study.

20599904
Preferential adhesion maintains separation of ommatidia in the Drosophila eye.
In the Drosophila eye, neighboring ommatidia are separated by inter-ommatidial cells (IOCs). How this ommatidial spacing emerges during eye development is not clear. Here we demonstrate that four adhesion molecules of the Irre cell recognition module (IRM) family play a redundant role in maintaining separation of ommatidia. The four IRM proteins are divided into two groups: Kirre and Rst are expressed in IOCs, and Hbs and Sns in primary pigment cells (1 degrees s). Kirre binds Hbs and Sns in vivo and in vitro. Reducing activity of either Rst or Kirre alone had minimal effects on ommatidial spacing, but reducing both together led to direct ommatidium:ommatidium contact. A similar phenotype was also observed when reducing both Hbs and Sns. Consistent with the role of these factors in sorting ommatidia, mis-expression of Hbs plus Sns within a single IOC led to complete separation of the cell from neighboring ommatidia. Our results indicate mutual preferential adhesion between ommatidia and IOCs mediated by four IRM proteins is both necessary and sufficient to maintain separation of ommatidia.

20140910
Canonical wingless signaling regulates cone cell specification in the Drosophila retina.
Correct tissue patterning during development involves multiple morphogenetic events that include specification of different cell fates, cell proliferation, cell death, and coordinated changes in cell shape, position, and adhesion. Here, we use the Drosophila retina to explore the molecular mechanisms that regulate and integrate these various events. In a previous report, we found that wingless (wg) was required to induce a previously unknown surge of cell death ("early death") in the pupal retina. Here, we show that wg is also required to induce the more widely studied mid-pupal cell death ("late death") in a process that involves regulation of DIAP1. Furthermore, our data suggest that wg has a previously unreported role in specifying the glial-like cone cells. This activity requires canonical Wg signaling and is linked with Notch pathway activity. Our work broadens the role of canonical Wg signaling to encompass multiple patterning steps in the emerging Drosophila retina.

17974969
Differing Src signaling levels have distinct outcomes in Drosophila.
High levels of Src activity are found in a broad spectrum of cancers. The roles of Src and its negative regulator Csk have been extensively studied, although results have often proved contradictory or the relevance to whole organisms is unclear. In Drosophila, overexpression of either Src orthologue resulted in apoptotic cell death, but paradoxically, reducing dCsk activity led to over-proliferation and tissue overgrowth. Here, we show that in Drosophila epithelia in situ, the levels of Src signaling determine the cellular outcome of Src activation. Apoptotic cell death was triggered specifically at high Src signaling levels; lower levels directed antiapoptotic signals while promoting proliferation. Furthermore, our data indicate that expression of kinase-dead Src isoforms do not necessarily act as dominant-negative factors, but can instead increase Src pathway activity, most likely by titrating Csk activity away from endogenous Src. The importance of Src activity levels was emphasized when we examined oncogenic cooperation between Src and Ras: malignant overgrowth was observed specifically when high Src signaling levels were achieved. We propose a model in which low levels of Src signaling promote survival and proliferation during early stages of tumorigenesis, whereas strong Src signaling, coupled with antiapoptotic signals, directs invasive migration and metastasis during advanced tumor stages.

