20636686
Impact of maternal posttraumatic stress disorder and depression following exposure to the September 11 attacks on preschool children's behavior.
To evaluate whether conjoined maternal posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression are associated with increased behavioral problems among terrorism-exposed preschool children (N = 116; 18-54 months), this study compared clinically significant child behavioral problem rates among the preschool children of mothers with PTSD and depression, depression alone, and neither disorder. Behavioral problems were independently rated by mothers and preschool teachers. Maternal depression and PTSD, relative to maternal depression alone, and to neither disorder, were associated with substantially increased child problems. Notably, maternal depression and PTSD were associated with increased emotional reactivity (relative risk [RR] = 5.9 by mother's and 3.4 by teacher's reports) and aggressive behavior problems (RR = 11.0 by mother's and RR = 5.9 by teacher's reports). This was corroborated by teacher ratings. Implications for intervening with terrorism-exposed preschool children are discussed.

19487609
Effect of maternal psychopathology on behavioral problems in preschool children exposed to terrorism: use of generalized estimating equations to integrate multiple informant reports.
To examine whether the number of maternal psychopathologies is associated with increased clinically significant behavioral problems in preschool children exposed to disaster, using child behavior ratings from multiple informants. Cross-sectional study. Lower Manhattan, New York, New York. One hundred two preschool child-mother dyads directly exposed to the World Trade Center attacks. EXPOSURES: Maternal disorders: 2 (posttraumatic stress disorder [PTSD] and depression), 1 (depression or PTSD), or none. Maternal depression and PTSD were self-reported. Child behavioral problems were rated by mothers and teachers using a standardized behavioral checklist. For each informant, we created separate dichotomous variables that indicated whether the child's behavioral problems were severe enough to be clinically significant. We then used an analytic technique (generalized estimating equations) that integrates the child behavioral problem ratings by the mother and teachers to derive a more reliable indicator of clinically significant child behavioral problems. The rate of clinically significant child behavioral problems increased linearly relative to the number of maternal psychopathologies. The number of maternal psychopathologies was associated with a linear increase in functional impairment. Compared with children of mothers without psychopathologies, children of mothers with depression and PTSD were at greater risk for several clinically significant problems, notably, aggressive behavior (relative risk, 13.0), emotionally reactive behavior (11.2), and somatic complaints (10.5). Boys were more likely to have clinically significant behavior problems than were girls. Concurrent maternal depression and PTSD was associated with dramatic increases in the rate of clinically significant behavioral problems in preschool children, particularly boys, 3 years after the World Trade Center attacks.

19178553
Substance use and functional impairment among adolescents directly exposed to the 2001 World Trade Center attacks.
The relationship between exposure to the World Trade Center (WTC) attacks, increased substance use, functional impairment and mental health service use, controlling for depression and post-traumatic stress disorder, was assessed through an in-school survey of directly exposed students (N = 1040) attending the five middle and five high schools nearest the WTC. The survey was conducted 18 months after the attacks. Students with one WTC exposure risk factor had a five-fold increase in substance use, while those with three or more exposure risks had a nearly 19-fold increase. Increased substance use was associated with impaired school work, school behaviour and grades. Students reporting increased substance use were nearly twice as likely to want help but were no more likely than asymptomatic students to receive services. Adolescents reporting increased substance use, without co-morbidity, were less likely to receive psychological services than others. Attention to the needs of substance-using adolescents exposed to disaster is needed.

18945918
Relationship between type of trauma exposure and posttraumatic stress disorder among urban children and adolescents.
This study examines the association between trauma exposure and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) among 157 help-seeking children (aged 8-17). Structured clinical interviews are carried out, and linear and logistic regression analyses are conducted to examine the relationship between PTSD and type of trauma exposure controlling for age, gender, and ethnicity. Confrontation with traumatic news, witnessing domestic violence, physical abuse, and sexual abuse are each significantly associated with PTSD. Witnessing a crime, being the victim of a crime, and exposure to accidents, fire, or disaster are not associated with PTSD. These findings underscore the association between interpersonal violence and childhood PTSD.

18673404
Roles of perinatal problems on adolescent antisocial behaviors among children born after 33 completed weeks: a prospective investigation.
There is uncertainty about the extent to which mildly sub-optimal perinatal characteristics among individuals born near-term (>33 weeks of gestation) are associated with various subsequent childhood problems, including antisocial behavior. There is even more uncertainty about whether the pathway to antisocial behavior differs by gender. A sample of 1689 infants, born near-term, was followed from birth for over 30 years. Using structural equation modeling (SEM), the study evaluated hypothesized mechanisms linking perinatal problems to antisocial behavior, mediated through the following variables in early and later childhood: neurological abnormalities at age 1; hearing, speech, and language problems at age 3; cognitive function at age 4; and academic performance at age 7. Childhood problems were assessed by trained research clinicians, blind to perinatal status. An 'antisocial behavior' variable was created, based on retrospective self-report of six antisocial incidences assessed in adulthood. Path coefficients showed that birthweight, head circumference, and Apgar scores were indirectly associated with antisocial behavior in the presence of one or more of the following: neurological abnormalities, abnormality in language, speech, and hearing, cognitive function, or academic performance. We found gender differences only in the associations between hearing and IQ and between language perception and IQ. Poor academic performance was associated with antisocial behavior in both boys and girls. Our hypothesis, that perinatal problems may progress to antisocial behavior when mediated by various markers of early childhood problems, was confirmed. Adverse perinatal events need to be considered in identifying infants who are at risk for academic problems and antisocial behavior, even when the infant is born relatively close to term (i.e., >33 weeks). Poor academic performance, which is indirectly influenced by a variety of neurological and cognitive problems during the perinatal period, infancy, and early childhood appear to increase antisocial behavioral problems in both girls and boys.

18552630
The relationship between PTSD arousal symptoms and depression among mothers exposed to the World Trade Center attacks.
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is associated with greater risk of developing comorbid depression. However, little is known about the relationship between specific PTSD symptom clusters and comorbid depression. Approximately 4 years after the World Trade Center (WTC) attacks, we examined the association between PTSD symptom clusters and depression severity among 64 mothers directly exposed to the WTC attacks. Severity scores were computed for each PTSD symptom cluster by summing symptom frequency. Partial correlations with depression severity were calculated separately for PTSD symptom clusters, controlling for demographic variables, time elapsed since the attacks, WTC attack exposure, meeting PTSD criterion A, and the other cluster scores. Higher arousal symptom cluster scores were significantly correlated with persistent depression, but the re-experiencing and avoidance symptom clusters were not. Subsequent analyses isolating shared symptoms of PTSD and depression from those unique to PTSD suggest a complex interrelationship among symptoms of arousal, numbing, and depression.

18250236
Impact of conjoined exposure to the World Trade Center attacks and to other traumatic events on the behavioral problems of preschool children.
To examine the long-term behavioral consequences of exposure to the World Trade Center (WTC) attacks in preschool children and to evaluate whether conjoined exposure to disaster and to other traumatic events has additive effects. Retrospective cohort study. Lower Manhattan, New York. A total of 116 preschool children directly exposed to the WTC attacks. Main Exposures High-intensity WTC attack-related trauma exposure indexed by the child experiencing 1 or more of the following: seeing people jumping out of the towers, seeing dead bodies, seeing injured people, witnessing the towers collapsing, and lifetime history of other trauma exposure. Main Outcome Measure Clinically significant behavioral problems as measured using the Child Behavioral Checklist. Preschool children exposed to high-intensity WTC attack-related events were at increased risk for the sleep problems and anxious/depressed behavioral symptom clusters. Conjoined exposure to high-intensity WTC attack-related events and to other trauma was associated with clinically significant emotionally reactive, anxious/depressed, and sleep-related behavioral problems. Children without a conjoined lifetime history of other trauma did not differ from nonexposed children. Risk of emotionally reactive, anxious/depressed, and attention problems in preschool children exposed to conjoined high-intensity WTC attack-related events and other trauma increased synergistically. Conjoined other trauma exposure seems to amplify the impact of high-intensity WTC attack-related events on behavioral problems. Preschool children exposed to high-intensity events who had no other trauma exposure did not have increased clinically significant behavioral problems. The additive effects of trauma exposure are consistent with an allostatic load hypothesis of stress. More vigorous outreach to trauma-exposed preschool children should become a postdisaster public health priority.

17707257
Low birth weight and risk of affective disorders and selected medical illness in offspring at high and low risk for depression.
Numerous studies have demonstrated that low birth weight (LBW) is associated with the development of medical conditions, such as hypertension and diabetes, and psychiatric disorders, such as depression. One possible mechanism through which LBW might increase risk for both medical and psychiatric disorders is by altering the biologic systems (such as the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal [HPA] axis function) that govern emotion regulation and physical reactivity. In this study, we conducted secondary data analyses in a longitudinal study originally designed to understand the intergenerational transmission of major depressive disorder (MDD). We examined the risk for both medical and psychiatric illnesses known to be influenced by HPA axis dysregulation in the context of parental depression. The study had 2 primary objectives: (1) to examine whether LBW increases the risk of selected adult illness that may be influenced by the HPA axis and (2) to examine whether the increased risk of illness varies by parental depression status. We conducted longitudinal assessments of 244 offspring of depressed and nondepressed parents for more than 20 years. Psychopathology and medical illness were assessed by direct interview conducted by clinicians blind to risk status and previous diagnosis. We examined the effect of BW in 3 categories: less than 2.5 kg (LBW), 2.5-3.5 kg, and more than 3.5 kg (reference group). Offspring with LBW had a significantly increased risk of MDD, anxiety disorders, phobia, suicidal ideation, impaired functioning, allergies, and hypertension compared to those with BW exceeding 3.5 kg. The association between LBW and depression was stronger among children of depressed parents than among children of nondepressed parents, with an interaction term (BW and parental depression status) significant for MDD (P = .05), suggesting that parental depression may augment the impact of LBW on offspring depression:

17472762
The role of perinatal problems in risk of co-morbid psychiatric and medical disorders in adulthood.
Perinatal problems may be associated with an increased risk for psychological and physical health problems in adulthood, although it is unclear which perinatal problems (low birthweight, preterm birth, low Apgar scores, and small head circumference), or what clusters of problems, are more likely to be associated with later health problems. It is also not known whether perinatal problems (singly or together) are associated with co-morbidity between psychological and physical health problems. A regional random sample (from Baltimore) of mothers and their children (n=1525) was followed from birth to adulthood (mean age 29 years). Perinatal conditions were measured at delivery. Psychological problems (depression and suicidal ideation) were measured with the General Health Questionnaire-28 (GHQ-28) and physical problems (asthma and hypertension) with the RAND-36 Health Status Inventory. Children with perinatal problems were generally at increased risk for depression, suicidal ideation and hypertension, and co-morbid depression and hypertension even after controlling for confounders. One possible underlying condition, preterm low birthweight (LBW), extracted by cluster analysis, considering all of the four perinatal problems, was associated with increased risk for psychological and physical health outcomes as well as co-morbidity of the two. LBW, preterm birth and small head circumference singly increased the risk for both psychological and physical health problems, as well as co-morbid depression and hypertension, while low Apgar scores were only associated with psychological problems. Delineating different etiological processes, such as preterm LBW, considering various perinatal problems simultaneously, might be of benefit to understanding the fetal origin of adult illness and co-morbidity.

17347378
Association of direct exposure to terrorism, media exposure to terrorism, and other trauma with emotional and behavioral problems in preschool children.
This study examined the differential impact of various types of trauma exposure on emotional and behavioral problems in preschool children. Participants were 95 mothers of 1- to 4-year-old children in Israel. Results suggested a differential pattern of associations between the types of trauma exposure (i.e., direct exposure to terrorism, media exposure to terrorism, and other trauma) and children's internalizing and externalizing problems. This line of research is important for the identification of risk factors and the development of effective prevention and intervention strategies to promote resilience in preschool children exposed to specific type(s) of trauma.

17347371
Additive interaction of child abuse and perinatal risk as signs of resiliency in adulthood.
To find the biological basis of resilience, we exploited data from a longitudinal community-based study of 1,748 adult children, followed from birth to adulthood. Results showed that those with both abuse and perinatal problems demonstrated synergistically impaired well-being, a higher rate of school dropout, lower sense of success, and lower income. Among abused adult children (n = 271), we found that those without, relative to those with, perinatal problems had lower risk for adult psychopathology. An examination of the biological base of resilience could be added in a multidimensional/multifactorial model to help researchers identify ways to promote resiliency even before birth.

17283305
Conjoined effects of low birth weight and childhood abuse on adaptation and well-being in adolescence and adulthood.
To characterize the conjoined effects of low birth weight (LBW) and childhood abuse on impaired adaptation and illness in adolescence and adulthood. Longitudinal study of a birth cohort. Baltimore, Md. Children (N = 1748) were followed from birth to adulthood (mean age, 26 years) as part of the Johns Hopkins Collaborative Perinatal Study. Childhood abuse and LBW. Indicators of adaptation were delinquency, school suspension, repeating grades, academic honors, quality of life, and socioeconomic status. Indicators of psychiatric and medical problems were depression, social dysfunction, somatization, asthma, and hypertension. Participants with both LBW and subsequent childhood abuse, relative to those with neither risk, were at a substantially elevated risk for psychological problems: 10-fold for depression; nearly 9-fold for social dysfunction, and more than 4-fold for somatization. However, they were not at an elevated risk for medical problems in adulthood. Those exposed to childhood abuse were more likely to report delinquency, school suspension, repeating grades during adolescence, and impaired well-being in adulthood, regardless of LBW status. For those with LBW alone, the prevalence of those problems was comparable with that of individuals without either risk factor. Children with LBW and childhood abuse are at much greater risk for poor adaptation and psychiatric problems than those with LBW alone and those with neither risk. Preventive interventions should target families with LBW children who are at greater risk for childhood abuse.

