21131838
Loss of p16INK4A expression in low-grade ovarian serous carcinomas.
According to a tumor progression model, low-grade ovarian serous carcinomas may evolve from serous borderline tumors or micropapillary tumors. We sought to investigate the role of and associations between BRAF mutational status, extracellular signal regulated kinase activation, and p16(INK4A) expression in various types of ovarian serous tumors. We analyzed 29 typical ovarian serous borderline tumors, 8 micropapillary tumors, 4 low-grade invasive ovarian serous carcinomas, and 24 high-grade invasive ovarian serous carcinomas for the BRAF mutational status at codon 600; in addition, expression levels of the downstream signaling protein extracellular signal regulated kinase and the p16(INK4A) tumor suppressor protein were assessed by immunohistochemistry. There was a decline in p16(INK4A) expression from serous borderline tumors to micropapillary tumors with almost complete loss in low-grade invasive carcinomas. High-grade carcinomas had a variable p16(INK4A) expression pattern. We found a T1799A BRAF mutation in 12 typical serous borderline tumors (41%) and 1 micropapillary tumor (12.5%). No mutations were found in the low-grade and high-grade invasive carcinomas (0%). Among the typical borderline tumors, cases with BRAF mutations tended to have stronger p16(INK4A) expression compared with cases with wild-type BRAF. No other correlations were identified between the BRAF mutational status and expression levels of the analyzed proteins. Loss of p16(INK4A) expression may be a pathogenetic factor in the progression from serous borderline tumors to low-grade invasive carcinomas. The divergent molecular profiles support the theory that high-grade carcinomas are unrelated to serous borderline tumors or low-grade carcinomas.

19733098
Cultured bilayered skin allograft for vaginal construction.
This is the first report of live human cultured bilayered skin allograft (taken from another person) (LHCBSA) to line a dissected space to create a vagina. A 19-year-old with Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome (MRKH syndrome) of vaginal and uterine agenesis had a space dissected and lined with LHCBSA. Although the lining devitalized within 2 weeks, there was a rapid ingrowth of vaginal mucosal cells from the vaginal dimple with an excellent long-term result. This is the first report that LHCBSA is able to stimulate vaginal mucosal cell growth for a neovagina. It is possible that it might stimulate other surface tissue lining to cover adjacent raw areas such as bladder or esophagus.

19616457
Squamous papilloma with hyperpigmentation in the skin graft of the neovagina in Rokitansky syndrome: literature review of benign and malignant lesions of the neovagina.
It is rare for a benign or malignant neoplasm to develop in a neovagina. This is the first report of a squamous papilloma with hyperpigmentation which developed in the neovagina 12 years after a McIndoe procedure was done with a split-thickness skin graft from the patient's buttock. The patient had congenital absence of the vagina and uterus (Rokitansky syndrome, Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome, MRKH syndrome). It presented as post-coital blood spotting for 3 months. As a routine, all cases of vaginal construction regardless of the reason for the surgery or the lining of the neovagina should have a continuous annual examination and careful inspection of the entire vagina. Biopsy of any unusual finding should be done. Despite the dark color of the vaginal lesion, bleeding and rapid appearance our patient had a benign tumor. Radiation therapy to the neovagina and prolonged treatment with podophyllin and cauterization should be avoided.

17920404
Stage I ovarian carcinoma: different clinical pathologic patterns.
To analyze clinicopathologic patterns of early ovarian carcinoma. Retrospective chart and histopathology review. Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York and the Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont Ferrand, France. Seventy-six consecutive cases of Fédération Internationale de Gynécologie et d'Obstétrique stage I ovarian carcinoma. Surgical staging. Symptomatology, pathology, and histology analysis. Twenty-two cases (29%) were serous papillary carcinomas and 54 were nonserous carcinomas (71%) (40 endometrioid, 10 clear cell, and 4 mixed endometrioid and clear cell carcinomas). Ninety-eight percent of ovarian endometriosis, 95% of endometrial carcinomas, and 83% of endometrial polyps and hyperplasias were associated with nonserous carcinomas. Most patients with serous papillary carcinoma presented with asymptomatic pelvic masses; patients with nonserous carcinomas presented with pelvic pain or abnormal vaginal bleeding with or without pelvic mass. Over two thirds of stage I ovarian carcinomas were nonserous, and were diagnosed because of associated symptoms: pelvic pain with endometriosis and/or adnexal masses, or vaginal bleeding from endometrial pathology. Serous papillary carcinomas were often asymptomatic and diagnosed during follow-up evaluations in breast cancer patients. Stage I ovarian carcinoma has different clinical and pathologic patterns than advanced ovarian carcinoma. The risk of ovarian and endometrial malignancy should be taken into consideration during evaluation of patients with endometriosis and breast cancer histories.

17601903
Prepubertal unilateral fibrous hyperplasia of the labium majus: report of eight cases and review of the literature.
To report and propose a consensus term for eight cases of a newly recognized, asymptomatic, rapidly growing unilateral labium majus mass without palpable borders in prepubertal girls, appearing to be temporally associated with the physiologic increase of adrenal hormones. Histologic examination, special stains, and immunohistochemistry were performed on all cases. In our personal cases, electron microscopy and chromosomal analysis were also performed, together with pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), inguinal exploration, vaginoscopy with biopsies, and adrenal hormone levels. Of the eight cases, seven were Ashkenazi Jewish girls from the same area in New York City. The unilateral masses were asymptomatic, soft, without palpable borders. The overlying skin had a slightly tan peau d'orange surface. The masses could not be completely excised because they extended into the contiguous pelvic floor. Histologically, the masses were composed of bland hypocellular fibrous tissue extending into the deep subcutaneous tissue. The masses blended into the surrounding tissue and adjacent pelvic floor as shown by MRI preoperatively and postoperatively. Residual tissue did not progress after incomplete resection. These fibrous lesions develop in months at the time of physiologic increase in adrenal hormone secretion just before puberty and subsequently appear to stop growing. The surgeon should not attempt a complete removal but simply excise sufficient tissue for a reasonable cosmetic result and to confirm the diagnosis. The lesions reflect fibroblastic hyperplasia, which is possibly hormone-driven. The ethnic and geographic clustering of cases raises consideration of environmental exposures or genetic predisposition.

