21498720
No circulating cytomegalovirus in five patients with glioblastoma multiforme.
Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common and most aggressive type of primary brain tumor, accounting for 52% of all primary brain tumor cases and 20% of all intracranial tumors. Recently, evidence for a viral cause has been postulated, possibly SV40 or more likely cytomegalovirus (CMV). One report indicated that 80% of patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme have detectable cytomegalovirus DNA in their peripheral blood, while sero-positive normal donors and other surgical patients did not exhibit detectable virus. In the current study, we examined peripheral blood of 5 patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme. Peripheral blood was collected in anticoagulated tubes from five patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme referred for radiation therapy. We used standard methods for detecting CMV by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and peripheral blood culture. None of our patients had circulating CMV. There are four subtypes of glioblastoma. We hypothesize that circulating CMV might be limited to some, but not all of these subtypes, and that our failure to detect CMV might be attributed to the fact that none of these patients had the appropriate subtype or subtypes.

18719364
Gene delivery by embryonic stem cells for malignant glioma therapy: hype or hope?
Patients with glioblastomas have a poor prognosis and new treatments paradigms are needed. The futility of current treatments lies in part on the difficulty of delivering therapeutic agents to the tumor. In this article, we review and discuss current knowledge of adjuvant treatment for glioblastomas including gene therapy and viral vectors. Additionally, this review provides an update on recent progress, which has focused on improving delivery methods including the development of new approaches such as stem cells. Particular emphasis is given to laboratory data showing the use of embryonic stem cells used as vectors to deliver pro-apoptotic genes to glioblastoma cells.

18676359
In vivo gene delivery by embryonic-stem-cell-derived astrocytes for malignant gliomas.
The treatment of malignant gliomas with current therapies remains a challenge in neurooncology. Our recent work showed that embryonic stem cell (ESC)-derived astrocytes conditionally expressing genes can be used to induce apoptosis in malignant glioma cells in vitro. The tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) gene has been shown to induce apoptosis in a variety of tumor cells, including gliomas. The aim of this study was to assess the proapoptotic effects of transgenic TRAIL delivered by ESC-derived astrocytes on malignant gliomas in vivo. Malignant glioma A172 cells were used to induce heterotopic xenografts in nude mice. ESC-derived astrocytes conditionally expressing TRAIL were injected into the xenografts. TRAIL expression was documented in the malignant glioma xenografts by reverse transcription PCR and immunohistochemistry after external gene induction. A significant reduction in tumor volume occurred 48 h after a single injection (14%) and double injections (31%) in the experimental groups. Terminal dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) revealed abundant apoptotic tumor cells in the experimental groups. Seven days after injection, the tumor had undergone severe necrosis, with only scattered residual tumor cells at the periphery. Death receptor DR4 expression increased significantly in the experimental groups compared with controls. Our data suggest that ESC-derived astrocytes conditionally expressing TRAIL should be considered as vectors to deliver gene therapy for malignant gliomas.

17432717
Enhanced proapoptotic effects of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand on temozolomide-resistant glioma cells.
Death receptor targeting is an attractive approach in experimental treatment for tumors such as malignant gliomas, which are resistant to radiation and chemotherapy. Among the family of cytokines referred to as death li gands, tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) has attracted clinical interest. The aim of this study was to assess whether TRAIL can be used as an adjuvant to temozolomide (TMZ) for apoptosis induction in malignant glioma cell lines. Six human malignant glioma cell lines (A172, U87, U251, T98, U343, and U373) were exposed to human (h)TRAIL, TMZ, or an hTRAIL/TMZ combined treatment. Cell viability was assayed using 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazole-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide and phase-contrast microscopy. Cell apoptosis was detected using the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick-end labeling technique and quantified using flow cytometric analysis. The apoptosis signaling cascade was studied with Western blotting. The additive effects of hTRAIL and TMZ resulted in a significant decrease in cell viability and an increased apoptotic rate. Expression of the death receptors DR5 and DR4 in two cell lines (A172 and U251) upregulated significantly when they were used in combination hTRAIL/TMZ treatment (p < 0.05 compared with baseline control), leading to activation of caspase-8 and caspase-3 (p < 0.05 compared with baseline control) and confirming an extrinsic apoptotic pathway. A cell intrinsic pathway through mitochondrial cytochrome c was not activated. Based on this work, one may infer that hTRAIL should be considered as an adjuvant treatment for TMZ-resistant human malignant gliomas.

20523363
Embryonic stem cell (ESC)-mediated transgene delivery induces growth suppression, apoptosis and radiosensitization, and overcomes temozolomide resistance in malignant gliomas.
High-grade gliomas are among the most lethal of all cancers. Despite considerable advances in multimodality treatment, including surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the overall prognosis for patients with this disease remains dismal. Currently available treatments necessitate the development of more effective tumor-selective therapies. The use of gene therapy for malignant gliomas is promising, as it allows in situ delivery and selectively targets brain tumor cells while sparing the adjacent normal brain tissue. Viral vectors that deliver proapoptotic genes to malignant glioma cells have been investigated. Although tangible results on patients' survival remain to be further documented, significant advances in therapeutic gene transfer strategies have been made. Recently, cell-based gene delivery has been sought as an alternative method. In this paper, we report the proapoptotic effects of embryonic stem cell (ESC)-mediated mda-7/IL-24 delivery to malignant glioma cell lines. Our data show that these are similar to those observed using a viral vector. In addition, acknowledging the heterogeneity of malignant glioma cells and their signaling pathways, we assessed the effects of conventional treatment for high-grade gliomas, ionizing radiation and temozolomide, when combined with ESC-mediated transgene delivery. This combination resulted in synergistic effects on tumor cell death. The mechanisms involved in this beneficial effect included activation of both apoptosis and autophagy. Our in vitro data support the concept that ESC-mediated gene delivery might offer therapeutic advantages over standard approaches to malignant gliomas. Our results corroborate the theory that combined treatments exploiting different signaling pathways are needed to succeed in the treatment of malignant gliomas.

19199004
Tonsillary carcinoma after temozolomide treatment for glioblastoma multiforme: treatment-related or dual-pathology?
Glioblastoma multiforme is a primary malignant brain tumor with a prognosis of typically less than 2 years. Standard treatment paradigms include surgery, radiation therapy and temozolomide. Little data exists for temozolomide recommendations after the first 6 months. We present a case of a patient with glioblastoma multiforme treated with surgery, radiation and chronic temozolomide for 6 years. He continues to survive glioblastoma-recurrence-free, but developed tonsillary carcinoma. This case raises the question of whether this secondary solid-organ malignancy is treatment-related or dual pathology.

