21455042
Hepatitis C treatment completion in individuals with psychiatric comorbidity and depression.
Hepatitis C virus is a common bloodborne pathogen. Patient, provider, and health care system factors combine to constrain access to treatment and have led to low rates of treatment initiation and continuation among medically eligible individuals. Behavioral health comorbidity, which is common in the patient population, has historically been an exclusion criterion and is one such barrier to care. We implemented an interdisciplinary nurse-managed primary care-based hepatitis C evaluation and treatment program to address behavioral health needs concurrently in an effort to increase treatment initiation and continuation rates among comorbid individuals. We found no association between having a psychiatric or substance use history and treatment discontinuation in our patient cohort. Likewise, there was no association in our cohort between becoming depressed or anxious while undergoing treatment and treatment discontinuation. The results of our study concur with others that have shown that addressing behavioral health comorbidities concurrently with hepatitis C evaluation and treatment may improve treatment continuation rates among comorbid patients, thereby helping to remove barriers to treatment of chronic hepatitis C.

18852403
Validation of a hepatitis C screening tool in primary care.
Although hepatitis C virus (HCV) has an estimated national prevalence of 1.8%, testing rates are lower than those recommended by guidelines, particularly in primary care. A critical step is the ability to identify patients at increased risk who should be screened. We sought to prospectively derive and validate a clinical predication tool to assist primary care providers in identifying patients who should be tested for HCV antibodies. A total of 1000 randomly selected patients attending an inner-city primary care clinic filled out a 27-item questionnaire assessing 5 HCV risk factor domains: work, medical, exposure, personal care, and social history. Afterward, the patients underwent HCV antibody testing. Multivariable logistic regression analysis was performed to identify risk factors associated with HCV antibodies. There was an 8.3% (95% confidence interval, 6.7%-10.2%) prevalence of HCV antibodies. The patients who were HCV antibody positive were more likely to be male, older, and insured by Medicaid (P < or = .02). Those who had risk factors within the medical, exposure, and social history domains were more likely to be HCV antibody positive. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for the screening tool based on these 3 domains was 0.77. With an increasing number of positive domains, there was a higher likelihood of HCV antibody positivity. Only 2% of patients with 0 risk factors had HCV antibodies. A prediction tool can be used to accurately identify patients at high risk of HCV who may benefit from serologic screening. Future studies should assess whether wider use of this tool may lead to improved outcomes.

17397690
Medical/psychiatric comanagement by nurse practitioners in chronic hepatitis C treatment: a case study.
This article aims to increase access to care for patients with chronic hepatitis C who have medical and psychiatric comorbidities by reporting on a clinical advanced practice nursing comanagement model for evaluation, treatment, and follow-up care.

20950406
HIV and HCV health beliefs in an inner-city community.
Summary.? Chronic infection with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) is more prevalent than human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, but more public health resources are allocated to HIV than to HCV. Given shared risk factors and epidemiology, we compared accuracy of health beliefs about HIV and HCV in an at-risk community. Between 2002 and 2003, we surveyed a random patient sample at a primary care clinic in New York. The survey was organized as domains of Common Sense Model of Self-Regulation: causes ('sharing needles'), timeline/consequences ('remains in body for life', 'causes cancer') and controllability ('I can avoid this illness', 'medications may cure this illness'). We compared differences in accuracy of beliefs about HIV and HCV and used multivariable linear regression to identify factors associated with relative accuracy of beliefs. One hundred and twenty-two subjects completed the survey (response rate 42%). Mean overall health belief accuracy was 12/15 questions (80%) for HIV vs 9/15 (60%) for HCV (P?<?0.001). Belief accuracy was significantly different across all domains. Within the causes domain, 60% accurately believed sharing needles a risk factor for HCV compared to 92% for HIV (P?<?0.001). Within the timeline/consequences domain, 42% accurately believed HCV results in lifelong infection compared to 89% for HIV (P?<?0.001). Within the controllability domain, 25% accurately believed that there is a potential cure for HCV. Multivariable linear regression revealed female gender as significantly associated with greater health belief accuracy for HIV. Thus, study participants had significantly less accurate health beliefs about HCV than about HIV. Targeting inaccuracies might improve public health interventions to foster healthier behaviours and better hepatitis C outcomes.

