20570968
Large inverted repeats within Xp11.2 are present at the breakpoints of isodicentric X chromosomes in Turner syndrome.
Turner syndrome (TS) results from whole or partial monosomy X and is mediated by haploinsufficiency of genes that normally escape X-inactivation. Although a 45,X karyotype is observed in half of all TS cases, the most frequent variant TS karyotype includes the isodicentric X chromosome alone [46,X,idic(X)(p11)] or as a mosaic [46,X,idic(X)(p11)/45,X]. Given the mechanism of idic(X)(p11) rearrangement is poorly understood and breakpoint sequence information is unknown, this study sought to investigate the molecular mechanism of idic(X)(p11) formation by determining their precise breakpoint intervals. Karyotype analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping of eight idic(X)(p11) cell lines and three unbalanced Xp11.2 translocation lines identified the majority of breakpoints within a 5 Mb region, from approximately 53 to 58 Mb, in Xp11.1-p11.22, clustering into four regions. To further refine the breakpoints, a high-resolution oligonucleotide microarray (average of approximately 350 bp) was designed and array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) was performed on all 11 idic(X)(p11) and Xp11.2 translocation lines. aCGH analyses identified all breakpoint regions, including an idic(X)(p11) line with two potential breakpoints, one breakpoint shared between two idic(X)(p11) lines and two Xp translocations that shared breakpoints with idic(X)(p11) lines. Four of the breakpoint regions included large inverted repeats composed of repetitive gene clusters and segmental duplications, which corresponded to regions of copy-number variation. These data indicate that the rearrangement sites on Xp11.2 that lead to isodicentric chromosome formation and translocations are probably not random and suggest that the complex repetitive architecture of this region predisposes it to rearrangements, some of which are recurrent.

20210998
A paucity of heterochromatin at functional human neocentromeres.
Centromeres are responsible for the proper segregation of replicated chromatids during cell division. Neocentromeres are fully functional ectopic human centromeres that form on low-copy DNA sequences and permit analysis of centromere structure in relation to the underlying DNA sequence. Such structural analysis is not possible at endogenous centromeres because of the large amounts of repetitive alpha satellite DNA present. High-resolution chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) on CHIP (microarray) analysis of three independent neocentromeres from chromosome 13q revealed that each neocentromere contained approximately 100 kb of centromere protein (CENP)-A in a two-domain organization. Additional CENP-A domains were observed in the vicinity of neocentromeres, coinciding with CpG islands at the 5' end of genes. Analysis of histone H3 dimethylated at lysine 4 (H3K4me2) revealed small domains at each neocentromere. However, these domains of H3K4me2 were also found in the equivalent non-neocentric chromosomes. A surprisingly minimal (approximately 15 kb) heterochromatin domain was observed at one of the neocentromeres, which formed in an unusual transposon-free region distal to the CENP-A domains. Another neocentromere showed a distinct absence of nearby significant domains of heterochromatin. A subtle defect in centromere cohesion detected at these neocentromeres may be due to the paucity of heterochromatin domains. This high-resolution mapping suggests that H3K4me2 does not seem sufficiently abundant to play a structural role at neocentromeres, as proposed for endogenous centromeres. Large domains of heterochromatin also do not appear necessary for centromere function. Thus, this study provides important insight into the structural requirements of human centromere function.

18992157
Analysis of the largest tandemly repeated DNA families in the human genome.
Tandemly Repeated DNA represents a large portion of the human genome, and accounts for a significant amount of copy number variation. Here we present a genome wide analysis of the largest tandem repeats found in the human genome sequence. Using Tandem Repeats Finder (TRF), tandem repeat arrays greater than 10 kb in total size were identified, and classified into simple sequence e.g. GAATG, classical satellites e.g. alpha satellite DNA, and locus specific VNTR arrays. Analysis of these large sequenced regions revealed that several "simple sequence" arrays actually showed complex domain and/or higher order repeat organization. Using additional methods, we further identified a total of 96 additional arrays with tandem repeat units greater than 2 kb (the detection limit of TRF), 53 of which contained genes or repeated exons. The overall size of an array of tandem 12 kb repeats which spanned a gap on chromosome 8 was found to be 600 kb to 1.7 Mbp in size, representing one of the largest non-centromeric arrays characterized. Several novel megasatellite tandem DNA families were observed that are characterized by repeating patterns of interspersed transposable elements that have expanded presumably by unequal crossing over. One of these families is found on 11 different chromosomes in >25 arrays, and represents one of the largest most widespread megasatellite DNA families. This study represents the most comprehensive genome wide analysis of large tandem repeats in the human genome, and will serve as an important resource towards understanding the organization and copy number variation of these complex DNA families.

18769724
Analysis of transposon interruptions suggests selection for L1 elements on the X chromosome.
It has been hypothesised that the massive accumulation of L1 transposable elements on the X chromosome is due to their function in X inactivation, and that the accumulation of Alu elements near genes is adaptive. We tested the possible selective advantage of these two transposable element (TE) families with a novel method, interruption analysis. In mammalian genomes, a large number of TEs interrupt other TEs due to the high overall abundance and age of repeats, and these interruptions can be used to test whether TEs are selectively neutral. Interruptions of TEs, which are beneficial for the host, are expected to be deleterious and underrepresented compared with neutral ones. We found that L1 elements in the regions of the X chromosome that contain the majority of the inactivated genes are significantly less frequently interrupted than on the autosomes, while L1s near genes that escape inactivation are interrupted with higher frequency, supporting the hypothesis that L1s on the X chromosome play a role in its inactivation. In addition, we show that TEs are less frequently interrupted in introns than in intergenic regions, probably due to selection against the expansion of introns, but the insertion pattern of Alus is comparable to other repeats.

17988739
Recombineering linear DNA that replicate stably in E. coli.
The advent of recombineering technology in Escherichia coli has revolutionized the way recombinant DNA molecules are constructed. We present a novel application of recombineering to linearize DNA by capping their ends with individual telomeres derived from bacteriophage N15, which exists as a linear prophage in E. coli. The N15 telomerase occupancy site was recombined into circular DNA and resolved into individual telomeres by the phage N15 protelomerase enzyme. We demonstrate this technique by assembling linear BACs that replicate stably in their host strain E. coli DH10B. Correct linearization of the BACs was confirmed by restriction mapping using pulsed field gel electrophoresis. The linear BAC DNA can be easily purified using standard plasmid isolation methods and resist degradation from RecBCD nuclease in vitro and in vivo owing to the presence of telomeres. Transfection of a linear 100 kb BAC containing the human beta-globin gene cluster into HT1080 cells produced accurately spliced transcripts, demonstrating that the linear DNA will be useful for subsequent functional studies. This novel recombineering technique may be particularly useful for building large linear constructs for assembling artificial chromosomes with telomeres, and may provide a unique means to clone and study large linear viral genomes that contain hairpin ends.

17651496
Co-localization of CENP-C and CENP-H to discontinuous domains of CENP-A chromatin at human neocentromeres.
Mammalian centromere formation is dependent on chromatin that contains centromere protein (CENP)-A, which is the centromere-specific histone H3 variant. Human neocentromeres have acquired CENP-A chromatin epigenetically in ectopic chromosomal locations on low-copy complex DNA. Neocentromeres permit detailed investigation of centromeric chromatin organization that is not possible in the highly repetitive alpha satellite DNA present at endogenous centromeres. We have examined the distribution of CENP-A, as well as two additional centromeric chromatin-associated proteins (CENP-C and CENP-H), across neocentromeric DNA using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) on CHIP assays on custom genomic microarrays at three different resolutions. Analysis of two neocentromeres using a contiguous bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) microarray spanning bands 13q31.3 to 13q33.1 shows that both CENP-C and CENP-H co-localize to the CENP-A chromatin domain. Using a higher resolution polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplicon microarray spanning the neocentromere, we find that the CENP-A chromatin is discontinuous, consisting of a major domain of about 87.8 kilobases (kb) and a minor domain of about 13.2 kb, separated by an approximately 158 kb region devoid of CENPs. Both CENP-A domains exhibit co-localization of CENP-C and CENP-H, defining a distinct inner kinetochore chromatin structure that is consistent with higher order chromatin looping models at centromeres. The PCR microarray data suggested varying density of CENP-A nucleosomes across the major domain, which was confirmed using a higher resolution oligo-based microarray. Centromeric chromatin consists of several CENP-A subdomains with highly discontinuous CENP-A chromatin at both the level of individual nucleosomes and at higher order chromatin levels, raising questions regarding the overall structure of centromeric chromatin.

17630829
Evolutionary history of mammalian transposons determined by genome-wide defragmentation.
The constant bombardment of mammalian genomes by transposable elements (TEs) has resulted in TEs comprising at least 45% of the human genome. Because of their great age and abundance, TEs are important in comparative phylogenomics. However, estimates of TE age were previously based on divergence from derived consensus sequences or phylogenetic analysis, which can be unreliable, especially for older more diverged elements. Therefore, a novel genome-wide analysis of TE organization and fragmentation was performed to estimate TE age independently of sequence composition and divergence or the assumption of a constant molecular clock. Analysis of TEs in the human genome revealed approximately 600,000 examples where TEs have transposed into and fragmented other TEs, covering >40% of all TEs or approximately 542 Mbp of genomic sequence. The relative age of these TEs over evolutionary time is implicit in their organization, because newer TEs have necessarily transposed into older TEs that were already present. A matrix of the number of times that each TE has transposed into every other TE was constructed, and a novel objective function was developed that derived the chronological order and relative ages of human TEs spanning >100 million years. This method has been used to infer the relative ages across all four major TE classes, including the oldest, most diverged elements. Analysis of DNA transposons over the history of the human genome has revealed the early activity of some MER2 transposons, and the relatively recent activity of MER1 transposons during primate lineages. The TEs from six additional mammalian genomes were defragmented and analyzed. Pairwise comparison of the independent chronological orders of TEs in these mammalian genomes revealed species phylogeny, the fact that transposons shared between genomes are older than species-specific transposons, and a subset of TEs that were potentially active during periods of speciation.

