20307397
An analysis of the HumaPen Luxura HD pen: what is the role of 0.5-unit insulin dosing?
The HumaPen Luxura HD is an insulin pen device that has the ability to deliver insulin in half-unit increments. This study demonstrates the precision of this pen device using a computer-controlled dose accuracy glide force system. Although one other half-unit pen device is currently on the market, we are not aware of any studies using a similar methodology to verify its precision and accuracy. Clinical experience in treating a select group of adults with diabetes demonstrates the need for such a device. Although there are no outcome studies, this device should help to improve glycemic control and reduce hypoglycemia in such patients. We believe a half-unit insulin pen device is beneficial to more than just the pediatric population, and therefore, this device represents an improvement in present technology.

19421968
Targeting the incretin system in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
The incretins have emerged as key targets in the modern treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Understanding the physiology of the incretins is essential to the physician's ability to appropriately use emerging pharmacotherapies that target this system. This review describes incretin physiology and discusses recent trials of drugs that modulate this system in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. A MEDLINE search using the terms "GLP-1" (ie, glucagon-like peptide 1), "incretins," "exenatide," and "DPP-IV inhibitors" (ie, dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitors) was performed, and pertinent articles from the past 10 years were reviewed. Articles describing incretin physiology and clinical trials with exenatide and dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitors were identified and discussed. As the articles show, new medications manipulating the incretin system are an important part of treating type 2 diabetes. The cost of these drugs and their potential side effects in comparison with existing agents must be considered when they are being selected as part of a treatment regimen. However, the evidence to date offers much promise and enthusiasm.

18159646
The benefits of tight glycemic control in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) is associated with significantly increased risk of microvascular and macrovascular disease. Although most studies have focused on the microvascular complications of diabetes (eg, nephropathy, neuropathy, retinopathy), most patients with type 2 DM die from causes that are related to macrovascular disease (eg, myocardial infarction). Poor glycemic control increases the risk of future cardiovascular events, and prospective studies of patients with type 1 and type 2 DM have demonstrated that the incidence of vascular complications is reduced by lifestyle modifications or medications that reduce blood glucose concentrations.

