21086978
Tamoxifen metabolite isomer separation and quantification by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.
Tamoxifen (Tam), the antiestrogen used to treat estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer is a pro-drug that is converted to its major active metabolites, endoxifen and 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen (4-OH-Tam) by various biotransformation enzymes of which cytochrome P450-2D6 (CYP2D6) is key. The usual Tam dose is 20 mg daily; however, the plasma active metabolite concentrations vary due to common genetic variants encoding the biotransformation enzymes and environmental factors (e.g., concomitant drugs) that inhibit these enzymes. Effective treatment depends on adequate Tam conversion to its active isomers. To monitor metabolite plasma levels, a novel liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method was developed to separate and quantitate Tam, N-desmethyl-tamoxifen (ND-Tam), and tamoxifen-N-oxide (Tam-N-oxide), and the E, Z, and Z' isomers of endoxifen and 4-OH-Tam. Known standards were used to identify each metabolite/isomer. Quantitation of these metabolites in plasma was linear from 0.6 to 2000 nM. Intra- and inter-assay reproducibilities were 0.2-8.4% and 0.6-6.3%, respectively. Accuracy determined by spike experiments with known standards was 86-103%. Endoxifen, 4-OH-Tam, and their isomers were stable in fresh frozen plasma for ?6 months. This method provides the first sensitive, specific, accurate, and reproducible quantitation of Tam and its metabolite isomers for monitoring Tam-treated breast cancer patients.

20131991
Highlights of the Chemotherapy Foundation Symposium XXVII: therapeutic options for breast cancer.
The XXVII Annual Chemotherapy Foundation Symposium sponsored by The Mount Sinai School of Medicine is one of the leading forums for communication of important discoveries and new developments in cancer therapeutics. Here, we summarize and review the emerging advances in the treatment of breast cancer, which includes therapeutics in HER signaling, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibition, PI3K inhibitors and novel epithilones.

20856780
Effect of pretreatment distress on daily fatigue after chemotherapy for breast cancer.
Fatigue is one of the most frequently reported and adverse effects of cancer chemotherapy. The present study tested the hypothesis that women's levels of emotional distress at the time of their initial outpatient chemotherapy treatment would predict the severity of their postinfusion fatigue. Sixty stage I (32.6%) and II (67.4%) patients with breast cancer (mean age, 44.5 years) who were receiving standard outpatient chemotherapy participated. The independent variable, emotional distress, was assessed for "last night," "this morning," and "right now" with a visual analog scale (0 to 100). The dependent variable, post-treatment fatigue (PTF), was assessed (0 to 100) over each of the subsequent 6 days using end-of-day diaries, which also included assessments of distress and nausea (0 to 100). For the statistical analyses, post-treatment fatigue was divided into three phases with means calculated for days 1 through 2 (phase 1), 3 to 4 (phase 2), and 5 to 6 (phase 3). Consistent with the study hypothesis, patients' pretreatment distress level in the clinic was a significant (P < .001) predictor of PTF. There was also a significant (P < .025) interaction with phase, with distress becoming a predictor of PTF after phase 1. Multivariate analysis indicated that prior levels of distress were not independent predictors of PTF. This study is the first to demonstrate time-specific effects of pretreatment distress on PTF. Possible mechanisms of these effects now warrant investigation, as do possible benefits of brief interventions to reduce patient distress immediately before treatment.

