21056818
Anesthesia for patients undergoing orthopedic oncologic surgeries.
When planning an anesthetic for patients undergoing orthopedic oncologic surgeries, numerous factors must be considered. Preoperative evaluation may elucidate significant co-morbidities or side effects secondary to chemotherapy or radiation, which can affect anesthetic choices. Procedures vary in length and complexity and pose challenges in both positioning and in planning to minimize blood loss. Many anesthetic techniques are available to provide both intraoperative anesthesia and postoperative analgesia, while the type of thromboprophylaxis and analgesic adjuvants that will be administered needs to be defined. This review focuses on approaches to use when caring for patients undergoing orthopedic oncologic procedures.

20607421
Osteosarcoma of the proximal tibia: limb-sparing resection and reconstruction with a modular segmental proximal tibia tumor prosthesis.
A limb-sparing resection was performed for osteosarcoma of the proximal tibia in a young patient. A special modular segmental proximal tibial endoprosthesis that includes a hinged total knee component was used for reconstruction. A medial gastrocnemius rotational flap was utilized to reconstruct the extensor mechanism of the knee. The muscle flap aids in covering the prosthesis and helps to protect against infection. Limb-sparing resection for tumors arising from the proximal tibia, and reconstruction with a modular segmental proximal tibia tumor prosthesis and gastrocnemius muscle flap, is a safe and reliable method for treating tumors involving this area.

20345366
Osteoblastoma of the sternum--case report and review of the literature.
Osteoblastoma is an extremely rare entity that represents less than 1% of all bone tumors, and affects twice as many males as females with peak incidence between 15 and 20 years. Osteoblastomas commonly affect axial bones, long bones, bones of the foot and hand, and less commonly the pelvis, scapula, ribs, and clavicle. Osteoblastoma does not have a classic presentation, but can vary with the location and size of the tumor. The main complaint is often progressive pain localized at the tumor site. Osteoblastoma is a benign tumor with an aggressive behavior. The treatment is wide surgical resection, otherwise it continues to enlarge and destroy the bone and surrounding structures. We report a 32-year-old male with an osteoblastoma of this sternum who was treated with an en-bloc resection and reconstruction with Marlex((R)) and a methylmethacrylate plate.

19800298
Synovial sarcoma of the thoracic spine.
Synovial sarcoma is an uncommon malignant neoplasm occurring chiefly in young adults. It often presents as a solid well-circumscribed soft-tissue mass in the extremities of young adults. Despite its proximity to joints, it has been well established that the tumor cells do not display features of synovial differentiation but instead appear to have a primitive epithelial phenotype. There is no report of a lower thoracic paravertebral synovial sarcoma in an adult male. To describe our management in a patient with a synovial sarcoma of the thoracic spine and to review previously published cases. Case report. A 60-year-old man presented with a 5-month history of right upper quadrant abdominal pain radiating to his back in a band-like fashion; shortness of breath on exertion; and increasing pain when standing, sitting, or walking. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a large right-sided paraspinal mass sitting on the eighth and ninth ribs, pressing on the T9 vertebrae and abutting the T7 and T8 vertebral level exhibiting "Triple Intensity." Plain films demonstrated a right-sided paraspinal mass extending from the T7-T8 level to T10. Bone scintigraphy showed increased uptake on the right thoracic spine at T7-T8 to T10. Computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed a right paraspinal mass with lytic changes in the T9 vertebral bodies. A right-sided thoracotomy was performed, and the patient underwent subsequent radiation therapy. Absence of the tumor was shown by an MRI scan after the operation. Complete resolution of the patient's complaints was achieved. The diagnosis is supported by plain radiographs, bone scintigraphy, magnetic resonance and CT imaging studies, and histologic and immunohistochemical evidence. Synovial sarcomas are rarely present in the paravertebral region of the thoracic spine. A careful radiographic study of the tumor permitted early preliminary diagnosis, confirmed upon histopathologic analysis. Despite lytic changes, removal of a periosteal layer permitted sparing of the vertebral bodies.

19504159
Limb-sparing resection of the scapula and reconstruction with a constrained total scapula prosthesis: a case of multicentric epithelioid hemangioendothelioma involving the scapula and surrounding soft tissues.
The scapula is a relatively uncommon site for primary bone sarcomas. Tumors arising from the scapula are often initially contained by the rotator cuff muscles that protect pertinent adjacent muscles as well as the brachial plexus and axillary blood vessels. Limb-sparing resection of a scapula sarcoma is technically complex and requires meticulous dissection and mobilization of the brachial plexus and axillary blood vessels. Several muscles must be capable of being preserved in order to reconstruct the scapula and shoulder girdle with a special customized total scapula replacement. The goal of reconstruction is to restore a stable shoulder girdle to preserve elbow and hand function. In the procedure demonstrated in this video, limb-sparing scapula resection and reconstruction was performed for a patient with a multicentric epithelioid hemangioendothelioma. The steps of the procedure are detailed along with accommodations made for the multicentric nature of the tumor. To allow for optimal postoperative function and maximum soft tissue coverage, a small constrained scapular prosthesis was utilized. The glenohumeral ligaments were reconstructed with a Gore-Tex aortic graft. Multiple muscle rotation flaps were performed to cover and protect the prosthesis as well as restore shoulder girdle stability. Limb-sparing surgery for scapula sarcomas and anatomic reconstruction with a constrained total scapula prosthesis is a reliable and safe technique for resecting selected sarcomas and reconstructing the shoulder girdle. A stable shoulder girdle can be restored for optimal hand and elbow function. A total scapula prosthetic reconstruction is the authors' procedure of choice when the deltoid, trapezius, rhomboid, latissimus, and serratus anterior muscles are capable of being preserved. The functional outcome is superior to a forequarter amputation and a flail (nonreconstructed) shoulder in which the extremity is left hanging by soft tissues (nonanatomic method).

