17653845
Distress with medication side effects among persons with severe mental illness.
We examined prevalence and perceived distress resulting from self-reported side effects (SEs) attributed to psychotropic medications among individuals with severe mental illness participating in a study of consumer-operated services. We examined gender and racial differences using logistic regression, conducted factor analyses of SEs, and examined correlations between distress and self-reported symptoms. Over 90% reported at least one SE, and nearly two-thirds reported a high level of distress with at least one SE. The most distressing SEs reported were embarrassment from weight gain, weight gain, dry mouth, and sedation. The likelihood of distress by particular SEs varied by gender and race.

17464558
What's in a name? Terms preferred by service recipients.
In a large (n = 1,827) multi-site study examining effectiveness of consumer operated service programs as an adjunct to traditional mental health services, we examined individuals' preferred term describing their status as service recipients, and we applied logistic regression to examine whether preference varied by gender, race or diagnosis. Preferred terms were client (39%), patient (22%), consumer (16%), survivor (11%), other (11%) and ex-patient (1%), varying by site. Controlling for site, preferences did not vary by gender, race, or diagnosis. The lack of consensus suggests clinicians, researchers, program administrators, and policymakers should be sensitive to individuals' preferences.

17287387
Relationship between diabetes and mortality among persons with co-occurring psychotic and substance use disorders.
Individuals with diabetes and individuals with serious mental illness are more likely than the general population to die prematurely. The study examined the impact of diabetes on mortality among 197 individuals with co-occurring psychotic and substance use disorders who participated in a randomized controlled study of integrated mental health and substance abuse treatment. The authors examined Medicaid claims for evidence of diabetes and applied survival analyses to examine whether time from study entry until death was different for individuals with and without evidence of diabetes. Of individuals with co-occurring psychotic and substance use disorders, 21% had evidence of diabetes. In a 12-year period, 41% of those with evidence of diabetes died compared with 10% of those without evidence of diabetes. Interventions targeted for diabetes prevention and diabetes management are critical for persons with serious mental illness, particularly among those who also abuse substances.

