21557611
Multifunctional Nanoemulsion Platform for Imaging Guided Therapy Evaluated in Experimental Cancer.
Nanoparticle applications in medicine have seen a tremendous growth in the past decade. In addition to their drug targeting application and their ability to improve bioavailability of drugs, nanoparticles can be designed to allow their detection with a variety of imaging methodologies. In the current study, we developed a multimodal nanoparticle platform to enable imaging guided therapy, which was evaluated in a colon cancer mouse model. This "theranostic" platform is based on oil-in-water nanoemulsions and carries iron oxide nanocrystals for MRI, the fluorescent dye Cy7 for NIRF imaging, and the hydrophobic glucocorticoid prednisolone acetate valerate (PAV) for therapeutic purposes. Angiogenesis-targeted nanoemulsions functionalized with ?v?(3)-specific RGD peptides were evaluated, as well. When subcutaneous tumors were palpable, the nanoemulsions were administered at a dose of 30 mg of FeO/kg and 10 mg of PAV/kg. MRI and NIRF imaging showed significant nanoparticle accumulation in the tumors, while tumor growth profiles revealed a potent inhibitory effect in all of the PAV nanoemulsion-treated animals as compared to the ones treated with control nanoemulsions, the free drug, or saline. This study demonstrated that our nanoemulsions, when loaded with PAV, iron oxide nanocrystals, and Cy7, represent a flexible and unique theranostic nanoparticle platform that can be applied for imaging guided therapy of cancer.

21106318
Targeted iron oxide particles for in vivo magnetic resonance detection of atherosclerotic lesions with antibodies directed to oxidation-specific epitopes.
The aim of this study was to determine whether iron oxide particles targeted to oxidation-specific epitopes image atherosclerotic lesions. Oxidized low-density lipoprotein plays a major role in atherosclerotic plaque progression and destabilization. Prior studies indicate that gadolinium micelles labeled with oxidation-specific antibodies allow for in vivo detection of vulnerable plaques with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). However, issues related to biotransformation/retention of gadolinium might limit clinical translation. Iron oxides are recognized as safe and effective contrast agents for MRI. Because the efficacy of passively targeted iron particles remains variable, it was hypothesized that iron particles targeted to oxidation-specific epitopes might increase the utility of this platform. Lipid-coated ultra-small superparamagnetic iron particles (LUSPIOs) (<20 nm) and superparamagnetic iron particles (<40 nm) were conjugated with antibodies targeted to either malondialdehyde-lysine or oxidized phospholipid epitopes. All formulations were characterized, and their in vivo efficacy evaluated in apolipoprotein E deficient mice 24 h after bolus administration of a 3.9-mg Fe/kg dose with MRI. In vivo imaging data were correlated with the presence of oxidation-specific epitopes with immunohistochemistry. MRI of atherosclerotic lesions, as manifested by signal loss, was observed after administration of targeted LUSPIOs. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the presence of malondialdehyde-epitopes and iron particles. Limited signal attenuation was observed for untargeted LUSPIOs. Additionally, no significant arterial wall uptake was observed for targeted or untargeted lipid-coated superparamagnetic iron oxide particles, due to their limited ability to penetrate the vessel wall. This study demonstrates that LUSPIOs targeted to oxidation-specific epitopes image atherosclerotic lesions and suggests a clinically translatable platform for the detection of atherosclerotic plaque.

21028895
Multimodal clinical imaging to longitudinally assess a nanomedical anti-inflammatory treatment in experimental atherosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease causing great morbidity and mortality in the Western world. To increase the anti-inflammatory action and decrease adverse effects of glucocorticoids (PLP), a nanomedicinal liposomal formulation of this drug (L-PLP) was developed and intravenously applied at a dose of 15 mg/kg PLP to a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Since atherosclerosis is a systemic disease, emerging imaging modalities for assessing atherosclerotic plaque are being developed. (18)F-Fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography and dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging, methods commonly used in oncology, were applied to longitudinally assess therapeutic efficacy. Significant anti-inflammatory effects were observed as early as 2 days that lasted up to at least 7 days after administration of a single dose of L-PLP. No significant changes were found for the free PLP treated animals. These findings were corroborated by immunohistochemical analysis of macrophage density in the vessel wall. In conclusion, this study evaluates a powerful two-pronged strategy for efficient treatment of atherosclerosis that includes nanomedical therapy of atherosclerotic plaques and the application of noninvasive and clinically approved imaging techniques to monitor delivery and therapeutic responses. Importantly, we demonstrate unprecedented rapid anti-inflammatory effects in atherosclerotic lesions after the nanomedical therapy.

20593373
Longitudinal tracking of human dendritic cells in murine models using magnetic resonance imaging.
Ex vivo generated dendritic cells are currently used to induce therapeutic immunity in solid tumors. Effective immune response requires dendritic cells to home and remain in lymphoid organs to allow for adequate interaction with T lymphocytes. The aim of the current study was to detect and track Feridex labeled human dendritic cells in murine models using magnetic resonance imaging. Human dendritic cells were incubated with Feridex and the effect of labeling on dendritic cells immune function was evaluated. Ex vivo dendritic cell phantoms were used to estimate sensitivity of the magnetic resonance methods and in vivo homing was evaluated after intravenous or subcutaneous injection. R2*-maps of liver, spleen, and draining lymph nodes were obtained and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry or relaxometry methods were used to quantify the Feridex tissue concentrations. Correlations between in vivo R2* values and iron content were then determined. Feridex labeling did not affect dendritic cell maturation or function. Phantom results indicated that it was possible to detect 125 dendritic cells within a given slice. Strong correlation between in vivo R2* values and iron deposition was observed. Importantly, Feridex-labeled dendritic cells were detected in the spleen for up to 2 weeks postintravenous injection. This study suggests that magnetic resonance imaging may be used to longitudinally track Feridex-labeled human dendritic cells for up to 2 weeks after injection.

20578026
Reproducibility of black blood dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging in aortic plaques of atherosclerotic rabbits.
To investigate the short-term reproducibility of black-blood dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in atherosclerotic rabbits to evaluate the potential of this technique to be a reliable readout of plaque progression and/or regression upon therapeutic intervention. Atherosclerotic rabbits were imaged at baseline and 24 hours later with DCE-MRI on a 1.5T MRI system. DCE-MRI images were analyzed by calculating the area under the signal intensity versus time curve (AUC). Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) were used to evaluate interscan, intraobserver, and interobserver reproducibility. In addition, the test-retest coefficient of variation (CoV) was evaluated. Statistical analyses showed excellent interscan, intraobserver, and interobserver agreement. All ICCs were greater than 0.75, P < 0.01 indicating excellent agreement between measurements. Experimental results show good interscan and excellent intra- and interobserver reproducibility, suggesting that DCE-MRI could be used in preclinical settings as a read-out for novel therapeutic interventions for atherosclerosis. This preliminary work encourages investigating the reproducibility of DCE-MRI also in clinical settings, where it could be used for monitoring high-risk patients and in longitudinal clinical drug trials.

20526859
Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of atherosclerotic plaque angiogenesis.
Atherosclerosis is a progressive systemic disease of the large arteries characterized by the formation of plaques in the vessel wall. Despite our knowledge of its pathogenesis, many vulnerable plaques still remain undiagnosed while in their asymptomatic phase and manifest for the first time with dramatic clinical events, such as stroke or myocardial infarction. In recent years, it is becoming clearer that sudden clinical events do not necessarily correlate with the degree of luminal obstruction caused by lesions, but rather with plaque composition. In particular, the degree of plaque inflammation is important in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and is considered a good marker of high-risk/vulnerable plaques. The presence of inflammatory infiltrate and plaque neovascularization are both histological hallmarks of atherosclerotic plaque inflammation. Therefore, plaque angiogenesis represents an attractive target to try and identify asymptomatic high-risk lesions. Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a technique that has been used extensively in the past to study the vascularity of tumors and its changes following therapeutic intervention. Recently, delayed and dynamic contrast enhanced (CE) MRI have been proposed as non-invasive tools to study the extent of plaque neovascularization in animals and patients with atherosclerosis. In this review, we will provide a brief introduction on DCE-MRI acquisition and analysis techniques. We will follow this with a description of contrast enhanced MR methods for the detection and quantification of neovasculature in atherosclerosis, with an emphasis on DCE-MRI. Finally, we will examine the current limitations and challenges faced by DCE-MRI and briefly discuss its future applications in the context of atherosclerosis.

19946750
Comparison of 3D-diffusion-prepared segmented steady-state free precession and 2D fast spin echo imaging of femoral artery atherosclerosis.
Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is a promising modality for the in vivo detection and characterization of atherosclerotic lesions in peripheral arteries. 2D imaging techniques for evaluation of peripheral artery disease (PAD) suffer from poor spatial coverage and have long scan times. The purpose of this study was to compare a diffusion prepared dark blood 3D steady state free precession (3D-DP-SSFP) sequence for evaluating atherosclerotic plaque burden in inguinal and thigh segments of the femoral artery and comparing the results obtained with 2D turbo spin echo (2D-TSE) techniques. A further goal of the study was to examine the inter observer reproducibility of MR plaque burden measures using the 3D DP-SSFP technique. Results of the study indicated higher signal to noise ratios for the 3D-DP-SSFP technique and higher CNR (better vessel-wall delineation) compared to the 2D-TSE technique. Furthermore, a good correlation between 3D-DP-SSFP and 2D-TSE techniques for the inguinal segment but poorer correlation for the thigh segment was observed. Inter-observer reproducibility for the 3D plaque burden measures was excellent. 3D-DP-SSFP may be a useful and reproducible technique for evaluating atherosclerosis in peripheral arteries.

19761992
In vivo detection of embryonic stem cell-derived cardiovascular progenitor cells using Cy3-labeled Gadofluorine M in murine myocardium.
The aim of the current study is to test the ability to label and detect murine embryonic stem cell-derived cardiovascular progenitor cells (ES-CPC) with cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) using the novel contrast agent Gadofluorine M-Cy3 (GdFM-Cy3). Cell therapy shows great promise for the treatment of cardiovascular disease. An important limitation to previous clinical studies is the inability to accurately identify transplanted cells. GdFM-Cy3 is a lipophilic paramagnetic contrast agent that contains a perfluorinated side chain and an amphiphilic character that allows for micelle formation in an aqueous solution. Previous studies reported that it is easily taken up and stored within the cytosol of mesenchymal stem cells, thereby allowing for paramagnetic cell labeling. Investigators in our laboratory have recently developed techniques for the robust generation of ES-CPC. We reasoned that GdFM-Cy3 would be a promising agent for the in vivo detection of these cells after cardiac cell transplantation. ES-CPC were labeled with GdFM-Cy3 by incubation. In vitro studies were performed to assess the impact of GdFM-Cy3 on cell function and survival. A total of 500,000 GdFM-Cy3-labeled ES-CPC or control ES-CPC were injected into the myocardium of mice with and without myocardial infarction. Mice were imaged (9.4-T) before and over a 2-week time interval after stem cell transplantation. Mice were then euthanized, and their hearts were sectioned for fluorescence microscopy. In vitro studies demonstrated that GdFM-Cy3 was easily transfectable, nontoxic, stayed within cells after labeling, and could be visualized using CMR and fluorescence microscopy. In vivo studies confirmed the efficacy of the agent for the detection of cells transplanted into the hearts of mice after myocardial infarction. A correspondence between CMR and histology was observed. The results of the current study suggest that it is possible to identify and potentially track GdFM-Cy3-labeled ES-CPC in murine infarct models via CMR.

19467659
Multimodality imaging of atherosclerotic plaque activity and composition using FDG-PET/CT and MRI in carotid and femoral arteries.
To evaluate the relationship between atherosclerotic plaque inflammation, as assessed by FDG-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT), and plaque morphology and composition, as assessed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), in the carotid and femoral arteries. Sixteen patients underwent FDG-PET/CT and MRI (T2-weighted (T2W) and proton density weighted (PDW)) of the carotid and femoral arteries. For every image slice, two observers determined the corresponding regions of the FDG-PET/CT and MRI image sets by matching CT and T2W axial images. Each plaque was then classified into one of three groups according to the CT appearance and T2W/PDW signal: (1) collagen, (2) lipid-necrotic core and (3) calcium. Arterial FDG uptake was measured for each plaque and normalized to vein FDG activity to produce a blood-normalized artery activity called the target to background ratio (TBR). The vessel wall thickness (VWT), the vessel wall area and the total vessel wall area were measured from the T2W MR images. The TBR value was higher in the lipid-necrotic core group compared to the collagen and calcium groups, (p<0.001). The lipid-necrotic core group demonstrated a significant TBR variation according to the median of the VWT (TBR=1.26+/-0.25 vs. 1.50+/-0.12). There was no correlation with other morphological MR parameters. This study demonstrates the complementary value of non-invasive FDG-PET/CT and MR imaging for the evaluation of atherosclerotic plaque composition and activity. Lipid-rich plaques are more inflamed than either calcified or collagen-rich plaques.

19442953
Macrophage-specific lipid-based nanoparticles improve cardiac magnetic resonance detection and characterization of human atherosclerosis.
We sought to determine whether gadolinium (Gd)-containing lipid-based nanoparticles (NPs) targeting the macrophage scavenger receptor-B (CD36) improve cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) detection and characterization of human atherosclerosis. Gd-containing lipid-based NPs targeting macrophages have improved MR detection of murine atherosclerosis. Gadolinium-containing untargeted NPs, anti-CD36 NPs, and nonspecific Fc-NPs were created. Macrophages were incubated with fluorescent targeted and nontargeted NPs to determine uptake via confocal microscopy and inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS) quantified Gd uptake. Human aortic specimens were harvested at autopsy. With a 1.5-T scanner, T1, T2, and PDW 3-dimensional scans were performed along with post-contrast scans after 24 h incubation. The T1 and cluster analyses were performed and compared with immunohistopathology. The NPs had a mean diameter of 125 nm and 14,900 Gd-ions, and relaxivity was 37 mmol/l(-1)s(-1) at 1.5-T and 37 degrees C. Confocal microscopy and ICP-MS demonstrated significant in vitro macrophage uptake of targeted NPs, whereas non-targeted NPs had minimal uptake. On T1 imaging, targeted NPs increased contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) by 52.5%, which was significantly greater than Fc-NPs (CNR increased 17.2%) and nontargeted NPs (CNR increased 18.7%) (p = 0.001). Confocal fluorescent microscopy showed that NPs target resident macrophages, whereas the untargeted NPs and Fc-NPs are found diffusely throughout the plaque. Targeted NPs had a greater signal intensity increase in the fibrous cap compared with non-targeted NPs. Macrophage-specific (CD36) NPs bind human macrophages and improve CMR detection and characterization of human aortic atherosclerosis. Thus, macrophage-specific NPs could help identify high-risk human plaque before the development of an atherothrombotic event.

19393089
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance parameters of atherosclerotic plaque burden improve discrimination of prior major adverse cardiovascular events.
Patients with prior major cardiovascular or cerebrovascular events (MACE) are more likely to have future recurrent events independent of traditional cardiovascular disease risk factors. The purpose of this study was to determine if patients with traditional risk factors and prior MACE had increased cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) plaque burden measures compared to patients with risk factors but no prior events. Black blood carotid and thoracic aorta images were obtained from 195 patients using a rapid extended coverage turbo spin echo sequence. CMR measures of plaque burden were obtained by tracing lumen and outer vessel wall contours. Patients with prior MACE had significantly higher MR plaque burden (wall thickness, wall area and normalized wall index) in carotids and thoracic aorta compared to those without prior MACE (Wall thickness carotids: 1.03 +/- 0.03 vs. 0.93+/- 0.03, p = 0.001; SD wall thickness carotids: 0.137 +/- 0.0008 vs. 0.102 +/- 0.0004, p < 0.001; wall thickness aorta: 1.63 +/- 0.10 vs. 1.50 +/- 0.04, p = 0.009; SD wall thickness aorta: 0.186 +/- 0.035 vs. 0.139 +/- 0.012, p = 0.009 respectively). Plaque burden (wall thickness) and plaque eccentricity (standard deviation of wall thickness) of carotid arteries were associated with prior MACE after adjustment for age, sex, and traditional risk factors. Area under ROC curve (AUC) for discriminating prior MACE improved by adding plaque eccentricity to models incorporating age, sex, and traditional CVD risk factors as model inputs (AUC = 0.79, p = 0.05). A greater plaque burden and plaque eccentricity is prevalent among patients with prior MACE.

19174763
Cross-sectional, prospective study of MRI reproducibility in the assessment of plaque burden of the carotid arteries and aorta.
The reliability of imaging techniques to assess early atherosclerosis remains unclear. We did a cross-sectional, prospective study to test reproducibility of MRI when imaging arteries, to assess risk of cardiovascular disease and correlations with age and sex. Between January 2003 and December 2006 we performed black-blood MRI of both common carotid arteries and the thoracic descending aorta in patients with cardiovascular risk factors who were referred from clinics in New York, NY, USA. Mean wall area, wall thickness, lumen area, total vessel area, and ratio of the mean wall area to the mean total vessel area (WA/TVA) were manually measured. Reproducibility within and between readers was tested on subsets of images from randomly chosen patients. MRI was performed on 300 patients. Intrareader reproducibility, assessed in images from 20 patients, was high for all parameters (intraclass correlation coefficients >0.8), except WA/TVA ratio in the descending aorta. The inter-reader reproducibility, assessed in images from 187 patients, was acceptable (intraclass correlation coefficients >0.7) for the mean wall, lumen, and total vessel areas. Values for all MRI parameters in all vessels increased with increasing age for both sexes (all P <0.0005) but were always significantly higher in men than in women, except for aortic mean wall thickness and WA/TVA ratio in the carotid arteries. Mean wall area values correlated well between the carotid arteries and aorta, reflecting the systemic nature of atherosclerosis. Our findings support MRI as a reproducible measurement of plaque burden and demonstrate the systemic distribution of atherosclerosis.

18581415
Serial in vivo positive contrast MRI of iron oxide-labeled embryonic stem cell-derived cardiac precursor cells in a mouse model of myocardial infarction.
Myocardial regeneration with stem-cell transplantation is a possible treatment option to reverse deleterious effects that occur after myocardial infarction. Since little is known about stem cell survival after transplantation, developing techniques for "tracking" cells would be desirable. Iron-oxide-labeled stem cells have been used for in vivo tracking using MRI but produce negative contrast images that are difficult to interpret. The aim of the current study was to test a positive contrast MR technique using reduced z-gradient rephasing (GRASP) to aid in dynamically tracking stem cells in an in vivo model of mouse myocardial infraction. Ferumoxides and protamine sulfate were complexed and used to magnetically label embryonic stem cell-derived cardiac-precursor-cells (ES-CPCs). A total of 500,000 ES-CPCs were injected in the border zone of infarcted mice and MR imaging was performed on a 9.4T scanner using T(2)*-GRE sequences (negative contrast) and positive contrast GRASP technique before, 24 hours, and 1 week after ES-CPC implantation. Following imaging, mice were sacrificed for histology and Perl's staining was used to confirm iron within myocardium. Good correlation was observed between signal loss seen on conventional T(2)* images, bright areas on GRASP, and the presence of iron on histology. This demonstrated the feasibility of in vivo stem cell imaging with positive contrast MRI.

18504763
Evaluation of neovessels in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits using an albumin-binding intravascular contrast agent and MRI.
To test whether B-22956/1, a novel intravascular contrast agent with a high affinity to serum albumin (Bracco Imaging SpA.), allowed quantifying neovessel and macrophage density in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits using MRI. A T1-weighted MRI of the aorta was acquired in 10 rabbits (7 atherosclerotic and 3 control rabbits) before and up to 2 h after intravenous injection of 100 mumol/kg of Gd-DTPA or 75 mumol/kg of B-22956/1. Plaque enhancement was measured at different time points. Immunohistochemistry was performed using anti-CD 31 antibodies and anti-RAM 11 antibodies to correlate to neovessel and macrophage density, respectively. MRI showed a significant plaque enhancement 2 h after B-22956/1 versus Gd-DTPA in the atherosclerotic group (39.75% versus 9.5%; P < 0.0001. Early atherosclerotic plaques (n = 146) enhancement positively correlates with neovessel density on corresponding histological sections (r = 0.42; P < 0.01). Enhancement of atherosclerotic plaques 2 h after injection of B-22956/1 correlated with macrophage density (r = 0.71; P < 0.01). Enhancement of atherosclerotic plaques with MRI correlated with neovessel density at early time points after the injection of B-22956/1 and with macrophage density, at later time points. Hence, B-22956/1-enhanced MRI represents a promising imaging technique for the identification of "high-risk" plaques.

18467641
Detection of neovessels in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits using dynamic contrast enhanced MRI and 18F-FDG PET.
The association of inflammatory cells and neovessels in atherosclerosis is considered a histological hallmark of high-risk active lesions. Therefore, the development and validation of noninvasive imaging techniques that allow for the detection of inflammation and neoangiogenesis in atherosclerosis would be of major clinical interest. Our aim was to test 2 techniques, black blood dynamic contrast enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) and 18-fluorine-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) PET, to quantify inflammation expressed as plaque neovessels content in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Atherosclerotic plaques were induced in the aorta of 10 rabbits by a combination of 2 endothelial abrasions and 4 months hyperlipidemic diet. Six rabbits underwent MRI during the injection of Gd-DTPA, whereas 4 rabbits were imaged after injection of 18F-FDG with PET. We found a positive correlation between neovessels count in atherosclerotic plaques and (1) Gd-DTPA uptake parameters evaluated by DCE-MRI (r=0.89, P=0.016) and (2) 18F-FDG uptake evaluated by PET (r=0.5, P=0.103 after clustered robust, Huber-White, standard errors analysis). DCE-MRI and 18F-FDG PET may allow for the evaluation of inflammation in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits. These noninvasive imaging modalities could be proposed as clinical tools in the evaluation of lesion prognosis and monitoring of anti-angiogenic therapies.

18383304
Fractionated Feridex and positive contrast: in vivo MR imaging of atherosclerosis.
Macrophages have been identified as a critical factor in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Ultrasmall iron oxide particles (USPIOs) have been used to passively target intraplaque macrophages. For dextran-based USPIOs, uptake into macrophages may be modulated by particle size. The aim of the current study was to test the efficacy of fractionated Feridex with respect to macrophage uptake in atherosclerotic rabbits. Fractionation of Feridex resulted in a 15-nm USPIO that exhibited a blood half-life of 15.9 h and liver retention of 6.4%. Blood clearance and liver retention of Feridex was 0.46 h and 60%, following administration of 4.8 mg Fe/kg Feridex. Atherosclerotic rabbits were administered 0.5 or 4.8 mg Fe/kg dosages of either fractionated Feridex or Feridex. MRI was performed at 1.5T over a 24-h time period postinjection. Perls and RAM-11 staining was performed to identify iron deposition. MRI showed a dose-dependent signal loss using conventional gradient echo (GRE) sequences following administration of fractionated Feridex. Even at low dose, significant signal loss was observed that correlated with histology. No signal attenuation or iron deposition was observed in the vessel wall of rabbits administered Feridex. Results of this study suggest that it may be possible to optimize USPIOs for intraplaque macrophage detection.

17729343
Magnetic resonance imaging of vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques: current imaging strategies and molecular imaging probes.
The vulnerability or destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques has been directly linked to plaque composition. Imaging modalities, such as magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, that allow for evaluation of plaque composition at a cellular and molecular level, could further improve the detection of vulnerable plaque and may allow for monitoring the efficacy of antiatherosclerotic therapies. In this review we focus on MR imaging strategies for the detection and evaluation of atherosclerotic plaques and their composition. We highlight recent advancements in the development of MR pulse sequences, computer image analysis, and the use of commercially available MR contrast agents, such as gadopentic acid (Gd-DTPA), for plaque characterization. We also discuss molecular imaging strategies that are currently being used to design specific imaging probes targeted to biochemical and cellular markers of atherosclerotic plaque vulnerability.

17215360
Detecting and assessing macrophages in vivo to evaluate atherosclerosis noninvasively using molecular MRI.
We investigated the ability of targeted immunomicelles to detect and assess macrophages in atherosclerotic plaque using MRI in vivo. There is a large clinical need for a noninvasive tool to assess atherosclerosis from a molecular and cellular standpoint. Macrophages play a central role in atherosclerosis and are associated with plaques vulnerable to rupture. Therefore, macrophage scavenger receptor (MSR) was chosen as a target for molecular MRI. MSR-targeted immunomicelles, micelles, and gadolinium-diethyltriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) were tested in ApoE-/- and WT mice by using in vivo MRI. Confocal laser-scanning microscopy colocalization, macrophage immunostaining and MRI correlation, competitive inhibition, and various other analyses were performed. In vivo MRI revealed that at 24 h postinjection, immunomicelles provided a 79% increase in signal intensity of atherosclerotic aortas in ApoE-/- mice compared with only 34% using untargeted micelles and no enhancement using gadolinium-DTPA. Confocal laser-scanning microscopy revealed colocalization between fluorescent immunomicelles and macrophages in plaques. There was a strong correlation between macrophage content in atherosclerotic plaques and the matched in vivo MRI results as measured by the percent normalized enhancement ratio. Monoclonal antibodies to MSR were able to significantly hinder immunomicelles from providing contrast enhancement of atherosclerotic vessels in vivo. Immunomicelles provided excellent validated in vivo enhancement of atherosclerotic plaques. The enhancement seen is related to the macrophage content of the atherosclerotic vessel areas imaged. Immunomicelles may aid in the detection of high macrophage content associated with plaques vulnerable to rupture.

