19932764
Electronic image of the month. Endoscopy and surgery for appendiceal adenoma.


19067409
Adenocarcinoma following ileal pouch-anal anastomosis for ulcerative colitis: review of 26 cases.
The occurrence of adenocarcinoma following ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA) for ulcerative colitis (UC) is an infrequent and but potentially lethal complication. We have seen 1 such case among 520 IPAAs performed in our group practice between 1978 and February 2008. We have added this case to a review of 25 previously reported cases of adenocarcinoma of the pouch or outflow tract following IPAA for UC. Our conclusions are 1) that post-IPAA cancer can occur following either mucosectomy or stapled anastomosis; 2) that this malignancy can occur after IPAA performed for UC either with or without neoplasia; and 3) that this complication is seen whether or not the initial cancer or dysplasia had involved the rectum.

18330577
Cavernous, arteriovenous, and mixed hemangioma-lymphangioma of the rectosigmoid: rare causes of rectal bleeding--case series and review of the literature.
Cavernous hemangiomas of the sigmoid colon and rectum are uncommon vascular malformations usually found in young adults with a long history of episodic and painless rectal bleeding. Alternatively, they may present with massive life-threatening hemorrhage. We report three cases of hemangioma of the rectosigmoid including one case of cavernous hemangioma, one case of arteriovenous hemangioma, and one case of hemangiolymphangiomatosis with emphasis on clinical presentation, radiologic, operative, and pathologic findings. Definitive treatment consists of complete resection with a sphincter-preserving procedure or abdominoperineal resection, based on extent of disease. Therapy is typically delayed by several years in these patients due to erroneous diagnosis and failed treatment of hemorrhoids and inflammatory bowel disease. Relative to hemangiomas, lymphangiomas of the rectosigmoid are even more rare and when symptomatic, present with rectal bleeding and pelvic pain.

