21486110
A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of topiramate for pathological gambling.
Abstract Objectives. Pathological gambling (PG) is an impulse control disorder characterized by recurrent gambling thoughts and behaviours that impair social functioning. Earlier studies suggested that topiramate may be effective in treating some impulse control disorders. We conducted the first randomized, controlled trial of topiramate in PG. Methods. PG patients were randomized to topiramate (N = 20) or placebo (N = 22) in this 14-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group trial. The primary outcome measure was change in the obsessions subscale of the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale Modified for Pathological Gambling. Results. Mixed regression models (time [weeks] × treatment) revealed no significant treatment effect of topiramate on the primary or secondary outcome measures. The most statistically robust findings involved reducing the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS) total score and Motor and Non-Planning subscale scores, for which topiramate outperformed placebo at merely a trend level (P < 0.1). Conclusions. The observed trend in BIS score reductions may warrant further investigation to study whether topiramate reduces clinically important impulsivity in PG. Treatment studies with larger samples and less stringent exclusion criteria are needed to produce results that can be generalized to pathological gamblers in the community.

20816027
Double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of topiramate augmentation in treatment-resistant obsessive-compulsive disorder.
BACKGROUND: From 40% to 60% of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) patients fail to tolerate or respond to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Preclinical and neuroimaging studies have shown abnormally high glutamatergic concentrations in OCD patients and an association between decreased caudate glutamatergic concentrations and reduced OCD symptom severity after SSRI treatment. Topiramate inhibits glutamatergic conduction. METHOD: Thirty-six adult patients with DSM-IV-defined OCD were randomly assigned to topiramate (n = 18) and placebo (n = 18) groups in this 12-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-groups trial. Subjects were taking the maximum SSRI dose they could tolerate for at least 12 weeks and their current dose for at least 6 weeks, which was maintained throughout the study. Primary outcome measures were changes in the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (YBOCS) total score and compulsions and obsessions subscores. Patients were recruited and followed up between April 1, 2003, and April 13, 2006. RESULTS: Using mixed regression models (time [weeks] x treatment), we found a significant treatment effect on the YBOCS compulsions (P = .014) subscale, but not the obsessions (P = .99) subscale or the total score (P = .11). Over the 12-week trial, the topiramate group (mean endpoint dose = 177.8 +/- 134.2 mg/d; range, 50-400 mg/d) showed an average linear decrease of 5.38 points on the compulsions subscale compared to 0.6 points in the placebo group. Thirteen topiramate and 14 placebo subjects completed the study. Topiramate was not well tolerated in this trial: 28% (5/18) of the subjects discontinued the drug for adverse effects, and 39% (7/18) had a dose reduction for this reason. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this first double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of topiramate augmentation for treatment-resistant OCD suggest that topiramate may be beneficial for compulsions, but not obsessions. Modifications in glutamatergic function may be responsible, at least in part, for the improved response in compulsions seen with topiramate. TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00211744.

20671896
Problematic Internet use: is it more compulsory than rewarding or mood driven?


20588072
Basal Ganglia activity in pathological gambling: a fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography study.
Pathological gambling (PG) is a disorder classified as an impulse control disorder (DSM-IV) bridging impulsive, compulsive and addictive behaviors. The striatum and thalamus are supposed to be involved in the pathophysiological substrate of these behaviors. An increased relative glucose metabolic rate (rGMR) in patients with a diagnosis of PG had previously been reported in the medial and orbitofrontal cortex. We extended our studies to include functional alterations of the striatum and thalamus in a cohort of patients with PG before and after treatment with lithium. Twenty-one patients with PG who met lifetime comorbid bipolar spectrum diagnoses and a comparison group of 21 age- and sex-matched controls underwent a baseline positron emission tomography (PET) scan. Sixteen of these patients entered a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled parallel-group-design trial of lithium and underwent a follow-up PET scan at week 10. Anatomical MRI were obtained and the structures outlined on consecutive axial slices. These individual hand-drawn templates were used to identify structures on the PET scan of each patient, and the rGMR was measured. The PG patients had a decrement of the rGMR in the ventral parts of the striatum and thalamus, and an increment of the rGMR in the dorsal parts as compared with the controls. Lithium treatment increased the ventral caudate rGMR to a trend level in the patients, but had no effect on the metabolism of either the putamen or the thalamus. Because of their extensive connectivity to the frontal cortex, striatal and thalamic functional alteration may contribute to faulty decision making processes in PG patients. By increasing the ventral rGMR of the caudate nucleus, lithium treatment may reduce cognitive dysfunction and symptoms in PG patients.

20353313
Bipolar disorder and comorbid attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. A distinct clinical phenotype? Clinical characteristics and temperamental traits.
It has been suggested that bipolar disorder (BD) with comorbid ADHD represents a distinct clinical phenotype of BD. There are no data regarding potential heterogeneity between BD subjects with a diagnosis of ADHD in childhood whose ADHD remitted in adulthood (cADHD-BD) vs. BD patients with persistent ADHD diagnosis in adulthood (aADHD-BD). This heterogeneity may constitute a confounder in investigations of the nature of the co-occurrence between BD and ADHD. The aim of this paper is to compare BD patients without ADHD, to those with aADHD-BD, and those with cADHD-BD on clinical and temperamental characteristics, hypothesizing that maladaptive temperament will be increased in BD subjects with a stable diagnosis of ADHD in adulthood compared to those whose ADHD remitted. We further hypothesize that maladaptive temperament will be associated with the severity of both illnesses. A total of 100 outpatients (aged 18-30 years) with BD in remission were included. The assessment of ADHD was made according to a procedure aimed to reduce potential recall biases. Subjects had to have a parent available and had never been treated with stimulants. Temperamental traits were assessed with the California Child Q-sort (CCQ) and the Early Adolescent Temperament Questionnaire (EATQ). Rate of co-occurrence of ADHD-BD was 18% lifetime and 10% current diagnosis. Patients with ADHD-BD (aADHD-BD+cADHD-BD) reported a significantly earlier onset of mood disorder, higher number of previous mood episodes, and significantly higher impulsivity than BD patients without ADHD. aADHD-BD showed a significantly earlier BD onset, higher number of previous mood episodes, higher impulsivity, decreased Reactive Control and higher Negative Emotionality temperamental scores than cADHD patients. Findings suggest that patients with aADHD-BD present a clinical phenotype distinct from that of patients with BD without ADHD or with a childhood ADHD diagnosis that remitted with the age. This appealing hypothesis of a BD-distinct phenotype that can be detected early due to its associated maladaptive temperamental traits requires further investigation in larger samples, supported by neuropsychological, genetic and imaging data.

20346726
Complex repetitive behavior: punding after bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation in Parkinson's disease.
"Punding" is the term used to describe a stereotyped motor behavior characterized by an intense fascination with repetitive purposeless movements, such as taking apart mechanical objects, handling common objects as if they were new and entertaining, constantly picking at oneself, etc. As a phenomenon with both impulsive and compulsive features, the phenomenology of punding is currently being questioned. In order to investigate the pathophysiology of this phenomenon, we screened a population of Parkinson's disease (PD) outpatients who underwent subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation (STN DBS). We conducted a patient-and-relative-completed survey with 24 consecutive patients in an academic outpatient care center, using a modified version of a structured interview. Patients were administered the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), the Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory and the Sheehan Disability Scale. Five (20.8%) of the 24 subjects were identified as punders, including three men (60%) and two women. The punders were comparable to the non-punders in terms of clinical and demographic factors. The punder and non-punder groups only differed statistically with regard to the length of time from DBS implantation. Those findings suggest that punding might be induced by STN DBS, and its rate of occurrence in DBS population seems to be more common than previously suspected.

19958042
Ondansetron augmentation in treatment-resistant obsessive-compulsive disorder: a preliminary, single-blind, prospective study.
Serotonin and dopamine neuronal systems have been implicated in the modulation of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) symptoms. About 40% of OCD patients do not respond to first-line selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) treatment; among those, dopamine blocker augmentation has been reported to improve the rate of response by an additional one-third. Given that serotonin 5-HT(3) receptors are indirect inhibitors of cortico-mesolimbic dopamine release, augmentation with the 5-HT(3) receptor antagonist ondansetron in combination with SSRIs and antipsychotics has potential efficacy in treatment-resistant OCD patients. To assess the efficacy and tolerability of ondansetron in combination with SSRIs and antipsychotics in patients with treatment-resistant OCD. In total, 14 patients with a DSM-IV diagnosis of OCD, who were treatment resistant and receiving stable treatment with SSRIs and antipsychotic augmentation, entered a 12-week, single-blind trial of ondansetron. The drug was initiated at a dosage of 0.25 mg twice daily for 6 weeks and was then titrated to 0.5 mg twice daily for 6 weeks. Of the 14 patients, nine (64.3%) experienced a treatment response (> or =25% reduction in the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale [YBOCS] score and a Clinical Global Impressions-Improvement [CGI-I] score of 1 or 2) at 12 weeks. The average reduction in YBOCS-rated symptoms for the whole group was 23.2%. None of the treated patients experienced symptom exacerbation or significant adverse effects. These results suggest that low-dose ondansetron may have promise as an augmentation strategy for some patients with OCD resistant to SSRIs and antipsychotic augmentation, but further controlled trials are required. Trial registration number (ClinicalTrials.gov): NCT00796497.

19840588
Internet addiction: a descriptive clinical study focusing on comorbidities and dissociative symptoms.
Internet addiction (IAD) is an emerging cause of morbidity and has been recently considered to merit inclusion in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition. Given the paucity of knowledge about IAD, we conducted a descriptive clinical analysis of patients focusing on clinical, demographic features, and comorbidities. The detachment has been suggested as a reason for the attractiveness of the Internet; thus, we assessed dissociative symptoms and their association with IAD disability. A cohort of 50 adult outpatients were screened using the Internet Addiction Scale. Exclusion criterion was using the Internet for only one purpose such as gaming or gambling. Nine women and 6 men constituted the sample of Internet addicts; each of them had a score of 70 or higher on the Internet Addiction Scale. Comorbidities and subthreshold symptoms were screened carefully. Dissociative symptoms were analyzed with the Dissociative Experience Scale, and disability was assessed using the Sheehan Disability Scale. Hours/week spent on the Internet were 42.21 +/- 3.09. Clinical diagnoses included 14% attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder, 7% hypomania, 15% generalized anxiety disorder, 15% social anxiety disorder; 7% dysthymia, 7% obsessive compulsive personality disorder, 14% borderline personality disorder, and 7% avoidant personality disorder. One patient met criteria for binge eating disorder. Severity measures of IAD were associated with higher perception of family disability (r = 0.814; P <or= .001) and with higher Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Severity score (r = 0.771; P <or= .001). Scores for the Dissociative Experience Scale were higher than expected (23.20 +/- 1.83) and were related to higher obsessive compulsive scores (r = 0.618; P <or= .001), hours per week on the Internet (r = 0.749; P <or= .001), and perception of family disability (r = 0.677; P <or= .001). From a phenomenological point of view, IAD in our sample population seems to be more compulsory than rewarding or mood driven. Dissociative symptoms are related to severity and impact of IAD.

19825906
Serotonin function in pathological gambling: blunted growth hormone response to sumatriptan.
Pathological gambling is a disruptive behaviour and an important public health concern that is classified as an impulse control disorder, and is also conceptualized as a prototype of 'behavioural addiction'. Its phenomenology cannot be reduced to a single neurobiological dysfunction; instead, it has been conceived as a complex chain of events in which the serotonergic system (5-HT) has often been suggested as one of the most prominent involved. Acute administration of Sumatriptan, a selective 5-HT(1B/1D) agonist, has been used to investigate the functional responsivity of 5-HT(1B/1D) receptors in alcoholics, resulting in a blunted growth hormone response. These findings have been interpreted as being due to the down-regulation of these receptors. However, previous studies could not rule out the possibility that the changes in receptor function were induced by chronic substance exposure. Twenty-two pathological gamblers and 19 healthy control subjects were evaluated in response to double-blind administration of both a single dose of oral Sumatriptan (100 mg) and of placebo in a crossover design. All participants were screened to ensure that they were negative for lifetime alcohol and drug addiction, and had been free of substance abuse for at least 6 months. Outcome measures included growth hormone, prolactin, gambling severity, mood, craving and 'high' change scales. A blunted growth hormone response was observed in pathological gamblers compared with healthy controls after Sumatriptan administration. No statistically significant differences were found for prolactin or behavioural measures, except for an increase in anxiety over time in pathological gamblers. These results, together with those obtained in our previous serotoninergic challenge study, document the presence of a serotonergic dysfunction in pathological gamblers similar to that reported in alcoholics.

19455047
Neurobiology of repeated transcranial magnetic stimulation in the treatment of anxiety: a critical review.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) has been applied to a growing number of psychiatric disorders as a neurophysiological probe, a primary brain-mapping tool, and a candidate treatment. Although most investigations have focused on the treatment of major depression, increasing attention has been paid to anxiety disorders. The aim of this study is to summarize published findings about the application of TMS as a putative treatment for anxiety disorders. TMS neurophysiological and mapping findings, both clinical and preclinical, have been included when relevant. We searched Medline, PsycInfo, and the Cochrane Library from 1980 to January 2009 for the terms 'generalized anxiety disorder', 'social anxiety disorder', 'social phobia', 'panic', 'anxiety', or 'posttraumatic stress disorder' in combination with 'TMS', 'cortex excitability', 'rTMS', 'motor threshold', 'motor evoked potential', 'cortical silent period', 'intracortical inhibition', 'neuroimaging', or 'intracortical facilitation'. Most of the therapeutic experiences with repetitive TMS available in the literature are in the form of case reports, not controlled or blinded studies. Stimulation of the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, especially at high frequencies, has been reported to reduce anxiety symptoms in posttraumatic stress disorder and panic disorder; nevertheless, results are mixed. A specific role for the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in the posttraumatic stress disorder symptom core can be hypothesized. TMS remains an investigational intervention that has not yet gained approval for the clinical treatment of any anxiety disorder. Clinical sham-controlled trials are scarce. Many of these trials have supported the idea that TMS has a significant effect, but in some studies, the effect is small and short lived. The neurobiological correlates suggest possible efficacy for the treatment of social anxiety that still has to be investigated.

18849906
Obsessive-compulsive disorder spectrum as a scientific "metaphor".
As a result of clinical, epidemiological, neuroimaging, and therapy studies that took place in the late 1980s, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) has been well-characterized in the field of anxiety disorders. Other disorders attracted attention for their similarities to OCD, and were located in the orbit of the disorder. OCD has become known as the "primary domain" of a scientific "metaphor" comprising the putative cluster of OCD-related disorders (OCRDs). It is a "paradigm" with which to explore basal ganglia dysfunction. The OCRDs share common phenomenology, comorbidities, lifetime course, demographics, possible genetics, and frontostriatal dysfunction (particularly caudate hyperactivity.) The adoption of this metaphor analogy has proven useful. However, 15 years since its emergence, the spectrum of obsessive-compulsive disorders remains controversial. Questions under debate include whether OCD is a unitary or split condition, whether it is an anxiety disorder, and whether there exists only one spectrum or several possible spectrums. Further work is needed to clarify obsessive-compulsive symptoms, subtypes, and endophenotypes. There is need to integrate existing databases, better define associated symptom domains, and create a more comprehensive endophenotyping protocol for OCRDs. There is also a need to integrate biological and psychological perspectives, concepts, and data to drive this evolution. By increasing research in this field, the OCD spectrum may evolve from a fragmented level of conceptualization as a "metaphor" to one that is more comprehensive and structured.

18781089
FDG-PET study in pathological gamblers. 1. Lithium increases orbitofrontal, dorsolateral and cingulate metabolism.
Pathological gambling affects 1-3% of the adult population, and has high comorbidity. Although mood stabilizers and serotonin reuptake inhibitors have shown some efficacy in the treatment of this condition, there is little known about how these pharmacological interventions work. Twenty-one patients with pathological gambling, who met lifetime comorbid bipolar spectrum diagnoses, received baseline PET scans. Sixteen of these patients were entered into a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled parallel group design trial of lithium, and received follow-up PET scans at 10 weeks. A comparison group of 32 age- and sex-matched controls was also available. Anatomical MRIs were obtained as a structural template. In patients with pathological gambling, relative glucose metabolic rates (rGMR) in the orbitofrontal cortex and medial frontal cortex were significantly increased at baseline compared to normal controls. Lithium increased rGMR further in the orbitofrontal cortex, heightening normal/patient differences, but it also increased the rGMR of the posterior cingulate and the dorsolateral frontal cortex normalizing the metabolic rate in these regions. Cortical areas implicated in impulse control disorders show increased rGMR in pathological gambling at baseline. Lithium treatment, while alleviating the symptoms, further increases rGMR in these areas.

18408647
Brain plasticity and brain stimulation in neuropsychiatry: toward individualized medicine.


18331650
Obsessive compulsive disorder comorbidity in DBA.
ABSTRACT: Diamond-Blackfan Anemia (DBA) is a congenital erythroid aplasia characterized as a normochromic macrocytic anemia with a selective deficiency in red blood cell precursors in otherwise normocelullar bone marrow. DBA is known to be associated with mental retardation and learning disabilities. Although comorbidities with other psychiatric conditions have not been reported in the existing literature, we report in this paper a case of a DBA patient with previously undiagnosed comorbidity of obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), successfully treated with sertaline 200 mg/day and valproic acid 600 mg/day. This case of comorbid presentation has clinical, therapeutic and pathophysiological implications. Given the difficulty of distinguishing among mental retardation, learning disabilities and OCD and the importance of precocious diagnosis in treating OCD especially since there are treatment methods interfering with anemia symptoms, physicians should adapt an adequate screening tool treating a child with DBA and comorbid mental disorder.

17277719
Obsessive-compulsive disorder and obsessive-compulsive spectrum disorders: diagnostic and dimensional issues.
Although obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is classified as an anxiety disorder in the DSM-IV, recent considerations for a reclassification into an obsessive-compulsive spectrum disorders (OCSDs) cluster are gaining prominence. Similarities in symptomatology, course of illness, patient population, and neurocircuitry of OCD and OCSD are supported by comorbidity, family, and neurological studies, which also offer a critical re-evaluation of the relationship between OCD and anxiety disorders. This review examines potential classifications of OCD among the wider spectrum of affective disorders and at the interface between affective disorders and addiction. In addition, it has been suggested that the categorical diagnostic approach would be enhanced by an additional dimensional approach, including parameters such as stability of mood and ability to sustain attention. With further studies, it is ultimately the goal to define OCD and related disorders based on endophenotypes. Despite efforts in this field, there are several fundamental unresolved issues, including the question of which disorders should be grouped together in this category and which characteristics to include as their shared common features. A reclassification of OCD among the OCSDs would allow for better scrutiny of distinct obsessive-compulsive symptoms, as currently this disorder often goes undetected in patients who complain of a broad symptom of anxiety. Advantages and disadvantages of establishing OCSDs and its implications for diagnosis, treatment, and research are discussed.

17166264
Resistant social anxiety disorder response to Escitalopram.
Social Anxiety Disorder (SAD) is a common disorder and its high prevalence and lifelong chronicity are such that it represents a substantial public health problem. The observation that serotonergic agents appear to be effective for its treatment suggests that patients may have abnormal serotonergic neurotransmission within the central nervous system. We investigated the efficacy of Escitalopram in treatment resistant patients with SAD. Twenty-nine adult outpatients participated in a 12-week open-label trial of escitalopram. All the subjects had a primary diagnosis of SAD and had failed at least one previous adequate trial of paroxetine. Escitalopram was orally administered starting with a dose of 10 mg/day following a 1-week titration. The escitalopram treatment was characterized by good tolerability (drop-out rate due to intolerance: 10.3%), and 24 subjects completed the study trial. At the end of the 12-week treatment period, 14 subjects (48.3%) were considered as responders on the basis of the Clinical Global Impression-Improvement (CGI-I) (much or very much improved) scale and the Liebowitz Scale for Social Anxiety (LSAS) (reduction >35% compared to baseline). We observed a significant mean reduction in the Sheehan Disability Scale Work (p < .05) and Social (p < .05) subscores, but not in the Family subscore. These data suggest escitalopram has a role in the treatment of resistant SAD, especially in view of the favourable tolerability profile observed in the patients. Controlled studies are required to further investigate these findings and to compare escitalopram with other treatments for this disorder.

20144692
Unilateral low frequency versus sequential bilateral repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation: is simpler better for treatment of resistant depression?
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) efficacy in the treatment of major depression has been shown in both low frequency right-sided and high frequency left-sided stimulation over the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). The aim of the present investigation was to evaluate the hypothesis of an additive effect of bilateral stimulation compare to sequential to unilateral stimulation. Sixty patients with treatment-resistant depression were assigned to receive either low-frequency rTMS over the right DLPFC (140 s x 1 Hz) followed by controlateral sham (unilateral group, n=20), low frequency right DLPFC rTMS followed by left DLPFC high frequency rTMS (5 s x 10 Hz) (bilateral group, n=20), or bilateral sham (sham group, n=20) in a 3 weeks double-blind, randomized trial. The primary outcome variable was the score on Hamilton Depression Scale (HAM-D). Low frequency right-sided and sequential bilateral stimulation showed different antidepressant efficacy at 3 weeks and across the full duration of the study, only the unilateral method appearing significantly more effective than sham at the end of the trial, and correlated to the higher percent of remitters (30% of the group vs. 10% -bilateral- and 5% -sham). Unilateral stimulation, but not bilateral, showed higher antidepressant efficacy compared to sham stimulation. The data suggest that right-sided low frequency stimulation may be a first line treatment alternative in resistant depression. To confirm and extend these findings further studies require a longer follow-up period, supported by biological observation and replication.

19028836
Noradrenergic function in pathological gambling: blunted growth hormone response to clonidine.
The noradrenergic system has been linked to impulsive behaviour in animals and humans, yet little data on noradrenergic system exist in specific impulse control disorders. To explore the role of the noradrenergic system in pathological gamblers (PG), we assessed neuroendocrine growth hormone (GH) response to the alpha2-adrenergic receptor agonist clonidine and placebo in PG and controls. The net effects of clonidine are a decrease in neurotransmission by depressing locus coeruleus activity and stimulation of GH secretion through activation of post-synaptic alpha2-adrenergic receptors in the hypothalamus. Twenty-nine PG subjects, free of other comorbid conditions, and 27 healthy controls received a double-blinded, placebo-controlled, single dose of oral clonidine (0.15 mg/kg). Data observed included GH, clonidine levels and levels of the main noradrenergic metabolite, 3-methoxy-4-hydroxy-phenylglycol (MHPG). The area under the curve for GH response to clonidine was significantly lower (separate variance t with 44.3 df = 2.626, P = 0.012, d = 0.58) in the PG group (199.6) than in the control group (426.3). PG had significantly blunted GH responses compared with controls at 120 and 150 min post-clonidine. These results are consistent with the idea that the subsensitivity of post-synaptic alpha-2 receptors is possibly attributable to higher-than-normal noradrenergic secretion in PG. This peripheral noradrenergic dysfunction could be consistent with attenuated cortico-frontal noradrenergic function as shown in positron emission tomography (PET) studies of PG.

