21278845
Caregiver Depression and Youth Disruptive Behavior Difficulties.
This study examines the rates of depressive symptoms and service use among caregivers whose children receive treatment for disruptive behavior disorders. Descriptive analyses examined preliminary baseline data from the Family Groups for Urban Youth with Disruptive Behaviors study for 212 caregivers to determine rates of caregiver depressive symptoms and lifetime mental health service use. Findings indicate that caregivers manifest substantially higher rates of depressive symptoms compared to national norms. Of those caregivers with clinically significant depressive symptoms, less than half reported ever receiving mental health services. Findings suggest that greater attention should be paid to identifying and treating caregiver depression among children receiving treatment for disruptive behavior disorders.

21274415
It Takes a Village to Deliver and Test Child and Family-Focused Services.
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this article is to highlight the benefits of collaboration in child focused mental health services research. METHOD: Three unique research projects are described. These projects address the mental health needs of vulnerable, urban, minority children and their families. In each one, service delivery was codesigned, interventions were co-delivered and a team of stakeholders collaboratively tested the impact of each one. RESULTS: The results indicate that the three interventions designed, delivered, and tested are associated with reductions in youth mental health symptoms. CONCLUSION: These interventions are feasible alternatives to traditional individualized outpatient treatment.

20842273
Engaging families into child mental health treatment: updates and special considerations.
The current paper reviews recent findings regarding how to conceptualize engagement and factors influencing engagement, treatment attendance rates, and interventions that work. Research related to the definition of engagement, predictors of engagement and treatment termination, attendance rates, and engaging interventions are summarized as an update to the McKay and Bannon (2004) review. Despite ongoing advances in evidence-based treatments and dissemination strategies, engaging families into mental health treatment remains a serious challenge. Within the last several years, a number of technological advances and interventions have emerged to address this problem. Families with children who present disruptive behavior challenges and symptoms of trauma are considered in terms of the unique barriers they experience regarding engagement in treatment. Potential solutions to increase treatment utilization and further research in this area are discussed.

20379348
Adapting A Family-Based HIV Prevention Program for Homeless Youth and Their Families: The HOPE (HIV prevention Outreach for Parents and Early adolescents) Family Program.
As rates of HIV infection increase in adolescents, it is important to provide prevention programs targeting this population. Homeless adolescents living with their families in shelters are at greater risk of participating in risky sexual behavior and incurring negative health outcomes. A family based HIV-prevention pilot study was conducted with eight homeless families in a New York City shelter to explore: 1) the perceived impact of family communication, parental monitoring, family understanding of puberty, STD's and HIV on preventing risky behavior for the participating youth, and 2) the feasibility of conducting such a program within the shelter system. Qualitative and quantitative results indicate increased family communication, parental monitoring and decreased parental depressive symptoms.

20046919
Cultural Pride Reinforcement as a Dimension of Racial Socialization Protective of Urban African American Child Anxiety.
The study objective was to examine how parental endorsement of cultural pride reinforcement messages may explain African American child anxiety. Data were gathered from 72 African American parents and their elementary school-aged children. Results indicated stronger parental endorsement of cultural pride reinforcement messages predicted less child anxiety. Additionally parental endorsement of these messages moderated the relationship between child mental health risk factor exposure and child anxiety. Specifically in the presence of high exposure, children of parents who endorsed high levels of cultural pride reinforcement messages had significantly lower anxiety scores relative to children of parents who endorsed low levels of these messages. Findings indicated parental endorsement of these messages may be an important factor in explaining African American child anxiety.

18794506
Site matters: winning the hearts and minds of patients in a cardiology clinic.
In medical care settings, mental health symptoms of depression and distress are associated with poor medical outcomes, yet they are often underrecognized. Authors sought to examine the effect of having immediate mental-health screening in the cardiology clinic. The Patient Health Questionnaire and the Impact of Event Scale were used to screen for depression and distress in 316 patients at an urban cardiology clinic. Because of poor follow-up rates, a psychiatrist was placed on the premises of the cardiology clinic to facilitate referrals. Placing a psychiatrist within the cardiology clinic significantly improved the rate of successful referrals. Because 45 patients (14%) endorsed suicidal thoughts, authors conclude that mental health screening programs should include an immediate evaluation by a clinician.

19924263
Adapting and disseminating a community-collaborative, evidence-based HIV/AIDS prevention programme: Lessons from the history of CHAMP.
In recent years, calls for the scaling-up, or more broad dissemination of evidence-based HIV prevention programmes, have increased. This paper responds to the call for increasing applicable knowledge about programme dissemination by reviewing the history of a major evidence-based human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) prevention and mental health promotion programme that has been adapted successfully and pilot-tested across four settings - including two major cities, as well as in the United States, Trinidad and Tobago and South Africa - to date. This programme, entitled CHAMP (the Collaborative HIV Prevention & Adolescent Mental Health Project), is distinctive primarily for its emphasis on community collaboration and power-sharing, and also its incorporation of individual, family and community-level interventions. The history of programme development, including theoretical foundations and results across sites, is discussed with a particular emphasis on the implications of CHAMP'S dissemination thus far.

18435606
Transitioning health care responsibility from caregivers to patient: a pilot study aiming to facilitate medication adherence during this process.
Transition in pediatric transplant recipients consists of both a physical shift in medical care location as well as a transition in health care responsibilities from caregivers to patients. The purpose of the present study was to test the feasibility of a pilot intervention aiming to facilitate the transition in health care responsibilities from caregivers to patients while patients are still receiving pediatric services. Twenty-two patients were enrolled in a two-session educational protocol aiming to facilitate transition of responsibility. Patients were recruited from an outpatient transplant clinic. Ten were referred because of suspected difficulty in transitioning of care, and 12 were consecutively recruited without any specific a priori concerns. Medication adherence, measured through the use of standard deviations of tacrolimus blood levels, and ALT levels were the medical outcome measures. Complete data are available for 20 patients. Mean ALT levels improved after the follow-up period. For referred patients, adherence and ALT levels improved. Standard deviation of tacrolimus decreased from 3.33 to 2.23, t = 2.52, p = 0.04. Mean ALT decreased from 120.33 to 63.99, t = 3.01, p = 0.01. Maximal ALT values decreased overall from 284.10 to 101.20, t = 2.61, p = 0.03. Our findings suggest that targeted education regarding transition in responsibility for adolescents' own health care is feasible in the outpatient environment and may assist families who are facing this potentially challenging process. A randomized, controlled study with a substantial number of enrolled patients is needed to establish the efficacy of this or other approaches.

