21070945
Structural basis for error-free replication of oxidatively damaged DNA by yeast DNA polymerase ?.
7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) adducts are formed frequently by the attack of oxygen-free radicals on DNA. They are among the most mutagenic lesions in cells because of their dual coding potential, where, in addition to normal base-pairing of 8-oxoG(anti) with dCTP, 8-oxoG in the syn conformation can base pair with dATP, causing G to T transversions. We provide here for the first time a structural basis for the error-free replication of 8-oxoG lesions by yeast DNA polymerase ? (Pol?). We show that the open active site cleft of Pol? can accommodate an 8-oxoG lesion in the anti conformation with only minimal changes to the polymerase and the bound DNA: at both the insertion and post-insertion steps of lesion bypass. Importantly, the active site geometry remains the same as in the undamaged complex and provides a basis for the ability of Pol? to prevent the mutagenic replication of 8-oxoG lesions in cells.

20577207
Structural basis for the suppression of skin cancers by DNA polymerase eta.
DNA polymerase eta (Poleta) is unique among eukaryotic polymerases in its proficient ability for error-free replication through ultraviolet-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers, and inactivation of Poleta (also known as POLH) in humans causes the variant form of xeroderma pigmentosum (XPV). We present the crystal structures of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Poleta (also known as RAD30) in ternary complex with a cis-syn thymine-thymine (T-T) dimer and with undamaged DNA. The structures reveal that the ability of Poleta to replicate efficiently through the ultraviolet-induced lesion derives from a simple and yet elegant mechanism, wherein the two Ts of the T-T dimer are accommodated in an active site cleft that is much more open than in other polymerases. We also show by structural, biochemical and genetic analysis that the two Ts are maintained in a stable configuration in the active site via interactions with Gln 55, Arg 73 and Met 74. Together, these features define the basis for Poleta's action on ultraviolet-damaged DNA that is crucial in suppressing the mutagenic and carcinogenic consequences of sun exposure, thereby reducing the incidence of skin cancers in humans.

19818796
Structural insights into yeast DNA polymerase delta by small angle X-ray scattering.
DNA polymerase delta (Poldelta) is a multisubunit polymerase that plays an indispensable role in replication from yeast to humans. Poldelta from Saccharomyces cerevisiae is composed of three subunits: Pol3, Pol31, and Pol32. Despite the elucidation of the structures and models of the individual subunits (or portions, thereof), the nature of their assembly remains unclear. We present here a small-angle X-ray scattering analysis of a yeast Poldelta complex (Poldelta(T)) composed of Pol3, Pol31, and Pol32N (amino acids 1-103 of Pol32). From the small angle X-ray scattering global parameters and reconstructed envelopes, we show that Poldelta(T) adopts an elongated conformation with a radius of gyration (R(g)) of approximately 52 A and a maximal dimension of approximately 190 A. We also propose an orientation for the accessory Pol31-Pol32N subunits relative to the Pol3 catalytic core that best agrees with the experimental scattering profile. The analysis also points to significant conformational variability that may allow Poldelta to better coordinate its action with other proteins at the replication fork.

19604477
Replication across template T/U by human DNA polymerase-iota.
Human DNA polymerase-iota (Poliota) incorporates correct nucleotides opposite template purines with a much higher efficiency and fidelity than opposite template pyrimidines. In fact, the fidelity opposite template T is so poor that Poliota inserts an incorrect dGTP approximately 10 times better than it inserts the correct dATP. We determine here how a template T/U is accommodated in the Poliota active site and why a G is incorporated more efficiently than an A. We show that in the absence of incoming dATP or dGTP (binary complex), template T/U exists in both syn and anti conformations, but in the presence of dATP or dGTP (ternary complexes), template T/U is predominantly in the anti conformation. We also show that dATP and dGTP insert differently opposite template T/U, and that the basis of selection of dGTP over dATP is a hydrogen bond between the N2 amino group of dGTP and Gln59 of Poliota.

