21501790
Elbow interposition arthroplasty.
End-stage elbow arthritis in young, active patients presents a challenging problem to the upper extremity surgeon. Total elbow arthroplasty is not a viable option in this population because of functional restrictions, limited implant survivorship, and the lack of an adequate salvage option. With the appropriate surgical indication, interposition arthroplasty can relieve severe pain, affording a functional elbow without severely proscribing permitted activities. In addition, bone stock is preserved, as are other reconstructive options for the future.

21089001
Is a silastic radial head still a reasonable option?
The importance of the radial head to elbow function and stability is increasingly apparent. Although preservation of the native radial head is preferred, severely comminuted fractures may necessitate resection or arthroplasty. Silastic radial head arthroplasty has been condemned on the basis of several sporadic reports of silicone synovitis. However, problems of "overstuffing," cartilage wear, and motion loss are becoming apparent with metal prostheses, indicating this also is not an ideal solution. Thus, the choices remain controversial. We asked whether intact or reconstructed primary elbow stabilizers permit use of silastic radial head implants without fragmentation, failure, and silicone synovitis. We retrospectively reviewed 23 patients with unreconstructable radial head fractures who were treated with silastic radial head arthroplasty and concomitant repair and/or reconstruction of the medial ulnar collateral ligament and/or lateral ulnar collateral ligament. Analysis included range of motion, pain, stability, and radiographic assessments; Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) questionnaire; and Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS). The minimum followup was 16 months (average, 69.6 months; range, 16-165 months). At last followup, the mean elbow flexion was 145°, extension 11°, supination 80°, and pronation 83°. The mean MEPS score was 88.9. The mean DASH score was 11.8. There were eight reoperations, none resulting from failure of the radial head implants. These results demonstrate silastic radial heads can be used with low complication rates and without evidence of synovitis when concomitant elbow ligament repair or reconstruction is performed. Level IV, therapeutic study. See Guidelines for Authors for a complete description of levels of evidence.

18984347
Chronic Mycobacterium infection of first dorsal web space after accidental Bacilli Calmette-Guérin injection in a health worker: case report.
We present a case of inoculation of the first dorsal web space by a nurse practitioner who accidentally stuck herself while preparing Bacilli Calmette-Guérin vaccine for treatment of bladder tumor. We report the evolution and management of this resistant chronic Mycobacterium infection that ultimately required use of a vacuum wound management system followed by a microvascular free tissue transfer.

18841435
Arthroscopically assisted coronoid fracture fixation: a preliminary report.
We investigated the feasibility of arthroscopically assisted reduction and fixation of small coronoid fractures and the anterior capsule for treatment of patients with Regan and Morrey Types I and II (O'Driscoll Types I and II) coronoid fractures with instability of the ulnohumeral joint. Four consecutive patients with this fracture type underwent arthroscopically assisted treatment and were evaluated at a minimum of 1 year (mean, 76 weeks; range, 58-92 weeks). All patients achieved a functional range of motion with an average flexion/extension arc of 2.5 degrees to 140 degrees and full pronation and supination. No patient had recurrent elbow instability. One patient had removal of a prominent suture over the subcutaneous border of the ulna. Arthroscopically assisted management of coronoid fractures can provide excellent observation, enabling anatomic repair without extensive soft tissue dissection. Preservation of the soft tissue attachments of small coronoid fragments and repair of the capsule are possible with this technique. Level of Evidence: Level IV, therapeutic study. See the Guidelines for Authors for a complete description of levels of evidence.

18282718
Trochlear reconstruction using vascularized lateral clavicle bone graft for posttraumatic osteonecrosis of the distal humerus.


17878776
Arthroscopically-assisted treatment of pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures.
Pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures are common injuries. Current treatment recommendations include nonoperative treatment for nondisplaced Milch type 1 fractures; however, truly nondisplaced fractures may be rare. Although closed reduction and percutaneous pinning under arthrographic visualization are most commonly used, anatomical reconstitution of the articular surface may require a lateral Kocher approach. This approach may compromise the vascularity of the distal fragment. To avoid this catastrophic complication while still obtaining anatomical articular surface reduction, we have investigated a new technique in which the lateral condyle fracture is reduced arthroscopically, allowing visualization of the articular surface without the soft tissue dissection required with open approaches. The fracture is then percutaneously pinned and immobilized as previously recommended. Six skeletally immature patients with lateral humeral condyle fractures underwent arthroscopic reduction and percutaneous pinning. The mean age of the patients was 48 months (range, 21-69 months). There were 2 girls and 4 boys. Surgery was performed on 4 left and 2 right elbows. The mean follow-up was 32 weeks (range, 21-44 weeks). Postoperatively, all patients were placed in a long arm cast for 4 weeks. Pins and casts were removed at 4 weeks, and motion was begun. Elbow radiographs were evaluated for fracture healing, articular congruity, malunion, growth disturbance, and presence of avascular necrosis. Range of motion, function, pain, and cosmetic deformity were recorded. All patients had full active and passive range of motion. There was no difference in range of motion compared with the contralateral side (P < 0.05). All fractures healed radiographically by 4 weeks. There were no cases of nonunion or malunion. No patients developed cubitus varus. One patient developed radiolucency of the capitellum. There were no other complications. Arthroscopic reduction and percutaneous fixation of pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures may offer a safe and effective alternative to open treatment with decreased soft tissue stripping and a possibly decreased risk of malunion or avascular necrosis. Level IV.

17210436
Arthroscopic reduction-association of the scapholunate.
The reduction-association scapholunate (RASL) procedure for stabilization of the scapholunate joint is an alternative to soft-tissue procedures that do not maintain normal carpal alignment, despite reports of good symptomatic relief. The RASL procedure--indicated for patients with scapholunate instability or scapholunate dissociation without arthritis and, in selected cases, with stage 1 scapholunate advanced collapse of the wrist--can be performed arthroscopically. Radial midcarpal and 3-4 radiocarpal portals are used to excoriate and prepare the scapholunate joint surfaces. By use of 0.62'' K-wire joysticks in the lunate and distal pole of the scaphoid, the scaphoid undergoes dorsiflexion and supination while the lunate undergoes palmarflexion to achieve reduction. A .35'' guidewire is advanced through the scaphoid waist, across the scapholunate joint to the proximomedial corner of the lunate. Supplemental K-wire fixation, from the scaphoid to the capitatum and lunate to the radius, stabilizes the reduction for placement of a cannulated HBS screw (Orthosurgical Implants, Miami, FL) through a 1-2 portal, while reduction and positioning are confirmed arthroscopically. Arthroscopy facilitates anatomic reduction of the joint, as well as the critically important, precise placement of the cannulated HBS screw, by use of 3 portals rather than the traditional 2-incision approach.

19762164
Biomechanical comparison of techniques to reduce the bulk of lacerated flexor tendon ends within digital sheaths of the porcine forelimb.
Zone II flexor tendon repairs may create a bulging effect with increased bulk and resistance to tendon gliding. A biomechanical time 0 study was performed to assess 2 methods of tendon antibulking for work of flexion and strength characteristics. We placed 24 fresh-frozen porcine forelimb tendons in a custom jig. Deep flexor tendon was sectioned just distal to the intact A1 and A2 pulleys. Specimens were divided into 3 groups before repair: group 1, nonmodified tendon; group 2, 30 degrees bilateral notch excised from both tendon ends; and group 3, triangular longitudinal central wedge excised from both tendon ends. All repairs used a 4-strand modified Kessler core suture and running circumferential epitendinous suture. Work of flexion, 2-mm gap formation, and ultimate load to failure were tested. Both antibulking techniques (groups 2 and 3) had significantly less work of flexion than group 1 (36.3 and 34.9 J vs 142.9 J, p < .001). There was no significant change in work of flexion between groups 2 and 3 (p > .05). There was no significant difference in terms of 2-mm gap formation among the 3 groups (p > .05). Groups 1 and 3 exhibited a significantly higher load to failure compared with group 2 (p < .05). The antibulking repair techniques used in this study decrease the work of flexion with no significant change in force to 2-mm gap formation. Group 2, however, did have significantly lower load to failure. These techniques might be beneficial in zone II flexor tendon injury, in which the tight annular pulley system restricts tendon gliding. However, this is a time 0 study and the potential adverse effects of increase tendon manipulation and trauma were not analyzed, which might increase adhesions and scar during the healing phase of tendon repair.

