21606952
Wnt signaling through T-cell factor phosphorylation.
Embryonic signaling pathways often lead to a switch from default repression to transcriptional activation of target genes. A major consequence of Wnt signaling is stabilization of ?-catenin, which associates with T-cell factors (TCFs) and 'converts' them from repressors into transcriptional activators. The molecular mechanisms responsible for this conversion remain poorly understood. Several studies have reported on the regulation of TCF by phosphorylation, yet its physiological significance has been unclear: in some cases it appears to promote target gene activation, in others Wnt-dependent transcription is inhibited. This review focuses on recent progress in the understanding of context-dependent post-translational regulation of TCF function by Wnt signaling.Cell Research advance online publication 24 May 2011; doi:10.1038/cr.2011.86.

21285352
Phosphorylation of TCF proteins by homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2.
Wnt pathways play essential roles in cell proliferation, morphogenesis, and cell fate specification during embryonic development. According to the consensus view, the Wnt pathway prevents the degradation of the key signaling component ?-catenin by the protein complex containing the negative regulators Axin and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3). Stabilized ?-catenin associates with TCF proteins and enters the nucleus to promote target gene expression. This study examines the involvement of HIPK2 (homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2) in the regulation of different TCF proteins in Xenopus embryos in vivo. We show that the TCF family members LEF1, TCF4, and TCF3 are phosphorylated in embryonic ectoderm after Wnt8 stimulation and HIPK2 overexpression. We also find that TCF3 phosphorylation is triggered by canonical Wnt ligands, LRP6, and dominant negative mutants for Axin and GSK3, indicating that this process shares the same upstream regulators with ?-catenin stabilization. HIPK2-dependent phosphorylation caused the dissociation of LEF1, TCF4, and TCF3 from a target promoter in vivo. This result provides a mechanistic explanation for the context-dependent function of HIPK2 in Wnt signaling; HIPK2 up-regulates transcription by phosphorylating TCF3, a transcriptional repressor, but inhibits transcription by phosphorylating LEF1, a transcriptional activator. Finally, we show that upon HIPK2-mediated phosphorylation, TCF3 is replaced with positively acting TCF1 at a target promoter. These observations emphasize a critical role for Wnt/HIPK2-dependent TCF phosphorylation and suggest that TCF switching is an important mechanism of Wnt target gene activation in vertebrate embryos.

20951344
Regulation of TCF3 by Wnt-dependent phosphorylation during vertebrate axis specification.
A commonly accepted model of Wnt/?-catenin signaling involves target gene activation by a complex of ?-catenin with a T-cell factor (TCF) family member. TCF3 is a transcriptional repressor that has been implicated in Wnt signaling and plays key roles in embryonic axis specification and stem cell differentiation. Here we demonstrate that Wnt proteins stimulate TCF3 phosphorylation in gastrulating Xenopus embryos and mammalian cells. This phosphorylation event involves ?-catenin-mediated recruitment of homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2 (HIPK2) to TCF3 and culminates in the dissociation of TCF3 from a target gene promoter. Mutated TCF3 proteins resistant to Wnt-dependent phosphorylation function as constitutive inhibitors of Wnt-mediated activation of Vent2 and Cdx4 during anteroposterior axis specification. These findings reveal an alternative in vivo mechanism of Wnt signaling that involves TCF3 phosphorylation and subsequent derepression of target genes and link this molecular event to a specific developmental process.

19842147
Xenopus axin-related protein: a link between its centrosomal localization and function in the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway.
The Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway regulates cell proliferation and cell fate determination in multiple systems. However, the subcellular localization of Wnt pathway components and the significance of this localization for the pathway regulation have not been extensively analyzed. Here we report that Xenopus Axin-related protein (XARP), a component of the beta-catenin destruction complex, is localized to the centrosome. This localization of XARP requires the presence of the DIX domain and an adjacent region. Since other components of the Wnt pathway have also been shown to associate with the centrosome, we tested a hypothesis that the beta-catenin destruction complex operates at the centrosome. However, XARP mutants with poor centrosomal localization revealed an enhanced rather than decreased ability to antagonize the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. Our data are consistent with the idea that the inactivation of XARP at the centrosome is an important regulatory point in Wnt signaling.

19789178
Centrosomal localization of Diversin and its relevance to Wnt signaling.
Wnt pathways regulate many developmental processes, including cell-fate specification, cell polarity, and cell movements during morphogenesis. The subcellular distribution of pathway mediators in specific cellular compartments might be crucial for the selection of pathway targets and signaling specificity. We find that the ankyrin-repeat protein Diversin, which functions in different Wnt signaling branches, localizes to the centrosome in Xenopus ectoderm and mammalian cells. Upon stimulation with Wnt ligands, the centrosomal distribution of Diversin is transformed into punctate cortical localization. Also, Diversin was recruited by Frizzled receptors to non-homogeneous Dishevelled-containing cortical patches. Importantly, Diversin deletion constructs, which did not localize to the centrosome, failed to efficiently antagonize Wnt signaling. Furthermore, a C-terminal construct that interfered with Diversin localization inhibited Diversin-mediated beta-catenin degradation. These observations suggest that the centrosomal localization of Diversin is crucial for its function in Wnt signaling.

19782678
The involvement of lethal giant larvae and Wnt signaling in bottle cell formation in Xenopus embryos.
Lethal giant larvae (Lgl) plays a critical role in establishment of cell polarity in epithelial cells. While Frizzled/Dsh signaling has been implicated in the regulation of the localization and activity of Lgl, it remains unclear whether specific Wnt ligands are involved. Here we show that Wnt5a triggers the release of Lgl from the cell cortex into the cytoplasm with the concomitant decrease in Lgl stability. The observed changes in Lgl localization were independent of atypical PKC (aPKC), which is known to influence Lgl distribution. In ectodermal cells, both Wnt5a and Lgl triggered morphological and molecular changes characteristic of apical constriction, whereas depletion of their functions prevented endogenous and ectopic bottle cell formation. Furthermore, Lgl RNA partially rescued bottle cell formation in embryos injected with a dominant negative Wnt5a construct. These results suggest a molecular link between Wnt5a and Lgl that is essential for apical constriction during vertebrate gastrulation.

19686683
PAR-1 phosphorylates Mind bomb to promote vertebrate neurogenesis.
Generation of neurons in the vertebrate central nervous system requires a complex transcriptional regulatory network and signaling processes in polarized neuroepithelial progenitor cells. Here we demonstrate that neurogenesis in the Xenopus neural plate in vivo and mammalian neural progenitors in vitro involves intrinsic antagonistic activities of the polarity proteins PAR-1 and aPKC. Furthermore, we show that Mind bomb (Mib), a ubiquitin ligase that promotes Notch ligand trafficking and activity, is a crucial molecular substrate for PAR-1. The phosphorylation of Mib by PAR-1 results in Mib degradation, repression of Notch signaling, and stimulation of neuronal differentiation. These observations suggest a conserved mechanism for neuronal fate determination that might operate during asymmetric divisions of polarized neural progenitor cells.

19332887
Strabismus regulates asymmetric cell divisions and cell fate determination in the mouse brain.
The planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway organizes the cytoskeleton and polarizes cells within embryonic tissue. We investigate the relationship between PCP signaling and cell fate determination during asymmetric division of neural progenitors (NPs) in mouse embryos. The cortex of Lp/Lp (Loop-tail) mice deficient in the essential PCP mediator Vangl2, homologue of Drosophila melanogaster Strabismus (Stbm), revealed precocious differentiation of neural progenitors into early-born neurons at the expense of late-born neurons and glia. Although Lp/Lp NPs were easily maintained in vitro, they showed premature differentiation and loss of asymmetric distribution of Leu-Gly-Asn-enriched protein (LGN)/partner of inscuteable (Pins), a regulator of mitotic spindle orientation. Furthermore, we observed a decreased frequency in asymmetric distribution of the LGN target nuclear mitotic apparatus protein (NuMa) in Lp/Lp cortical progenitors in vivo. This was accompanied by an increase in the number of vertical cleavage planes typically associated with equal daughter cell identities. These findings suggest that Stbm/Vangl2 functions to maintain cortical progenitors and regulates mitotic spindle orientation during asymmetric divisions in the vertebrate brain.

17993468
PAR1 specifies ciliated cells in vertebrate ectoderm downstream of aPKC.
Partitioning-defective 1 (PAR1) and atypical protein kinase C (aPKC) are conserved serine/threonine protein kinases implicated in the establishment of cell polarity in many species from yeast to humans. Here we investigate the roles of these protein kinases in cell fate determination in Xenopus epidermis. Early asymmetric cell divisions at blastula and gastrula stages give rise to the superficial (apical) and the deep (basal) cell layers of epidermal ectoderm. These two layers consist of cells with different intrinsic developmental potential, including superficial epidermal cells and deep ciliated cells. Our gain- and loss-of-function studies demonstrate that aPKC inhibits ciliated cell differentiation in Xenopus ectoderm and promotes superficial cell fates. We find that the crucial molecular substrate for aPKC is PAR1, which is localized in a complementary domain in superficial ectoderm cells. We show that PAR1 acts downstream of aPKC and is sufficient to stimulate ciliated cell differentiation and inhibit superficial epidermal cell fates. Our results suggest that aPKC and PAR1 function sequentially in a conserved molecular pathway that links apical-basal cell polarity to Notch signaling and cell fate determination. The observed patterning mechanism may operate in a wide range of epithelial tissues in many species.

17827178
WNTers in La Jolla.
A 'traditional' Wnt meeting, the first of which occurred over two decades ago as a meeting of the laboratories of Harold Varmus and Roel Nusse, was held at the University of California, San Diego, in June 2007. Organized by Karl Willert, Anthony Wynshaw-Boris and Katherine Jones, the meeting was attended by nearly 400 scientists interested in ;all things Wnt', including Wnt signal transduction mechanisms, and Wnt signaling in evolutionary and developmental biology, stem cell biology, regeneration and disease. Themes that dominated the meeting included the need for precise control over each step of the signal transduction mechanism and developing therapeutics for diseases caused by altered Wnt-signaling.

