20674509
Abdominal pain 1 month after adjustable gastric banding: an unusual complication caused by connecting tubing.


20204417
Laparoscopic subtotal colectomy for medically refractory ulcerative colitis: the time has come.
To evaluate laparoscopic versus open subtotal colectomy (STC) in patients with ulcerative colitis (UC) requiring urgent or emergent operative intervention. A retrospective review was performed of 90 patients with medically refractory UC who underwent STC with end ileostomy at The Mount Sinai Medical Center from 2002 to 2007. Patients with toxic megacolon were excluded. Univariate analysis was conducted by unpaired Student t-test and chi-square test. Results are presented as mean +/- 95% confidence interval. Ninety patients underwent STC, 29 by laparoscopic and 61 by open approach. In patients undergoing laparoscopic versus open STC, intraoperative blood loss was decreased (130.4 +/- 38.4 vs. 201.4 +/- 43.2 ml, p < 0.05) and operative time prolonged (216.4 +/- 20.2 vs. 169.9 +/- 14.4 min, p < 0.01). In the absence of postoperative complication, hospital length of stay (4.5 +/- 0.7 vs. 6 +/- 1.3 days, p < 0.001) was shorter in laparoscopic versus open group. No mortalities occurred. Overall morbidity, 30-day readmission, and reoperation were equivalent regardless of operative approach. Wound complications were absent in the laparoscopic group compared with 21.4% in the open group (p < 0.01). Follow-up at a mean of 36 months demonstrated no difference in restoration of gastrointestinal continuity. Laparoscopic STC confers the benefits of improved cosmesis, reduced intraoperative blood loss, negligible wound complications, and shorter hospital stay. Laparoscopy is a feasible and safe alternative to open STC in patients with UC refractory to medical therapy requiring urgent or emergent operation.

19118417
Video. When sleeve gastrectomy fails: adding a laparoscopic adjustable gastric band to increase restriction.
The use of laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) as a procedure for morbid obesity has recently increased. The LSG procedure is used most often as a part of a biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch (BPDDS) or as a first stage that can be converted to a BPDDS or Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB). However, the surgical indications for LSG have rapidly expanded, and some centers use the sleeve as the primary operation for morbid obesity.The utility of LSG as a primary procedure is controversial, with consensus lacking in the literature. Whether the etiology of failed sufficient weight loss is the result of an inadequate sleeve or attributable to dilation or hypertrophy of the sleeve, the incidence of failed sleeve gastrectomies may be significant.In the treatment of a patient with a failed LSG, the options typically include creation of a tighter sleeve or conversion to biliopancreatic diversion or RYGB. These procedures, however, are complex and can carry significant morbidity.The authors report a case of a morbidly obese 42-year-old man who failed to lose sufficient weight after an LSG. Because the patient was dependent on several oral antipsychotic medications, he refused any malabsorptive procedure, and a decision was made to proceed with laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB). The case proceeded successfully, and at this writing, 9 months after surgery, the patient has achieved a 57% excess weight loss from an original weight of 390 lb.The insertion of an LAGB into its normal anatomic position is feasible after a sleeve gastrectomy, and its use can induce sufficient restriction and weight loss results equivalent to those of a sleeve or band alone and possibly better.

