21311618
Cerebrospinal fluid leaks of temporal bone origin: selection of surgical approach.
Cerebrospinal fluid leaks of the temporal bone are rare, often occult, and sometimes challenging to localize and repair. This is a retrospective study of eight patients with spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid leak and six patients with cerebrospinal fluid leak or encephalocele discovered during chronic ear surgery who were treated in a tertiary medical center over a 5-year period. All received preoperative temporal bone computed tomography, and six also underwent magnetic resonance imaging, one computed tomography cisternography, and one radionuclide cisternography. All patients initially underwent a transmastoid surgical approach. Additional exposure was necessary in three patients; two underwent middle fossa craniotomy and another required minicraniotomy. Primary surgical repair was successful in six of the eight patients with spontaneous leaks and in all six chronic ear patients. Both recurrences required intradural middle fossa repair. An individualized approach should be taken for repair of temporal bone cerebrospinal fluid leaks. In this series, most were successfully repaired in a single stage using a transmastoid or combined approach. The transmastoid approach provides information about the precise size and location of the dural defect. A primary transcranial approach is needed for defects that are multiple, located in the petrous apex, and in revision cases.

17473682
Cholesteatoma in the normal hearing ear.
Surgical treatment of cholesteatoma in ears with normal or near-normal hearing represents a challenge, in that complete removal of disease may require sacrifice of the ossicular chain. Our aim was to identify the predictive factors and surgical strategies that favor hearing preservation in these patients. Retrospective case review. Fifty-four procedures were performed in 50 patients with cholesteatoma and a preoperative speech reception threshold or pure-tone average (PTA) of less than 25 dB. Complete audiometric data were available in 51 cases. All patients had complete surgical removal of cholesteatoma. Whenever feasible, ossicular reconstruction was performed at the time of the initial surgical procedure. The median PTA changed by -3 dB, and hearing was preserved to within 10 dB of preoperative level in 72% of patients. An intact ossicular chain was found in 72% of the cases and could often be preserved at surgery. However, similar hearing outcomes resulted after intact versus reconstructed ossicular chains and in open versus closed mastoidectomies. The recidivism rate was 26%, and recidivistic cases had worse hearing outcomes. Congenital cholesteatomas and Prussak space cholesteatomas had better outcomes with respect to hearing preservation and recidivism. Cholesteatoma in the normal hearing ear should be treated with the same surgical priorities as all other cholesteatomas. Preventing recidivism has a significant effect on hearing preservation, whereas preserving an intact ossicular chain and maintaining an intact canal wall do not.

17471108
Petrous apex aspergillosis as a long-term complication of cholesterol granuloma.
Aspergillus infection of the petrous apex is a rare and devastating condition. To date, only two such cases have been reported, which resulted from direct extension of chronic Aspergillus otitis media. We present a case of petrous apex aspergillosis occurring years after surgical drainage of a petrous apex granuloma cyst. Because of the potential lethal nature of this condition, aggressive surgical therapy should be considered early in this illness and may provide the best chance for survival.

