20578897
The genetics of the thyroid stimulating hormone receptor: history and relevance.
The thyroid stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR) is the key regulator of thyrocyte function. The gene for the TSHR on chromosome 14q31 has been implicated as coding for the major autoantigen in the autoimmune hyperthyroidism of Graves' disease (GD) to which T cells and autoantibodies are directed. The TSHR is a seven-transmembrane domain receptor that undergoes complex posttranslational processing. In this brief review, we look at the genetics of this important autoantigen and its influence on a variety of tissue functions in addition to its role in the induction of GD. There is convincing evidence that the TSH receptor gene confers increased susceptibility for GD, but not Hashimoto's thyroiditis. GD is associated with polymorphisms in the intron 1 gene region. How such noncoding nucleotide changes influence disease susceptibility remains uncertain, but is likely to involve TSHR splicing variants and/or microRNAs arising from this gene region. Whether such influences are confined to the thyroid gland or whether they influence cell function in the many extrathyroidal sites of TSHR expression remains unknown.

19211403
Inheriting autoimmune thyroid disease.


18925838
Influence of the TSH receptor gene on susceptibility to Graves' disease and Graves' ophthalmopathy.
A large gene region, called GD-1, was first described by this laboratory as linked to Graves' disease (GD) and included the gene for the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR). Recent studies have now suggested an association of TSHR intronic polymorphisms with GD. We have taken the opportunity to examine a population of well-characterized patients with autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) typed for an additional thyroid susceptibility gene, the immunoregulatory gene for cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4), to examine its relationship with the susceptibility to GD endowed by TSHR gene polymorphisms. We used TSHR-SNP-rs2268458, located in intron 1 of the TSHR gene, measured using standard PCR-RFLP procedures, as our marker for the TSHR gene association. We genotyped 200 patients with GD, 83 patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT), and 118 healthy controls (all female Caucasians). The allele and genotype frequencies from GD patients, but not HT patients, were significantly different from controls. The frequency of the combined genotype (allele) CC + TC was significantly higher in GD patients versus controls, suggesting that the C-containing genotype increased the risk for GD in a dominant manner (p = 0.018, odds ratio [OR] = 1.8). When compared with CTLA-4 (A/G)(49) single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), we were unable to demonstrate additive risk in patients with established AITD. Further, subsetting the patients (n = 120) into those with clinically significant Graves' ophthalmopathy (GO) showed no association with the TSHR SNP. These results demonstrated that the intronic TSHR-SNP-rs2268458 was associated with GD, but not with HT, thus indicating that the TSHR gene has the potential to increase susceptibility to GD. However, we were not able to demonstrate any additive risk with the CTLA-4 (A/G)(49) SNP, which is, therefore, an independent risk factor for AITD. This suggested that, within the limits of the study population, each of these two genes provided a small contribution to GD susceptibility and that neither was essential. In addition, there was no evidence for the TSHR gene association adding to the risk of developing GO. Direct functional analyses are now needed to help explain the mechanisms of this TSHR gene susceptibility to GD.

17911434
Thyroid epigenetics: X chromosome inactivation in patients with autoimmune thyroid disease.
The autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITDs) are female-predominant diseases with a ratio of approximately seven females to each male. X chromosome inactivation (XCI), an epigenetic phenomenon, has been suggested to be skewed in many such female patients with AITD. We analyzed female genomic DNA from 87 patients with Graves' disease (GD), 47 patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT), and 69 healthy controls. Using an XCI assay based on Hpa II digestion and PCR and DNA sequencing, we found skewed heterozygous XCI (>or=80%) in 20 of 70 GD patients (28.6%) and 11 of 43 HT patients (25.6%), giving a total of 31 of 113 AITD patients (27.4%) with skewed XCI. In contrast, only 5 of 58 healthy controls had skewed XCI (8.6%). Statistical analysis confirmed that XCI skewing was significantly associated with AITD (P = 0.004, OR = 4.0), demonstrating that the degree of XCI is an important contributor to the increased risk of females in developing AITD.

