20878196
Thyroid and parathyroid surgery in pregnancy.
The consideration of surgery during pregnancy requires weighing the benefit of urgent surgery against the risk to mother and fetus. Surgery during pregnancy involves an increase in both maternal and fetal risks. Thyroid and parathyroid surgery involves physiological risks to both mother and fetus specific to the disease and function of these endocrine glands. Evaluation of a thyroid mass is similar in pregnant patients with ultrasound and fine-needle aspiration biopsy providing the most important information, while the use of radiographic imaging is severely constrained except when specifically required. In general, thyroid surgery can be delayed until after delivery except in cases of airway compromise or aggressive cancer. In contrast, parathyroid surgery is recommended during pregnancy to avoid adverse effects to the neonate.

20529986
Focused review: ropivacaine versus bupivacaine for epidural labor analgesia.
Neuraxial analgesia is frequently administered to women in labor. For many years, bupivacaine has been used because of its long duration of action, lack of excessive motor block, and minimal fetal and neonatal effects. However, bupivacaine is one of the most cardiotoxic local anesthetics in current use and motor block is still a problem. Many local anesthetics such as bupivacaine exist in 2 forms, levorotatory and dextrorotatory. Ropivacaine, an amide local anesthetic produced in the pure levorotatory form addresses some of the concerns related to bupivacaine. In this article, we present the literature comparing ropivacaine and bupivacaine to determine whether there is an advantage to using one of these local anesthetics for labor analgesia. We found that there is no advantage to the routine use of ropivacaine for labor analgesia.

20472631
An update on obstetric anesthesia.
Many women in the United States receive analgesia for labor and delivery. The ideal labor analgesic technique would confer complete pain relief without side effects. The analgesic technique would not cause any lower extremity motor blockade nor interfere with the progress or course of labor and would be sufficiently flexible to produce anesthesia for instrumental or cesarean deliveries. Furthermore, the baby would be vigorous at birth. Modern obstetric analgesia techniques and medications achieve these goals. This article reviews current labor analgesia techniques and medications used during labor and delivery.

19888033
Labor pain at the time of epidural analgesia and mode of delivery in nulliparous women presenting for an induction of labor.
To assess whether the degree of labor pain at the initiation of neuraxial analgesia is associated with mode of delivery. Nulliparous women who presented to the labor department for an induction of labor, who were between 37 and 41 weeks of gestation, and who requested labor epidural analgesia with a pain score of 0-3 (low pain) and a cervical dilatation less than 4 cm were assessed retrospectively. Maternal and neonatal outcome including mode of delivery and duration of labor were compared with a similar group of women with pain scores of 4-6 (moderate pain), and 7-10 (severe pain). Assessing whether there was an association between pain level at the time of epidural and operative delivery rates was analyzed using a chi test for trend and by logistic regression to include potentially relevant covariates. We found 185 nulliparous women with low pain and compared them with a randomly selected equal number of women in each of the other pain groups. There was no significant association between pain groups in terms of duration of the first or second stage of labor or mode of delivery. Women with low pain had an operative delivery rate (instrumental assisted vaginal delivery plus cesarean delivery) of 49%, compared with 45% and 45% in those with moderate and severe pain, respectively (P=.40). We did not find an association between the degree of labor pain at initiation of epidural analgesia and mode of delivery or duration of labor. II.

19372342
Amniotic fluid embolism.
Amniotic fluid embolism is one of the most catastrophic complications of pregnancy. First described in 1941, the condition is exceedingly rare and the exact pathophysiology is still unknown. The etiology was thought to be embolic in nature, but more recent evidence suggests an immunologic basis. Common presenting symptoms include dyspnea, nonreassuring fetal status, hypotension, seizures, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Early recognition of amniotic fluid embolism is critical to a successful outcome. However, despite intensive resuscitation, outcomes are frequently poor for both infant and mother. Recently, aggressive and successful management of amniotic fluid embolism with recombinant factor VIIa and a ventricular assist device, inhaled nitric oxide, cardiopulmonary bypass and intraaortic balloon pump with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation have been reported and should be considered in select cases.

18946292
Manual editing of automatically recorded data in an anesthesia information management system.
Anesthesia information management systems allow automatic recording of physiologic and anesthetic data. The authors investigated the prevalence of such data modification in an academic medical center. The authors queried their anesthesia information management system database of anesthetics performed in 2006 and tabulated the counts of data points for automatically recorded physiologic and anesthetic parameters as well as the subset of those data that were manually invalidated by clinicians (both with and without alternate values manually appended). Patient, practitioner, data source, and timing characteristics of recorded values were also extracted to determine their associations with editing of various parameters in the anesthesia information management system record. A total of 29,491 cases were analyzed, 19% of which had one or more data points manually invalidated. Among 58 attending anesthesiologists, each invalidated data in a median of 7% of their cases when working as a sole practitioner. A minority of invalidated values were manually appended with alternate values. Pulse rate, blood pressure, and pulse oximetry were the most commonly invalidated parameters. Data invalidation usually resulted in a decrease in parameter variance. Factors independently associated with invalidation included extreme physiologic values, American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status classification, emergency status, timing (phase of the procedure/anesthetic), presence of an intraarterial catheter, resident or certified registered nurse anesthetist involvement, and procedure duration. Editing of physiologic data automatically recorded in an anesthesia information management system is a common practice and results in decreased variability of intraoperative data. Further investigation may clarify the reasons for and consequences of this behavior.

18713914
Successful placement of a right ventricular assist device for treatment of a presumed amniotic fluid embolism.
Amniotic fluid embolism is a rare and often fatal complication of pregnancy. We report the successful multidisciplinary management of a woman who developed a coagulopathy from a presumed amniotic fluid embolism after forceps-assisted vaginal delivery requiring recombinant factor VIIa, and pulmonary arterial hypertension requiring a right ventricular assist device.

18063212
Tension pneumothorax and cardiac arrest from an improvised oxygen delivery system.
An improvised mechanism for delivering supplemental oxygen to a spontaneously breathing, tracheally intubated patient set the stage for a case of barotrauma, bilateral tension pneumothorax, and cardiovascular collapse. Diagnosis and treatment was delayed by failed needle decompression of the pneumothoraces. Recommendations are made regarding the prevention and treatment of this complication to improve patient safety.

17717236
Local anesthetics and mode of delivery: bupivacaine versus ropivacaine versus levobupivacaine.
The influence of the labor epidural local anesthetic (LA) on mode of delivery has not been adequately studied. In this study, we sought to determine if there is a difference in mode of delivery among parturients who receive epidural bupivacaine, ropivacaine, or levobupivacaine. Nulliparous women at term requesting labor analgesia with a cervical dilation <5 cm were randomized to receive epidural bupivacaine, ropivacaine, or levobupivacaine. Analgesia was initiated with a bolus of 15 mL of 0.0625% of the assigned LA with fentanyl 2 microg/mL. Analgesia was maintained with an infusion of the same solution at 10 mL/h. The primary endpoint was the operative delivery rate (instrumental assisted vaginal delivery plus cesarean delivery). Ninety-eight women received bupivacaine, 90 ropivacaine, and 34 levobupivacaine (before it was removed from the US market). There was no significant difference in the operative delivery rate (bupivacaine = 46%, ropivacaine = 39%, and levobupivacaine = 32%, P = 0.35) among groups. There was less motor block in the levobupivacaine group when compared with the ropivacaine and bupivacaine groups, P < 0.05. There was no significant difference in the duration of the first or second stage of labor, the total dose of LA received per hour of labor, or neonatal outcome among groups. Bupivacaine, ropivacaine, and levobupivacaine all confer adequate labor epidural analgesia, with no significant influence on mode of delivery, duration of labor, or neonatal outcome.

17513642
The effect of an interactive visual reminder in an anesthesia information management system on timeliness of prophylactic antibiotic administration.
To reduce the incidence of surgical site infection, preoperative antibiotics should be administered within 60 min before surgical incision. The purpose of this study was to determine whether adding a visual interactive electronic reminder with a message related to antibiotic administration to our anesthesia information management system would increase compliance with prophylactic antibiotic guidelines. We retrospectively studied electronic anesthesia records of ambulatory and day-of-surgery admission surgical cases in which one of our usual prophylactic antibiotics was administered from June 2004 through December 2005, an interval that includes cases both before and after the February 2005 implementation of the new reminder. Compliance was defined as documented antibiotic administration within 60 min before the surgical procedure starting time. Noncompliant cases were divided into those in which dosing was too early or too late. Compliance for 4987 cases before and 9478 cases after the reminder was implemented increased from 82.4% to 89.1% (P < 0.01). This increase was found both for attending anesthesiologists assisted by a resident or nurse anesthetist (82.9% before vs 89.1% after, P < 0.01) and for attending anesthesiologists working alone (80.1% before vs 89.3% after, P < 0.01). The improvement in compliance was associated with a decrease in the incidence of antibiotics administered too late (i.e., after surgical incision) (15.2% before vs 8.1% after, P < 0.01), but with no significant change in the incidence of antibiotics administered too early (i.e., more than 60 min before skin incision) (2.4% before vs 2.8% after, P = 0.07). The implementation of a visual interactive electronic reminder regarding administration of preoperative antibiotics in an anesthesia information management system was associated with a sustained increase in compliance with surgical prophylactic antibiotic administration timing guidelines.

18848442
A survey of anesthesiologists' and nurses' attitudes toward the implementation of an Anesthesia Information Management System on a labor and delivery floor.
An anesthesia information management system (AIMS) is most frequently used in the operating room, but not on labor and delivery (L&D). The purpose of this study is to describe the implementation of an AIMS on L&D and the attitudes of practitioners (anesthesiologists and nurses) toward the system. The anesthesiology survey focused on satisfaction with the L&D AIMS, comparison of the L&D AIMS with a handwritten anesthesia record, and comparison of the L&D AIMS with the operating room AIMS. The nursing survey focused on nursing satisfaction with the L&D AIMS and comparison of the L&D AIMS with a handwritten anesthesia record. Most anesthesiologists (76%) were satisfied with the L&D AIMS and 73% would not want to revert back to the paper record. However, most anesthesiologists felt the operating room AIMS was either superior or equal to the L&D AIMS. Although few nurses (4%) preferred the anesthesiologists revert back to the handwritten record overall, the nurses were neutral in their assessment of the AIMS. Most of the criticism related to the location of the system; 56% believed it was not in a convenient location and 74% thought the AIMS equipment "got in their way". Overall, the anesthesiologists and nurses are satisfied with the L&D AIMS and would not want to switch back to a handwritten record. We conclude that AIMS should not be limited to the operating room setting and can successfully be used in L&D.

17270428
Delayed diagnosis of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) in a parturient with preeclampsia after inadvertent dural puncture.
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome is a rare complication generally associated with headache and acute changes in blood pressure. We present a case of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome where diagnosis was delayed because the patient also had preeclampsia and an inadvertent dural puncture, both associated with headache. The clinical challenge and the need for prompt diagnosis and treatment are emphasized.

