19387920
Alcohol and liver fibrosis.
Alcoholic liver disease involves significant crosstalk among intracellular signaling events in the liver. Overall, inflammatory and innate immune responses in Kupffer cells due to elevated gut-derived plasma endotoxin levels, increased reactive oxygen species-induced damage, and profibrogenic factors such as acetaldehyde or lipid peroxidation products contribute to activation of hepatic stellate cells, the key cell type involved in liver fibrosis. Using in vitro and in vivo approaches, there has been great progress in our understanding of the mechanisms leading to liver fibrosis: potential biomarkers of fibrosis have been identified, and several candidate targets for antifibrotic drugs have been elucidated.

19250650
Reactive nitrogen species switch on early extracellular matrix remodeling via induction of MMP1 and TNFalpha.
Liver injury leads to generation of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, which can react to produce peroxynitrite (ONOO-). We investigated whether ONOO- and its metabolites modulate extracellular matrix remodeling. Stellate cells (HSC) were incubated with pure ONOO- or SIN-1 (a ONOO- donor). Western blot, nuclear in vitro transcription, Northern blot, qPCR, and promoter transactivation analysis for COL1A1 and COL1A2 were carried out. Rats were fed alcohol or injected with CCl4 to cause alcohol-induced liver injury and an early fibrogenic response. HSC incubated with ONOO- or SIN-1 showed similar viability, proliferation, COL1A1 and COL1A2 transcription rates, and mRNA levels as controls. There was a time- and dose-dependent down-regulation of collagen I and alpha-Sma proteins and up-regulation of MMP1 and TNFalpha, indicating decreased HSC activation. These effects were blocked by ONOO- scavengers. SIN-1 or ONOO- increased nitrosylation of MMP1/MMP13 and transactivation of the MMP1, MMP13, and TNFalpha promoters. A TNFalpha neutralizing antibody or GSH-ethyl ester blocked MMP1 promoter transactivation; whereas TNFalpha or l-buthionine sulfoximine, which depletes GSH, further enhanced it. Pretreatment with SIN-1 or ONOO- reduced the TGFbeta pro-fibrogenic response in HSC. In vivo experiments validated the protective role of ONOO- on the early fibrogenic response. However, highly activated HSC, such as myofibroblasts and HSC from chronic alcohol-fed rats, were resistant to the anti-fibrogenic actions of ONOO- due to higher levels of GSH, a ONOO- scavenger, overproduction of pro-fibrogenic TGFbeta, and reactive oxygen species. ONOO- could induce a protective mechanism in HSC in early stages of liver injury.

19003881
Ethanol and arachidonic acid synergize to activate Kupffer cells and modulate the fibrogenic response via tumor necrosis factor alpha, reduced glutathione, and transforming growth factor beta-dependent mechanisms.
Because of the contribution of ethanol and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) to alcoholic liver disease, we investigated whether chronic ethanol administration and arachidonic acid (AA) could synergistically mediate Kupffer cell (KC) activation and modulate the stellate cell (HSC) fibrogenic response. Results: (1) the effects of ethanol and AA on KC and HSC were as follows: Cell proliferation, lipid peroxidation, H(2)O(2), O(2).(-), nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate reduced form (NADPH) oxidase activity, and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) were higher in KC(ethanol) than in KC(control), and were enhanced by AA; HSC(ethanol) proliferated faster, increased collagen, and showed higher GSH than HSC(control), with modest effects by AA. (2) AA effects on the control co-culture: We previously reported the ability of KC to induce a pro-fibrogenic response in HSC via reactive oxygen species (ROS)-dependent mechanisms; we now show that AA further increases cell proliferation and collagen in the control co-culture. The latter was prevented by vitamin E (an antioxidant) and by diphenyleneiodonium (a NADPH oxidase inhibitor). (3) Ethanol effects on the co-cultures: Co-culture with KC(control) or KC(ethanol) induced HSC(control) and HSC(ethanol) proliferation; however, the pro-fibrogenic response in HSC(ethanol) was suppressed because of up-regulation of TNF-alpha and GSH, which was prevented by a TNF-alpha neutralizing antibody (Ab) and by L-buthionine-sulfoximine, a GSH-depleting agent. (4) Ethanol plus AA effects on the co-cultures: AA lowered TNF-alpha in the HSC(control) co-cultures, allowing for enhanced collagen deposition; furthermore, AA restored the pro-fibrogenic response in the HSC(ethanol) co-cultures by counteracting the up-regulation of TNF-alpha and GSH with a significant increase in GSSG and in pro-fibrogenic transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta). CONCLUSION: These results unveil synergism between ethanol and AA to the mechanism whereby KC mediate ECM remodeling and suggest that even if chronic ethanol consumption sensitizes HSC to up-regulate anti-fibrogenic signals, their effects are blunted by a second "hit" such as AA.

18316020
Cannabinoids provoke alcoholic steatosis through a conspiracy of neighbors.
Cannabinoid signaling by CB1 receptors drives fibrogenesis and fat accumulation in liver. A report in this issue of Cell Metabolism (Jeong et al., 2008) now links hepatic stellate cells, a resident liver fibrogenic cell type, to the generation of steatosis through production of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) after ethanol feeding, leading to paracrine stimulation of hepatocyte CB1 receptors.

17538965
Ethanol and fish oil induce NFkappaB transactivation of the collagen alpha2(I) promoter through lipid peroxidation-driven activation of the PKC-PI3K-Akt pathway.
To analyze whether fish oil, as a source of polyunsaturated fatty acids from the n-3 series, could synergize with ethanol to promote collagen I upregulation in vivo, collagen alpha2(I) promoter-betaGal (COL1A2-betaGal) transgenic mice were fed a diet enriched in fish oil in the presence of ethanol (ethanol group) or dextrose (control group). Ethanol-fed mice showed mild steatosis, increased alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), nonsterified fatty acids, and plasma alcohol levels along with elevated cytochrome P450 2E1 activity, lipid peroxidation end products, and low glutathione (GSH) levels, which suggested enhanced oxidant stress and liver injury. Increased transactivation of the COL1A2 promoter assessed by betaGal activity was shown in vivo and by transfection with deletion constructs for the collagen alpha1(I) promoter (COL1A1) and COL1A2 promoters in vitro. Transcriptional regulation of both COL1A1 and COL1A2 promoters was validated by nuclear in vitro transcription run-on, northern blot analysis, and quantitative polymerase chain reaction, which was followed by the subsequent upregulation of collagen I protein with no changes in matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP 13). To further analyze the potential mechanism for collagen I upregulation, an in vitro coculture model was designed with primary stellate cells seeded on the bottom plate of a Boyden chamber and the rest of the liver cells plated on a cell culture insert, and fish oil or fish oil plus ethanol were added. The combination of fish oil plus ethanol increased nuclear factor kappaB binding to the COL1A2 promoter both in vivo and in the cocultures and also resulted in increased phosphorylation of protein kinase C, activation of PI3 kinase, and phosphorylation of Akt. The in vitro addition of vitamin E prevented such activation and collagen I increase. Furthermore, inhibitors of all 3 kinases blocked the increase in collagen I and NFkappaB binding to the COL1A2 promoter; the latter was also prevented by vitamin E. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that fish oil (mainly n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids [PUFAs]) can synergize with ethanol to induce collagen I, transactivating the COL1A2 promoter through a lipid peroxidation-PKC-PI3K-Akt-NFkappaB-driven mechanism in the absence of overt steatosis and inflammation.

18984466
Oxidative and nitrosative stress and fibrogenic response.
Uncontrolled production of collagen I is the main feature of liver fibrosis. Following a fibrogenic stimulus such as alcohol, hepatic stellate cells (HSC) transform into an activated collagen-producing cell. In alcoholic liver disease, numerous changes in gene expression are associated with HSC activation, including the induction of several intracellular signaling cascades, which help maintain the activated phenotype and control the fibrogenic and proliferative state of the cell. Detailed analyses for understanding the molecular basis of the collagen I gene regulation have revealed a complex process involving reactive oxygen species (ROS) as key mediators. Less is known, however, about the contribution of reactive nitrogen species (RNS). In addition, a series of cytokines, growth factors, and chemokines, which activate extracellular matrix (ECM)-producing cells through paracrine and autocrine loops, contribute to the fibrogenic response.

18416641
[Hepatocyte oxidant stress and alcoholic liver disease].
Acute and chronic alcohol consumption increases the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and enhances lipid peroxidation of lipids, proteins, and DNA. The mechanism by which alcohol causes cell injury is still not clear but a major role for ROS and lipid peroxidation-end products is considered. Many pathways have been suggested to play a role on how ethanol induces a state of "oxidative stress", including redox-state changes, acetaldehyde production, damage to the mitochondria, membrane injury, apoptosis, ethanol-induced hypoxia, effects on the immune system and altered cytokine production, increased endotoxin levels and activation of Kupffer cells, mobilization of iron, changes in the antioxidant defense, particularly mitochondrial glutathione (GSH), one electron oxidation of ethanol to 1-hydroxy-ethyl radical, and induction of CYP2E1. These pathways are not exclusive of one another and it is likely that several, indeed many systems contribute to the ability of ethanol to induce a state of oxidative stress.

17590105
[Hepatic stellate cells and oxidative stress].
Hepatic fibrosis is a wound-healing response that takes place during chronic liver injury and is characterized by excessive production and deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) components, mainly collagen type I. Hepatic stellate cells (HSC) are responsible for the excessive production of scar tissue during liver fibrosis. Activation of HSC, the main step in the development of hepatic fibrosis, is mediated by cytokines and reactive oxygen species (ROS) released by damaged hepatocytes and/or activated Kupffer cells and even HSC themselves. While HSC usually remain quiescent, in response to factors promoting liver injury they undergo activation and become highly proliferative and fibrogenic. Indeed a key feature of HSC activation is uncontrolled production of collagen type I. Collagen is a heterotrimeric protein composed of two a1 chains and one a2 chain forming a triple helix structure. Initiation of HSC activation is largely due to paracrine stimulation, whereas the perpetuation of such activated state involves autocrine as well as paracrine loops. This review focuses on the role of oxidant stress on the activation of stellate cells.

