19679564
Stra13 regulates oxidative stress mediated skeletal muscle degeneration.
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD), caused by loss of dystrophin is characterized by progressive muscle cell necrosis. However, the mechanisms leading to muscle degeneration in DMD are poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that Stra13 protects muscle cells from oxidative damage, and its absence leads to muscle necrosis in response to injury in Stra13-deficient mice. Interestingly, Stra13-/- mutants express elevated levels of TNFalpha, reduced levels of heme-oxygenase-1, and display apparent signs of oxidative stress prior to muscle death. Moreover, Stra13-/- muscle cells exhibit an increased sensitivity to pro-oxidants, and conversely, Stra13 overexpression provides resistance to oxidative damage. Consistently, treatment with anti-oxidant N-acetylcysteine ameliorates muscle necrosis in Stra13-/- mice. We also demonstrate that Stra13 expression is elevated in muscles from dystrophin-deficient (mdx) mice, and mdx/Stra13-/- double mutants exhibit an early onset of muscle degeneration. Our studies underscore the importance of oxidative stress-mediated muscle degeneration in muscular dystrophy, and reveal the contribution of Stra13 in maintenance of muscle integrity.

19029947
SHARP1/DEC2 inhibits adipogenic differentiation by regulating the activity of C/EBP.
SHARP1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is expressed in many cell types; however, the mechanisms by which it regulates cellular differentiation remain largely unknown. Here, we show that SHARP1 negatively regulates adipogenesis. Although expression of the early marker CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta) is not altered, its crucial downstream targets C/EBPalpha and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) are downregulated by SHARP1. Protein interaction studies confirm that SHARP1 interacts with and inhibits the transcriptional activity of both C/EBPbeta and C/EBPalpha, and enhances the association of C/EBPbeta with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Consistently, in SHARP1-expressing cells, HDAC1 and the histone methyltransferase G9a are retained at the C/EBP regulatory sites on the C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma2 promoters during differentiation, resulting in inhibition of their expression. Interestingly, treatment with troglitazone results in displacement of HDAC1 and G9a, and rescues the differentiation defect of SHARP1-overexpressing cells. Our data indicate that SHARP1 inhibits adipogenesis through the regulation of C/EBP activity, which is essential for PPARgamma-ligand-dependent displacement of co-repressors from adipogenic promoters.

18424439
Foxo3 is essential for the regulation of ataxia telangiectasia mutated and oxidative stress-mediated homeostasis of hematopoietic stem cells.
Unchecked accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) compromises maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells. Regulation of ROS by the tumor suppressor protein ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is critical for preserving the hematopoietic stem cell pool. In this study we demonstrate that the Foxo3 member of the Forkhead Box O (FoxO) family of transcription factors is essential for normal ATM expression. In addition, we show that loss of Foxo3 leads to defects in hematopoietic stem cells, and these defects result from an overaccumulation of ROS. Foxo3 suppression of ROS in hematopoietic stem cells is mediated partly by regulation of ATM expression. We identify ROS-independent modulations of ATM and p16(INK4a) and ROS-mediated activation of p53/p21(CIP1/WAF1/Sdi1) tumor suppressor pathways as major contributors to Foxo3-null hematopoietic stem cells defects. Our studies demonstrate that Foxo3 represses ROS in part via regulation of ATM and that this repression is required for maintenance of the hematopoietic stem cell pool.

18217694
Analysis of growth properties and cell cycle regulation using mouse embryonic fibroblast cells.
A balance between proliferation and apoptosis is crucial for cellular homeostasis, and its disruption leading to enhanced cellular proliferation and uncontrolled growth are hallmarks of cancer. Genetic manipulation in the mouse offers a powerful approach to delineate the roles of genes in carcinogenesis and determine the molecular and cellular basis of their function. Mouse embryonic fibroblast cells derived from mice that are disrupted for tumor suppressors or oncogenes have served as an invaluable tool to study altered growth properties of cells and identify regulatory molecules involved in neoplastic transformation. In this chapter, protocols for isolation of mouse embryonic fibroblast cells from midgestation mouse embryos and their applications to study altered growth properties by growth curves and colony formation assays are provided. Methods to analyze cell cycle profiles by flow cytometry using bromodeoxyuridine and propidium iodide staining were also provided, entry of cells in S-phase by [3H] thymidine incorporation studies, and the analysis of cells in mitosis by staining with antiphospho-H3 antibodies are also provided.

18217693
Analysis of transformation and tumorigenicity using mouse embryonic fibroblast cells.
An important step in cellular transformation and tumorigenesis is immortalization, in which cells gain the ability to grow indefinitely by bypassing cellular senescence that imposes a finite number of divisions in culture. Primary mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells have a limited growth capacity and on prolonged passaging spontaneously immortalize at a low frequency. In contrast to transformation of primary MEF cells that requires the presence of two cooperating oncogenes, immortalized MEF cells can be transformed by a single oncogene (Ras) resulting in a loss of contact inhibition, anchorage-independent growth, and tumor formation in nude mice. Studies of MEF cells have played an important role in the elucidation of the molecular mechanisms underlying cellular immortalization, transformation, and tumorigenesis. Additionally, utilization of MEF cells disrupted for specific genes has provided a powerful tool to analyze the genetic regulation of these cellular processes. In this chapter, methods for analysis of cellular immortalization using the 3T3 protocol, as well as transformation of MEF cells using oncogenic retroviruses are provided. This is followed by protocols for analysis of transformed cell characteristics such as foci formation, anchorage independent growth, and tumor formation in nude mice.

17502421
Stra13 regulates satellite cell activation by antagonizing Notch signaling.
Satellite cells play a critical role in skeletal muscle regeneration in response to injury. Notch signaling is vital for satellite cell activation and myogenic precursor cell expansion but inhibits myogenic differentiation. Thus, precise spatial and temporal regulation of Notch activity is necessary for efficient muscle regeneration. We report that the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Stra13 modulates Notch signaling in regenerating muscle. Upon injury, Stra13(-/-) mice exhibit increased cellular proliferation, elevated Notch signaling, a striking regeneration defect characterized by degenerated myotubes, increased mononuclear cells, and fibrosis. Stra13(-/-) primary myoblasts also exhibit enhanced Notch activity, increased proliferation, and defective differentiation. Inhibition of Notch signaling ex vivo and in vivo ameliorates the phenotype of Stra13(-/-) mutants. We demonstrate in vitro that Stra13 antagonizes Notch activity and reverses the Notch-imposed inhibition of myogenesis. Thus, Stra13 plays an important role in postnatal myogenesis by attenuating Notch signaling to reduce myoblast proliferation and promote myogenic differentiation.

17347673
Stra13 is induced by genotoxic stress and regulates ionizing-radiation-induced apoptosis.
In response to a number of genotoxic stimuli that induce DNA damage in cells, the tumour suppressor p53 is activated resulting in cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. In this study, we have identified stimulated with retinoic acid 13 (Stra13), a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, as a regulator of ionizing-radiation-induced apoptosis. We show that Stra13 is induced in response to several DNA-damaging agents in a p53-independent manner. Stra13-/- thymocytes show impaired apoptosis in response to ionizing radiation, and consistently, p53 levels and also expression of its key transcriptional targets Puma and Noxa are reduced in the mutant thymocytes. In vitro, Stra13 regulates p53 levels in a mouse double mutant 2 (Mdm2)-dependent manner by physically interacting with p53 and preventing Mdm2-mediated ubiquitination and nuclear export. Together, our studies provide evidence that Stra13 is involved in DNA-damage-induced apoptosis and indicate its role in tumorigenesis.

