20816193
Identification of IgE sequential epitopes of lentil (Len c 1) by means of peptide microarray immunoassay.
Lentils are often responsible for allergic reactions to legumes in Mediterranean children. Although the primary sequence of the major allergen Len c 1 is known, the location of the IgE-binding epitopes remains undefined. We sought to identify IgE-binding epitopes of Len c 1 and relate epitope binding to clinical characteristics. One hundred thirty-five peptides corresponding to the primary sequence of Len c 1 were probed with sera from 33 patients with lentil allergy and 15 nonatopic control subjects by means of microarray immunoassay. Lentil-specific IgE levels, skin prick test responses, and clinical reactions to lentil were determined. Epitopes were defined as overlapping signal above interslide and intraslide cutoffs and confirmed by using inhibition assays with a peptide from the respective region. Hierarchic clustering of microarray data was used to correlate binding patterns with clinical findings. The patients with lentil allergy specifically recognized IgE-binding epitopes located in the C-terminal region between peptides 107 and 135. Inhibition experiments confirmed the specificity of IgE binding in this region, identifying different epitopes. Linkage of cluster results with clinical data and lentil-specific IgE levels displayed a positive correlation between lentil-specific IgE levels, epitope recognition, and respiratory symptoms. Modeling based on the 3-dimensional structure of a homologous soy vicilin suggests that the Len c 1 epitopes identified are exposed on the surface of the molecule. Several IgE-binding sequential epitopes of Len c 1 have been identified. Epitopes are located in the C-terminal region and are predicted to be exposed on the surface of the protein. Epitope diversity is positively correlated with IgE levels, pointing to a more polyclonal IgE response.

20226304
Correlation of IgE/IgG4 milk epitopes and affinity of milk-specific IgE antibodies with different phenotypes of clinical milk allergy.
Results from large-scale epitope mapping with a peptide microarray have been shown to correlate with clinical features of milk allergy. We sought to assess IgE and IgG4 epitope diversity and IgE affinity in different clinical phenotypes of milk allergy and identify informative epitopes that might be predictive of clinical outcomes of milk allergy. Forty-one subjects were recruited from a larger study on the effects of ingesting heat-denatured milk proteins in subjects with milk allergy. Using food challenges, subjects were characterized as being clinically reactive to all forms of milk (n = 17), being tolerant to heated milk (HM) products (n = 16), or having outgrown their milk allergy (n = 8). Eleven healthy volunteers without milk allergy served as control subjects. A peptide microarray was performed by using the previously published protocol. Subjects with milk allergy had increased epitope diversity compared with those who outgrew their allergy. HM-tolerant subjects had IgE-binding patterns similar to those who had outgrown their allergy, but IgG4-binding patterns that were more similar to those of the allergic group. Binding to higher numbers of IgE peptides was associated with more severe allergic reactions during challenge. There was no association between IgG4 peptides and clinical features of milk allergy. Using a competitive peptide microarray assay, allergic patients demonstrated a combination of high- and low-affinity IgE binding, whereas HM-tolerant subjects and those who had outgrown their milk allergy had primarily low-affinity binding. Greater IgE epitope diversity and higher affinity, as determined by using the peptide microarray, were associated with clinical phenotypes and severity of milk allergy.

20004784
Epinephrine treatment is infrequent and biphasic reactions are rare in food-induced reactions during oral food challenges in children.
Data about epinephrine use and biphasic reactions in childhood food-induced anaphylaxis during oral food challenges are scarce. To determine the prevalence and risk factors of reactions requiring epinephrine and the rate of biphasic reactions during oral food challenges (OFCs) in children. Reaction details of positive OFCs in children between 1999 and 2007 were collected by using a computerized database. Selection of patients for OFCs was generally predicated on < or =50% likelihood of a positive challenge and a low likelihood of a severe reaction on the basis of the clinical history, specific IgE levels, and skin prick tests. A total of 436 of 1273 OFCs resulted in a reaction (34%). Epinephrine was administered in 50 challenges (11% of positive challenges, 3.9% overall) for egg (n = 15, 16% of positive OFCs to egg), milk (n = 14, 12%), peanut (n = 10, 26%), tree nuts (n = 4, 33%), soy (n = 3, 7%), wheat (n = 3, 9%), and fish (n = 1, 9%). Reactions requiring epinephrine occurred in older children (median, 7.9 vs 5.8 years; P < .001) and were more often caused by peanuts (P = .006) compared with reactions not treated with epinephrine. There was no difference in the sex, prevalence of asthma, history of anaphylaxis, specific IgE level, skin prick tests, or amount of food administered. Two doses of epinephrine were required in 3 of 50 patients (6%) reacting to wheat, cow's milk, and pistachio. There was 1 (2%) biphasic reaction. No reaction resulted in life-threatening respiratory or cardiovascular compromise. Older age and reactions to peanuts were risk factors for anaphylaxis during oral food challenges. Reactions requiring multiple doses of epinephrine and biphasic reactions were infrequent.

19577281
Development of a novel peptide microarray for large-scale epitope mapping of food allergens.
The peptide microarray is a novel assay that facilitates high-throughput screening of peptides with a small quantity of sample. We sought to use overlapping peptides of milk allergenic proteins as a model system to establish a reliable and sensitive peptide microarray-based immunoassay for large-scale epitope mapping of food allergens. A milk peptide microarray was developed by using commercially synthesized peptides (20-mers, 3 offset) covering the primary sequences of alpha(s1)-casein, alpha(s2)-casein, beta-casein, kappa-casein, and beta-lactoglobulin. Conditions for printing and immunolabeling were optimized using a serum pool of 5 patients with milk allergy. Reproducibility of the milk peptide microarray was evaluated using replicate arrays immunolabeled with the serum pool, whereas specificity and sensitivity were assessed by using serial dilution of the serum pool and a peptide inhibition assay. Our results show that epitopes identified by the peptide microarray were mostly consistent with those identified previously by SPOT membrane technology, but with specific binding to a few newly identified epitopes of milk allergens. Data from replicate arrays were reproducible (r > or = 0.92) regardless of printing lots, immunolabeling, and serum pool batches. Using the serially diluted serum pool, we confirmed that IgE antibody binding detected in the array was specific. Peptide inhibition of IgE binding to the same peptide and overlapping peptides further confirmed the specificity of the array. A reliable peptide microarray was established for large-scale IgE epitope mapping of milk allergens, and this robust technology could be applied for epitope mapping of other food allergens.

19377951
Microarrayed allergen molecules for diagnostics of allergy.
With the evolution of peptide synthesis techniques and microarray technology, it is now possible to map and characterize allergenic epitopes on a microarray platform. The peptide microarray-based immunoassay allows simultaneous analysis of thousands of target peptides using small volumes of diluted serum samples, and has a promising future to become a superior testing tool for aspects of food allergy diagnosis and prognosis, as well as for designing recombinant allergens for safe immunotherapy. Characterization of allergenic epitopes provides fundamental knowledge for understanding mechanisms of food allergy. This chapter describes in detail the development of a sensitive and reliable peptide microarray-based immunoassay. The information includes a comparison of different slide substrates, effect of buffers on spot morphology, performance of printing pins, immunolabeling detection systems with different levels of sensitivity, and suggested approaches to data analysis.

19348919
Allergen-specific basophil suppression associated with clinical tolerance in patients with milk allergy.
Children with milk allergy who tolerate heat-denatured milk (HM) have less severe reactions and outgrow the condition earlier than those who react to HM, which might be related to differences in IgE-dependent effector cell function. We sought to apply a novel assay to test the hypothesis that HM-tolerant children have suppressed IgE-mediated basophil responses. Allergic, HM-tolerant, outgrown, or control subjects were defined based on oral food challenges. Whole blood cells were stimulated in vitro with a range of milk allergen doses in the presence or absence of autologous serum or with dilutions of autologous serum. Activated basophils were identified by means of flow cytometry as CD63(bright)CD123+CD203c+HLA-DR(-)CD41a(-). HM-tolerant subjects' basophils were significantly less responsive to milk allergen stimulation at all doses than were basophils from HM-reactive (allergic) individuals. In the absence of autologous serum, HM-tolerant subjects' basophils were significantly more reactive at low allergen concentrations. To a lesser extent, autologous serum also inhibited IL-3- and anti-IgE-induced, but not N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine-induced, responses. The allergen-specific responsiveness of HM-tolerant subjects' basophils increased with dilution of autologous serum with normal pooled serum. Children with milk allergy with a favorable prognosis have evidence of extrinsically suppressed allergen-specific effector cell reactivity.

19055210
Basic science for the practicing physician: flow cytometry and cell sorting.


18851876
Immunologic changes in children with egg allergy ingesting extensively heated egg.
Prior studies have suggested that heated egg might be tolerated by some children with egg allergy. We sought to confirm tolerance of heated egg in a subset of children with egg allergy, to evaluate clinical and immunologic predictors of heated egg tolerance, to characterize immunologic changes associated with continued ingestion of heated egg, and to determine whether a diet incorporating heated egg is well tolerated. Subjects with documented IgE-mediated egg allergy underwent physician-supervised oral food challenges to extensively heated egg (in the form of a muffin and a waffle), with tolerant subjects also undergoing regular egg challenges (in a form of scrambled egg or French toast). Heated egg-tolerant subjects incorporated heated egg into their diets. Skin prick test wheal diameters and egg white, ovalbumin, and ovomucoid IgE levels, as well as ovalbumin and ovomucoid IgG4 levels, were measured at baseline for all subjects and at 3, 6, and 12 months for those tolerant of heated egg. Sixty-four of 117 subjects tolerated heated egg, 23 tolerated regular egg, and 27 reacted to heated egg. Heated egg-reactive subjects had larger skin test wheals and greater egg white-specific, ovalbumin-specific, and ovomucoid-specific IgE levels compared with heated egg- and egg-tolerant subjects. Continued ingestion of heated egg was associated with decreased skin test wheal diameters and ovalbumin-specific IgE levels and increased ovalbumin-specific and ovomucoid-specific IgG4 levels. The majority of subjects with egg allergy were tolerant of heated egg. Continued ingestion of heated egg was well tolerated and associated with immunologic changes that paralleled the changes observed with the development of clinical tolerance to regular egg.

18620743
Tolerance to extensively heated milk in children with cow's milk allergy.
Cow's milk allergy is the most common childhood food allergy. Previously we noted that children who outgrew their milk allergy had milk-specific IgE antibodies primarily directed against conformational epitopes; those with persistent milk allergy also had IgE antibodies directed against specific sequential epitopes. Because high temperature largely destroys conformational epitopes, we hypothesized that some children with milk allergy would tolerate extensively heated (baked) milk products. Children with milk allergy were challenged with heated milk products; heated milk-tolerant subjects were subsequently challenged with unheated milk. Heated milk-tolerant, unheated milk-reactive subjects ingested heated milk products for 3 months and were then re-evaluated. Immune responses were assessed in all subjects; growth and intestinal permeability were followed in heated milk-tolerant subjects. One hundred children (mean age, 7.5 years; range, 2.1-17.3 years) underwent heated milk challenges. Sixty-eight subjects tolerated extensively heated milk only, 23 reacted to heated milk, and 9 tolerated both heated and unheated milk. Heated milk-reactive subjects had significantly larger skin prick test wheals and higher milk-specific and casein-specific IgE levels than other groups. At 3 months, subjects ingesting heated milk products had significantly smaller skin prick test wheals and higher casein-IgG(4) compared with baseline; other immunologic parameters, growth, and intestinal permeability were not significantly different. Heated milk-reactive subjects had more severe symptoms during heated milk challenge than heated milk-tolerant subjects experienced during their unheated milk challenge. The majority (75%) of children with milk allergy tolerate heated milk.

18539190
T(H)2 adjuvants: implications for food allergy.
A persistent question for immunologists studying allergic disease has been to define the characteristics of a molecule that make it allergenic. There has been substantial progress elucidating mechanisms of innate priming of T(H)2 immunity in the past several years. These accumulating data demonstrate that T(H)2 immunity is actively induced by an array of molecules, many of which were first discovered in the context of antihelminthic immune responses. Similar intrinsic or associated activities are now known to account for the T(H)2 immunogenicity of some allergens, and may prove to play a role for many more. In this review, we discuss what has been discovered regarding molecules that induce innate immune activation and the pathways that promote T(H)2-polarized immune responses generally, and specifically what role these mechanisms may play in food allergy from models of food allergy and the study of T(H)2 gastrointestinal adjuvants.

18466206
Type 1 diabetes, autoimmune thyroid disease, and chronic urticaria.
A 12-yr-old boy initially presented with chronic urticaria. Autoimmune thyroid disease was then diagnosed during routine evaluation. He developed type 1 diabetes shortly after thyroid hormone replacement was initiated. This case emphasizes the importance of routine screening for other autoimmune disorders in patients in whom one disorder is already present.

17156490
Standardization and performance evaluation of mononuclear cell cytokine secretion assays in a multicenter study.
Cryopreservation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells has been used to preserve and standardize immunologic measurements for multicenter studies, however, effects of cryopreservation on cytokine responses are incompletely understood. In designing immunologic studies for a new multicenter birth cohort study of childhood asthma, we performed a series of experiments to determine the effects of two different methods of cryopreservation on the cytokine responses of cord and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Paired samples of PBMC were processed freshly, or after cryopreservation in a Nalgene container (NC) or a controlled-rate freezer (CRF). Although there were some differences between the methods, cryopreservation inhibited PHA-induced IL-10 secretion and Der f 1-induced IL-2 secretion, and augmented PHA-induced IL-2 secretion and spontaneous secretion of TNF-alpha. In separate experiments, NC cryopreservation inhibited secretion of several cytokines (IL-13, IL-10, IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha) by PHA-stimulated cord blood mononuclear cells. With the exception of PHA-induced IL-13, results from fresh and cryopreserved cord blood samples were not significantly correlated. Finally, in reproducibility studies involving processing of identical cell samples in up to 4 separate laboratories, variances in cytokine responses of fresh cells stimulated at separate sites did not exceed those in cryopreserved cells stimulated at a central site. Collectively, these studies indicate that cryopreservation can affect mononuclear cell cytokine response profiles, and that IL-10 secretion and antigen-induced responses may be especially vulnerable. These studies also demonstrate that mononuclear cell responses can be standardized for performance in a small number of laboratories for multicenter studies, and underscore the importance of measuring reproducibility and of testing whether cryopreservation techniques alter specific immunologic outcomes.

