21496949
A randomized controlled trial of oral phosphate binders in the treatment of pseudoxanthoma elasticum.
BACKGROUND: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a rare connective tissue disorder involving fragmentation and mineralization of elastic fibers predominantly in the skin, eyes, and cardiovascular system. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to assess the efficacy of sevelamer hydrochloride on the reversal of elastic fiber calcification and clinical lesions of PXE. METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, two-part prospective study. In the first year, 40 patients with PXE were randomized to receive either sevelamer hydrochloride (800 mg by mouth three times daily) or placebo in a 1:1 ratio. In the second year, all patients received sevelamer hydrochloride (800 mg by mouth three times daily). RESULTS: In the first year, the placebo and treatment groups' mean calcium scores decreased from 29.52 to 15.97 (41.93% mean improvement) and 27.48 to 16.75 (38.37% mean improvement), respectively. In the second year, the mean calcium scores decreased to 13.36 (53.94%) and 14.03 (51.35%) in these groups. The mean clinical score in the placebo group decreased from 6.25 to 6.05 at year 1 (2% improvement) whereas the mean clinical score in the sevelamer hydrochloride group decreased from 7.10 to 6.55 (7% improvement). In year 2, the scores in the original placebo and sevelamer hydrochloride groups decreased to 5.33 (14% improvement) and 5.72 (19% improvement), respectively. LIMITATIONS: Magnesium stearate in our placebo and active drugs may have played a confounding role in this study, contributing to the small differences observed in these two groups. CONCLUSION: Sevelamer hydrochloride produced a reduction in both calcification levels and clinical scores; however, this difference was not statistically significant compared with placebo. Future clinical studies should examine the inhibitory role and potential therapeutic effect of magnesium in PXE.

21173303
UV-A and UV-B penetration of normal human cadaveric fingernail plate.
To assess the extent to which UV-A and UV-B radiation can penetrate the human fingernail plate. The Dermalite UV light machine (National Biological, Beachwood, Ohio) was used as the source of UV radiation. The amount of UV-A and UV-B penetrating the nail plate was measured using a radiometer and compared with a control. Academic phototherapy clinic. Ten cadaver fingernails were obtained from 1 cadaver from the National Disease Research Interchange. Because the objective was to determine transmission through normal fingernails, grossly diseased or deformed nails were not used. The percentage of UV light penetration through each fingernail was calculated by dividing the amount of radiation measured when the fingernail was in front of the light by the amount of radiation measured when there was nothing in front of the light (UV with nail divided by UV without nail). All 10 fingernails completely blocked the UV-B light, reading 0 mW/cm(2) on the radiometer. The mean penetration of UV-A light through the fingernails was 1.65%, ranging from 0.56% for the right fifth digit to 2.43% for the left second digit. The nail plate completely blocked UV-B light, and only a minimal amount of UV-A light penetrated the nails. If UV is required to directly penetrate the nail to treat nail bed psoriasis, then these data suggest that therapeutic efficacy may be compromised by the intervening nail plate. This minimal penetration of UV-A light may explain why therapies such as psoralen-UV-A (PUVA) have low efficacy for the treatment of nail psoriasis.

17412454
Water content and other aspects of brittle versus normal fingernails.
Previous authors have claimed that dehydration of the nail plate causes brittle nails. Some experts claim that normal nails contain 18% water, and brittle nails contain less than 16%. We sought to test the hypothesis that brittle nails contain 2% less water than normal nails. We also examined the relationship between a number of health and behavioral variables and brittle nails. In all, 102 participants with either brittle or normal nails had two nails clipped and then analyzed for water content by a blinded investigator in the laboratory. Participants filled out a detailed questionnaire designed to reveal information about health and behavior. The mean water content for normal nails was 11.90% and for brittle nails was 12.48%. There was no statistically significant difference between the two groups. The odds of having brittle nails was 3.23 times greater among participants who received a professional manicure (95% confidence interval 1.21, 8.59). The frequency of professional manicures was associated with the likelihood of having brittle nails. Frequency of hand moisturizer use was significantly associated with nail brittleness (95% confidence interval 1.35, 32.10). Family history was significantly associated with the likelihood of having brittle nails (95% confidence interval 1.65, 21.11). Analyzing nails from living participants is limiting because samples can only be collected from the distal unattached nail plate. A small subanalysis was performed and showed that the nails were losing water between the time of clipping and laboratory analysis. Therefore, our water percentage results may not be representative of in vivo nail plate water contents. There was no significant difference in water content of brittle compared with normal nails.

