19455709
Targeted molecular dynamics reveals overall common conformational changes upon hybrid domain swing-out in beta3 integrins.
The beta3 integrin family members alphaIIbeta3 and alphaVbeta3 signal bidirectionally through long-range allosteric changes, including a transition from a bent unliganded-closed low-affinity state to an extended liganded-open high-affinity state. To obtain an atomic-level description of this transition in an explicit solvent, we carried out targeted molecular dynamics simulations of the headpieces of alphaIIbeta3 and alphaVbeta3 integrins. Although minor differences were observed between these receptors, our results suggest a common transition pathway in which the hybrid domain swing-out is accompanied by conformational changes within the beta3 betaA (I-like) domain that propagate through the alpha7 helix C-terminus, and are followed by the alpha7 helix downward motion and the opening of the beta6-alpha7 loop. Breaking of contact interactions between the beta6-alpha7 loop and the alpha1 helix N-terminus results in helix straightening, internal rearrangements of the specificity determining loop (SDL), movement of the beta1-alpha1 loop toward the metal ion dependent adhesion site (MIDAS), and final changes at the interfaces between the beta3 betaA (I-like) domain and either the hybrid or the alpha beta-propeller domains. Taken together, our results suggest novel testable hypotheses of intradomain and interdomain interactions responsible for beta3 integrin activation.

18175315
Functional and computational studies of the ligand-associated metal binding site of beta3 integrins.
A combination of experimental and computational approaches was used to provide a structural context for the role of the beta3 integrin subunit ligand-associated metal binding site (LIMBS) in the binding of physiological ligands to beta3 integrins. Specifically, we have carried out (1) adhesion assays on cells expressing normal alphaIIbeta3, normal alphaVbeta3, or the corresponding beta3 D217A LIMBS mutants; and (2) equilibrium and nonequilibrium (steered) molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of eptifibatide in complex with either a fully hydrated normal alphaIIbeta3 integrin fragment (alphaIIb beta-propeller and the beta3 betaA (I-like), hybrid, and PSI domains) or the equivalent beta3 D217A mutant. Normal alphaIIbeta3 expressing cells adhered to immobilized fibrinogen and echistatin, whereas cells expressing the alphaIIbeta3 D217A LIMBS mutant failed to adhere to either ligand. Similarly, the equivalent alphaVbeta3 mutant was unable to support adhesion to vitronectin or fibrinogen. The alphaIIbeta3 D217A mutation increased the binding of mAb AP5, which recognizes a ligand-induced binding site (LIBS) in the beta3 PSI domain, indicating that this mutation induced allosteric changes in the protein. Steered MD simulating the unbinding of eptifibatide from either normal alphaIIbeta3 or the equivalent beta3 D217A mutant suggested that the reduction in ligand binding caused by the LIMBS mutant required the loss of both the LIMBS and the metal ion-dependent adhesion site (MIDAS) metal ions. Our computational results indicate that the LIMBS plays a crucial role in ligand binding to alphaIIbeta3 by virtue of its effects on the coordination of the MIDAS.

17209052
Mapping early conformational changes in alphaIIb and beta3 during biogenesis reveals a potential mechanism for alphaIIbbeta3 adopting its bent conformation.
Current evidence supports a model in which the low-affinity state of the platelet integrin alphaIIbbeta3 results from alphaIIbbeta3 adopting a bent conformation. To assess alphaIIbbeta3 biogenesis and how alphaIIbbeta3 initially adopts the bent conformation, we mapped the conformational states occupied by alphaIIb and beta3 during biogenesis using conformation-specific monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). We found that alphaIIbbeta3 complex formation was not limited by the availability of either free pro-alphaIIb or free beta3, suggesting that other molecules, perhaps chaperones, control complex formation. Five beta3-specific, ligand-induced binding site (LIBS) mAbs reacted with much or all free beta3 but not with beta3 when in complex with mature alphaIIb, suggesting that beta3 adopts its mature conformation only after complex formation. Conversely, 2 alphaIIb-specific LIBS mAbs directed against the alphaIIb Calf-2 region adjacent to the membrane reacted with only minor fractions of free pro-alphaIIb, raising the possibility that pro-alphaIIb adopts a bent conformation early in biogenesis. Our data suggest a working model in which pro-alphaIIb adopts a bent conformation soon after synthesis, and then beta3 assumes its bent conformation by virtue of its interaction with the bent pro-alphaIIb.

