21051534
Ethanol induction of CYP2A5: permissive role for CYP2E1.
CYP2A5 metabolizes xenobiotics and activates hepatocarcinogens, and induction occurs in response to hepatic damage and cellular stress. We evaluated whether ethanol can elevate CYP2A5 and whether CYP2E1 plays a role in the ethanol induction of CYP2A5. Wild-type (WT), CYP2E1 knockout (KO), and CYP2E1 knockin (KI) mice were fed ethanol for 3 weeks. Ethanol increased CYP2E1 and CYP2A5 protein and activity in WT mice but not in the KO mice. Induction of CYP2A5 (and CYP2E1) was restored in the KI mice. Ethanol induction of CYP2A5 occurred only after CYP2E1 was first induced. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that CYP2E1 and CYP2A5 colocalize to the same zones in the liver. Ethanol also elevated CYP2A5 mRNA levels in WT and KI mice but not in KO mice. Induction of CYP2A5 by cadmium was partially decreased in KO mice compared with WT or KI mice. Ethanol elevated CYP2A4 mRNA levels in all mice although the extent of induction was lowest in the KO mice. In summary, ethanol elevated mouse hepatic CYP2A5 levels, which may be of toxicological significance because CYP2A5 metabolizes nicotine and other drugs and activates hepatocarcinogens. Induction of CYP2A5 by ethanol is potentiated by the induction of CYP2E1. We speculate that ethanol induction of CYP2E1 followed by increases in reactive oxygen species and activation of Nrf2 are important steps in the mechanism by which ethanol induces CYP2A5. The possibility that induction of CYP2E1 is permissive for the induction of CYP2A5 may reflect a new contribution by CYP2E1 to the actions of ethanol.

20692331
Chronic alcohol-induced liver injury and oxidant stress are decreased in cytochrome P4502E1 knockout mice and restored in humanized cytochrome P4502E1 knock-in mice.
A major pathway for chronic ethanol-induced liver injury is ethanol-induced oxidant stress. Several pathways contribute to mechanisms by which ethanol induces oxidant stress. Although some studies support a role for cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1), others do not. Most previous studies were conducted in the intragastric infusion model of ethanol administration. There is a need to develop oral models of significant liver injury and to evaluate the possible role of CYP2E1 in ethanol actions in such models. We evaluated chronic ethanol-induced liver injury, steatosis, and oxidant stress in wild-type (WT) mice, CYP2E1 knock out (KO) mice, and humanized CYP2E1 knock-in (KI) mice, in which the human 2E1 was added back to mice deficient in the mouse 2E1. WT mice and the CYP2E1 KO and KI mice (both provided by Dr. F. Gonzalez, National Cancer Institute) were fed a high-fat Lieber-DeCarli ethanol liquid diet for 3weeks; pair-fed controls received dextrose. Ethanol produced fatty liver and oxidant stress in WT mice but liver injury (transaminases, histopathology) was minimal. Ethanol-induced steatosis and oxidant stress were blunted in the KO mice (no liver injury) but restored in the KI mice. Significant liver injury was produced in the ethanol-fed KI mice, with elevated transaminases, necrosis, and increased levels of collagen type 1 and smooth muscle actin. This liver injury in the KI mice was associated with elevated oxidant stress and elevated levels of the human CYP2E1 compared to levels of the mouse 2E1 in WT mice. Activation of JNK and decreased levels of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL were observed in the ethanol-fed KI mice compared to the other groups. Fatty liver in the WT and the KI mice was associated with lower levels of PPAR? and acyl-CoA oxidase. No such changes were found in the ethanol-fed KO mice. These results show that CYP2E1 plays a major role in ethanol-induced fatty liver and oxidant stress. It is the absence of CYP2E1 in the KO mice that is responsible for the blunting of steatosis and oxidant stress because restoring the CYP2E1 restores the fatty liver and oxidant stress. Moreover, it is the human CYP2E1 that restores these effects of ethanol, which suggests that results for fatty liver and oxidant stress from rodent models of ethanol intake and mouse CYP2E1 can be extrapolated to human models of ethanol intake and to human CYP2E1.

20238404
Hepatoprotective effects of S-adenosyl-L-methionine against alcohol- and cytochrome P450 2E1-induced liver injury.
S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) acts as a methyl donor for methylation reactions and participates in the synthesis of glutathione. SAM is also a key metabolite that regulates hepatocyte growth, differentiation and death. Hepatic SAM levels are decreased in animal models of alcohol liver injury and in patients with alcohol liver disease or viral cirrhosis. This review describes the protection by SAM against alcohol and cytochrome P450 2E1-dependent cytotoxicity both in vitro and in vivo and evaluates mechanisms for this protection.

21525766
Role of CYP2E1 in Ethanol-Induced Oxidant Stress, Fatty Liver and Hepatotoxicity.
Background/Aims: Several pathways contribute to mechanisms by which ethanol induces oxidant stress. While some studies support a role for cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1), others do not. There is a need to develop oral models of significant ethanol-induced liver injury and to evaluate the possible role of CYP2E1 in ethanol actions in such models. Methods: We evaluated chronic ethanol-induced liver injury, steatosis and oxidant stress in wild-type (WT) mice, CYP2E1 knockout (KO) mice and in humanized CYP2E1 knockin (KI) mice, where the human 2E1 was added back to mice deficient in the mouse 2E1. WT mice and CYP2E1 KO and KI mice (both provided by Dr. F. Gonzalez, NCI) were fed a high-fat Lieber-DeCarli liquid diet for 3 weeks; pair-fed controls received dextrose. Results: Ethanol produced fatty liver and oxidant stress in WT mice, but liver injury (transaminases, histopathology) was minimal. Ethanol-induced steatosis and oxidant stress were blunted in the KO mice (no liver injury) but restored in the KI mice. Significant liver injury was produced in the ethanol-fed KI mice with elevated transaminases and necrosis. This liver injury in the KI mice was associated with elevated oxidant stress and elevated levels of the human CYP2E1 compared to levels of the mouse 2E1 in WT mice. Activation of JNK was observed in the ethanol-fed KI mice compared to the other groups. Fatty liver in WT and KI mice was associated with lower levels of lipolytic PPAR-?. No such changes were found in the ethanol-fed KO mice. Conclusions: These results show that CYP2E1 plays a major role in ethanol-induced fatty liver and oxidant stress. Restoring CYP2E1 in the CYP2E1 KO mice restores ethanol-induced fatty liver and oxidant stress.

19798529
CYP2E1 potentiation of LPS and TNFalpha-induced hepatotoxicity by mechanisms involving enhanced oxidative and nitrosative stress, activation of MAP kinases, and mitochondrial dysfunction.
The mechanisms by which alcohol causes cell injury are not clear. A major mechanism that is the focus of considerable research is the role of lipid peroxidation and oxidative stress in alcohol toxicity. Many pathways have been suggested to play a role in how alcohol induces oxidative stress. Considerable attention has been given to alcohol-elevated production of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and TNFalpha and to alcohol induction of CYP2E1. These two pathways are not exclusive of each other, however, associations and interactions between them, especially in vivo, have not been extensively evaluated. We have shown that increased oxidative stress from induction of CYP2E1 in vivo sensitizes hepatocytes to LPS and TNF toxicity and that oxidants, such as peroxynitrite, activation of p38 and JNK MAP kinases, inactivation of NF-kB protective pathways and mitochondrial dysfunction are downstream mediators of this CYP2E1-LPS/TNF potentiated hepatotoxicity. This review will summarize studies showing potentiated interactions between these two risk factors in promoting liver injury and the mechanisms involved.

19477265
Chronic ethanol feeding potentiates Fas Jo2-induced hepatotoxicity: role of CYP2E1 and TNF-alpha and activation of JNK and P38 MAP kinase.
We have previously shown that treatment of mice with pyrazole or acute ethanol potentiated Fas agonistic Jo2 antibody-induced liver injury by a mechanism involving induction of CYP2E1 and elevated oxidative stress. The current study evaluated whether chronic alcohol feeding potentiates Fas-induced liver injury and whether CYP2E1 plays a role in any enhanced hepatotoxicity. Wild-type and CYP2E1 knockout mice were fed ethanol or isocaloric dextrose for 4 weeks followed by a single treatment with either saline or Jo2. Mice were killed 8 h after the Jo2 challenge. There were three- to five fold increases in transaminases and more extensive eosinophilic necrosis, hemorrhage, and infiltration of inflammatory cells in the central zone of the hepatic lobule in the ethanol-fed mice treated with Jo2 compared to the dextrose/Jo2- or ethanol/saline-treated mice. Liver injury was blunted in ethanol-fed CYP2E1 knockout mice treated with Jo2. The chronic ethanol feeding produced steatosis, elevation of CYP2E1, and oxidative stress in wild-type but not CYP2E1 knockout mice. These changes in wild-type mice fed ethanol were similar after saline or Jo2 treatment. The Jo2 treatment produced activation of JNK and P38 MAP kinase, increased activity of caspase-8 and -3, and lowered hepatic GSH levels in both the dextrose- and the alcohol-fed mice. JNK was activated at early times after Jo2 treatment in the ethanol-fed mice. Serum TNF-alpha levels were strikingly elevated in the wild-type ethanol/Jo2 group, which showed liver injury, compared to all the other groups, which did not show liver injury. Inhibition of JNK or P38 MAPK partially, but not completely, prevented the elevated liver injury in the wild-type ethanol/Jo2 mice. These results show that chronic ethanol feeding enhances Fas-induced liver injury by a mechanism associated with induction of CYP2E1, elevated serum TNF-alpha levels, and activation of MAPK.

19448996
Role of oxidative stress in alcohol-induced liver injury.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are highly reactive molecules that are naturally generated in small amounts during the body's metabolic reactions and can react with and damage complex cellular molecules such as lipids, proteins, or DNA. Acute and chronic ethanol treatments increase the production of ROS, lower cellular antioxidant levels, and enhance oxidative stress in many tissues, especially the liver. Ethanol-induced oxidative stress plays a major role in the mechanisms by which ethanol produces liver injury. Many pathways play a key role in how ethanol induces oxidative stress. This review summarizes some of the leading pathways and discusses the evidence for their contribution to alcohol-induced liver injury. Special emphasis is placed on CYP2E1, which is induced by alcohol and is reactive in metabolizing and activating many hepatotoxins, including ethanol, to reactive products, and in generating ROS.

19387914
Oxidative stress and alcoholic liver disease.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are highly reactive molecules that are naturally generated in small amounts during the body's metabolic reactions and can react with and damage complex cellular molecules such as lipids, proteins, or DNA. This review describes pathways involved in ROS formation, why ROS are toxic to cells, and how the liver protects itself against ROS. Acute and chronic ethanol treatment increases the production of ROS, lowers cellular antioxidant levels, and enhances oxidative stress in many tissues, especially the liver. Ethanol-induced oxidative stress plays a major role in the mechanisms by which ethanol produces liver injury. Many pathways play a key role in how ethanol induces oxidative stress. This review summarizes some of the leading pathways and discusses the evidence for their contribution to alcohol-induced liver injury.

19026739
Inhibition of the mitochondrial permeability transition by cyclosporin A prevents pyrazole plus lipopolysaccharide-induced liver injury in mice.
Previous results showed that pyrazole potentiates lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced liver injury in mice. Mechanisms involved the overexpression of cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1), oxidative stress, and activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). The current study was carried out to test the hypothesis that the mitochondria permeability transition (MPT) plays a role in this pyrazole plus LPS toxicity. Mice were injected intraperitoneally with pyrazole for 2 days, followed by a challenge with LPS with or without treatment with cyclosporin A (CsA), an inhibitor of the MPT. Serum alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase were increased by pyrazole plus LPS treatment, and CsA treatment could attenuate these increases. CsA also prevented pyrazole plus LPS-induced hepatocyte necrosis. Formation of 4-hydroxynonenal protein adducts and 3-nitrotyrosine protein adducts in liver tissue was increased by the pyrazole plus LPS treatment, and CsA treatment blunted these increases. Swelling, cytochrome c release from mitochondria to the cytosol, and lipid peroxidation were increased in mitochondria isolated from the pyrazole plus LPS-treated mice, and CsA treatment prevented these changes. CsA did not prevent the increased levels of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), pp38 MAPK, and p-JNK2. In conclusion, although CsA does not prevent elevations in upstream mediators of the pyrazole plus LPS toxicity (iNOS, TNF-alpha, CYP2E1, MAPK), it does protect mice from the pyrazole plus LPS-induced liver toxicity by preventing the MPT and release of cytochrome c and decreasing mitochondrial oxidative stress. These results indicate that mitochondria are the critical targets of pyrazole plus LPS in mediating liver injury.

18721845
Pyrazole induced oxidative liver injury independent of CYP2E1/2A5 induction due to Nrf2 deficiency.
Pyrazole can induce CYP2E1 and 2A5, which produce reactive oxygen species (ROS). Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) regulates important antioxidant enzymes to remove ROS. In this study, we applied Nrf2 knockout mice to test the hypothesis that pyrazole will cause hepatotoxicity and elevate oxidative stress to a greater extent in Nrf2 knockout mice compared to wild type mice. Pyrazole induced severe oxidative liver damage in Nrf2 knockout mice but not in wild type mice. Activities and levels of CYP2E1 and 2A5 were elevated by pyrazole in the wild type mice but not in the Nrf2 knockout mice. However, expression or activity of Nrf2-regulated antioxidant enzymes, such as gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase (GCS), heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and glutathione-S-transferase (GST), were upregulated in the pyrazole-treated wild type mice, but to a lesser extent or not at all in the pyrazole-treated Nrf2 knockout mice. Treatment with antioxidants such as vitamin C or S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) or an inhibitor of iNOS prevented the pyrazole-induced oxidative liver damage, thus validating the role of oxidative/nitrosative stress in the pyrazole induced liver injury to the Nrf2 knockout mice. In summary, even though ROS-producing CYP2E1/2A5 were not elevated by pyrazole, impaired antioxidant capacity resulting from Nrf2 deficiency appear to be sufficient to promote pyrazole-induced oxidative liver injury.

18482574
S-adenosyl-L-methionine decreases the elevated hepatotoxicity induced by Fas agonistic antibody plus acute ethanol pretreatment in mice.
The current study was designed to investigate the effect and potential mechanism of exogenous administration of S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) on the enhanced hepatotoxicity induced by the Fas agonistic Jo2 antibody plus acute ethanol pretreatment in C57BL/6 mice. Acute ethanol plus Jo2 treatment produces liver toxicity under conditions in which ethanol alone or Jo2 alone do not. SAM significantly attenuated this elevated hepatotoxicity in mice as manifested by a decrease of serum aminotransferases and morphological amelioration. Levels of SAM and activity of methionine adenosyltransferase were lowered by the ethanol plus Jo2 treatment but restored by administration of SAM. The ethanol plus Jo2 treatment increased activity and content of CYP2E1, iNOS content and TNF-alpha levels; these increases were blunted by SAM. SAM also protected against the elevated oxidative and nitrosative stress found after ethanol plus Jo2, likely due to the decreases in CYP2E1, iNOS and TNF-alpha. Calcium-induced swelling of mitochondria was enhanced by the ethanol plus Jo2 treatment and this was prevented by SAM. JNK and P38 MAPK were activated by the ethanol plus Jo2 treatment; JNK activation was partially prevented by SAM. It is suggested that SAM protects against the ethanol plus Jo2 toxicity by restoring hepatic SAM levels, preventing the increase in iNOS, CYP2E1 and TNF-alpha and there by lowering the elevated oxidative/nitrosative stress and activation of the JNK signal pathway, ultimately preventing mitochondrial damage.

18393316
Cytochrome P450 2E1 contributes to ethanol-induced fatty liver in mice.
Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) is suggested to play a role in alcoholic liver disease, which includes alcoholic fatty liver, alcoholic hepatitis, and alcoholic cirrhosis. In this study, we investigated whether CYP2E1 plays a role in experimental alcoholic fatty liver in an oral ethanol-feeding model. After 4 weeks of ethanol feeding, macrovesicular fat accumulation and accumulation of triglyceride in liver were observed in wild-type mice but not in CYP2E1-knockout mice. In contrast, free fatty acids (FFAs) were increased in CYP2E1-knockout mice but not in wild-type mice. CYP2E1 was induced by ethanol in wild-type mice, and oxidative stress induced by ethanol was higher in wild-type mice than in CYP2E1-knockout mice. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha), a regulator of fatty acid oxidation, was up-regulated in CYP2E1-knockout mice fed ethanol but not in wild-type mice. A PPARalpha target gene, acyl CoA oxidase, was decreased by ethanol in wild-type but not in CYP2E1-knockout mice. Chlormethiazole, an inhibitor of CYP2E1, lowered macrovesicular fat accumulation, inhibited oxidative stress, and up-regulated PPARalpha protein level in wild-type mice fed ethanol. The introduction of CYP2E1 to CYP2E1-knockout mice via an adenovirus restored macrovesicular fat accumulation. These results indicate that CYP2E1 contributes to experimental alcoholic fatty liver in this model and suggest that CYP2E1-derived oxidative stress may inhibit oxidation of fatty acids by preventing up-regulation of PPARalpha by ethanol, resulting in fatty liver.

18369917
Development and properties of HepG2 cells that constitutively express CYP2E1.
CYP2E1, a member of the cytochrome P450 family, is induced by ethanol. CYP2E1 activates many hepatotoxins to their reactive toxic intermediate form, and generates reactive oxygen species (ROS) during its catalytic cycle. Induction of CYP2E1 plays an important role in ethanol-induced oxidant stress and ethanol toxicity. To study the biochemical and toxicological properties of CYP2E1, our laboratory developed a HepG2 cell line which constitutively expresses the human CYP2E1 form. These cells displayed elevated oxidative stress, loss of mitochondrial function and loss of viability when challenged with prooxidants such as ethanol, polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) such as arachidonic acid, iron, or when depleted of the critical antioxidant glutathione, as compared with control HepG2 cells which do not express CYP2E1. In the sections below , protocols are described for use of these cell lines to assay for CYP2E1-dependent oxidant stress and toxicity. Methods are described as to how the cell lines were established and maintained, how CYP2E1 is assayed, how cellular viability, mitochondrial function and generation of oxidant stress are determined.

18078827
CYP2E1 and oxidative liver injury by alcohol.
Ethanol-induced oxidative stress seems to play a major role in mechanisms by which ethanol causes liver injury. Many pathways have been suggested to contribute to the ability of ethanol to induce a state of oxidative stress. One central pathway seems to be the induction of cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) by ethanol. CYP2E1 metabolizes and activates many toxicological substrates, including ethanol, to more reactive, toxic products. Levels of CYP2E1 are elevated under a variety of physiological and pathophysiological conditions and after acute and chronic alcohol treatment. CYP2E1 is also an effective generator of reactive oxygen species such as the superoxide anion radical and hydrogen peroxide and, in the presence of iron catalysts, produces powerful oxidants such as the hydroxyl radical. This review article summarizes some of the biochemical and toxicological properties of CYP2E1 and briefly describes the use of cell lines developed to constitutively express CYP2E1 and CYP2E1 knockout mice in assessing the actions of CYP2E1. Possible therapeutic implications for treatment of alcoholic liver injury by inhibition of CYP2E1 or CYP2E1-dependent oxidative stress will be discussed, followed by some future directions which may help us to understand the actions of CYP2E1 and its role in alcoholic liver injury.

17920235
Synergistic toxicity induced by prolonged glutathione depletion and inhibition of nuclear factor-kappaB signaling in liver cells.
TNF-alpha, GSH depletion and CYP2E1 are factors that play an important role in alcoholic liver disease. Activation of NF-kappaB prevents hepatocyte damage caused by TNF-alpha. This work describes the effect of NF-kappaB inhibition on toxicities caused by GSH depletion or arachidonic acid (AA) treatment in liver cells, and evaluates the possible influence of CYP2E1 overexpression. Cells were exposed to the NF-kappaB inhibitor BAY11-7082, in the absence or presence of l-buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) to block GSH synthesis. BSO toxicity was higher in CYP2E1-expressing E47 HepG2 cells compared to control cells; the incubation with BAY11-7082 potentiated BSO toxicity in both cell lines comparably. Several other agents which suppress activation of NF-kappaB increased BSO toxicity in E47 cells. NF-kappaB inhibition, however, did not sensitize E47 cells to AA toxicity. Suppressing activity of NF-kappaB also potentiated BSO, but not AA toxicity, in isolated rat hepatocytes. BAY11-7082 plus BSO induced a greater p38 MAPK activation as compared to BAY11-7082 or BSO alone, and a p38 MAPK inhibitor protected against the synergistic toxicity. In summary, inhibition of NF-kappaB sensitizes liver cells to toxicity linked to GSH depletion, probably accelerating the processes of thiol homeostasis deregulation and induction of apoptosis through a mechanism mediated by p38 MAPK.

17640612
Depletion of S-adenosyl-l-methionine with cycloleucine potentiates cytochrome P450 2E1 toxicity in primary rat hepatocytes.
S-Adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) is the principal biological methyl donor. Methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT) catalyzes the only reaction that generates SAM. Hepatocytes were treated with cycloleucine, an inhibitor of MAT, to evaluate whether hepatocytes enriched in cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) were more sensitive to a decline in SAM. Cycloleucine decreased SAM and glutathione (GSH) levels and induced cytotoxicity in hepatocytes from pyrazole-treated rats (with an increased content of CYP2E1) to a greater extent as compared to hepatocytes from saline-treated rats. Apoptosis caused by cycloleucine in pyrazole hepatocytes appeared earlier and was more pronounced than control hepatocytes and could be prevented by incubation with SAM, glutathione reduced ethyl ester and antioxidants. The cytotoxicity was prevented by treating rats with chlormethiazole, a specific inhibitor of CYP2E1. Cycloleucine induced greater production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in pyrazole hepatocytes than in control hepatocytes, and treatment with SAM, Trolox, and chlormethiazole lowered ROS formation. In conclusion, lowering of hepatic SAM levels produced greater toxicity and apoptosis in hepatocytes enriched in CYP2E1. This is due to elevated ROS production by CYP2E1 coupled to lower levels of hepatoprotective SAM and GSH. We speculate that such interactions e.g. induction of CYP2E1, decline in SAM and GSH may contribute to alcohol liver toxicity.

17538970
Induction of cytochrome P450 2E1 [corrected] promotes liver injury in ob/ob mice.
Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) activates several hepatotoxins and contributes to alcoholic liver damage. Obesity is a growing health problem in the United States. The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether acetone- or pyrazole-mediated induction of CYP2E1 can potentiate liver injury in obesity. CYP2E1 protein and activity were elevated in acetone- or pyrazole-treated obese and lean mice. Acetone or pyrazole induced distinct histological changes in liver and significantly higher aminotransferase enzymes in obese mice compared to obese controls or acetone- or pyrazole-treated lean mice. Higher caspase-3 activity and numerous apoptotic hepatocytes were observed in the acetone- or pyrazole-treated obese mice. Increased protein carbonyls, malondialdehyde, 4-hydroxynonenal-protein adducts, elevated levels of inducible nitric oxide synthase, and higher 3-nitrotyrosine protein adducts were found in livers of acetone- or pyrazole-treated obese animals, suggesting elevated oxidative and nitrosative stress. Liver tumor necrosis factor alpha levels were higher in pyrazole-treated animals. The CYP2E1 inhibitor chlormethiazole and iNOS inhibitor N-(3-(aminomethyl)-benzyl) acetamidine abrogated the toxicity and the oxidative/nitrosative stress elicited by the induction of CYP2E1. CONCLUSION: These results show that obesity contributes to oxidative stress and liver injury and that induction of CYP2E1 enhances these effects.

17448893
Mitochondrial alterations in livers of Sod1-/- mice fed alcohol.
Chronic alcohol consumption induced liver injury in Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase-deficient mice (Sod1-/-), with extensive centrilobular necrosis and inflammation and a reduction in hepatic ATP content. Mechanisms by which ethanol decreased ATP in these mice remain unclear. We investigated alterations in mitochondria of Sod1-/- mice produced by chronic ethanol treatment. These mitochondria had an increase in State 4 oxygen consumption with succinate and especially with glutamate plus malate compared to mitochondria from pair-fed Sod1-/- mice or mitochondria from wild-type mice fed dextrose or ethanol. This uncoupling was associated with a decrease in ADP/O and respiratory control ratios, a decline in mitochondrial membrane potential, enhanced mitochondrial permeability transition, and decreased aconitase activity. Total thiols and uncoupling protein 2 levels were elevated in the pair-fed Sod1-/- mitochondria, perhaps an adaptive response to oxidant stress. However, no such increases were found with the ethanol-fed Sod1-/- mitochondria, suggesting a failure to develop these adaptations. The mitochondria from the ethanol-fed Sod1-/- mice had elevated levels of cleaved Bax, Bak, Bcl-xl, and adenine nucleotide translocator. Immunoprecipitation studies revealed increased association of Bax and Bak with the adenine nucleotide translocator. ADP-ATP exchange was very low in the ethanol-fed Sod1-/- mitochondria. These results suggest that ethanol treatment of Sod1-/- mice produces uncoupling and a decline in Deltapsi, swelling, increased association of proapoptotic proteins involved in the permeability transition, and decreased adenine nucleotide translocator activity, which may be responsible for the decline in ATP levels and development of necrosis in this model of alcohol-induced liver injury.

17446309
S-adenosyl methionine protects ob/ob mice from CYP2E1-mediated liver injury.
Pyrazole treatment to induce cytochrome P-450 2E1 (CYP2E1) was recently shown to cause liver injury in ob/ob mice but not in lean mice. The present study investigated the effects of S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) on the CYP2E1-dependent liver injury in ob/ob mice. Pyrazole treatment of ob/ob mice for 2 days caused necrosis, steatosis, and elevated serum transaminase and triglyceride levels compared with saline ob/ob mice. Administration of SAM (50 mg/kg body wt ip every 12 h for 3 days) prevented the observed pathological changes as well as the increase of apoptotic hepatocytes, caspase 3 activity, and serum TNF-alpha levels. SAM administration inhibited CYP2E1 activity but not CYP2E1 content. The pyrazole treatment increased lipid peroxidation, 4-hydroxynonenal and 3-nitrotyrosine protein adducts, and protein carbonyls. These increases in oxidative and nitrosative stress were prevented by SAM. Treatment of ob/ob mice with pyrazole lowered the endogenous SAM levels, and these were elevated after SAM administration. Mitochondrial GSH levels were very low after pyrazole treatment of the ob/ob mice; this was associated with elevated levels of malondialdehyde and 4-hydroxynonenal and 3-nitrotyrosine protein adducts in the mitochondria. All these changes were prevented with SAM administration. SAM protected against pyrazole-induced increase in serum transaminases, necrosis, triglyceride levels, caspase-3 activity, and lipid peroxidation even when administered 1 day after pyrazole treatment. In the absence of pyrazole, SAM lowered the slightly elevated serum transaminases, triglyceride levels, caspase-3 activity, and lipid peroxidation in obese mice. In conclusion, SAM protects against and can also reverse or correct CYP2E1-induced liver damage in ob/ob mice.

17382893
Geldanamycin, an inhibitor of Hsp90 increases cytochrome P450 2E1 mediated toxicity in HepG2 cells through sustained activation of the p38MAPK pathway.
Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) can mediate reactive oxygen species (ROS) induced cell death through its catalytic processes. Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is an important molecular chaperone which is essential for cellular integrity. We previously showed that inhibition of Hsp90 with Geldanamycin (GA), an inhibitor of Hsp90 increased CYP2E1 mediated toxicity in CYP2E1 over-expressing HepG2 cells (E47 cells) but not in C34-HepG2 cells devoid of CYP2E1 expression. The aim of the present study was to test the hypothesis that the potentiation of CYP2E1 toxicity in E47 cells with GA may involve changes in mitogen activated protein kinase signal transduction pathways. GA was toxic to E47 cells and SB203580, an inhibitor of p38 MAPK prevented this decrease in viability. The protective effects of SB203580 were effective only when SB203580 was added before GA treatment. GA activated p38 MAPK in E47 cells and this activation was an early and a sustained event. GA elevated ROS levels and lipid peroxidation and lowered GSH levels in E47 cells and these changes were blunted or prevented by treatment with SB203580. Apoptosis was increased by GA and prevented by pre-treatment with SB203580. The loss in mitochondrial membrane potential in E47 cells after GA treatment was also decreased significantly with SB203580 treatment. The activity and expression of CYP2E1 and Hsp90 levels were not altered by SB203580. In conclusion, the inhibition of Hsp90 with GA increases the toxicity of CYP2E1 in HepG2 cells through an early and sustained activation of the p38 MAPK pathway.

17349925
Acute ethanol pretreatment increases FAS-mediated liver injury in mice: role of oxidative stress and CYP2E1-dependent and -independent pathways.
This study evaluated whether acute ethanol pretreatment potentiates Fas-mediated liver injury and if oxidative stress and CYP2E1 play a role in any enhanced hepatotoxicity. There were 3-fold increases of transaminases and more extensive apoptotic necrosis of hepatocytes and focal hemorrhages of the hepatic lobule in mice treated with Jo2 Fas agonistic antibody plus ethanol compared to saline control or to mice treated with Jo2 or ethanol alone. CYP2E1 catalytic activity and protein were increased 2-fold by the acute ethanol pretreatment. There were 2- and 2.5-fold increases of caspase-8 and caspase-3 activity and 1.6-fold increases of apoptotic-positive cells in the Jo2 plus acute ethanol group compared to the Jo2 alone group. Levels of TNF-alpha, malondialdehyde, 4-hydroxynonenal, protein carbonyl formation, 3-nitrotyrosine protein adducts, and inducible nitric oxide synthase were increased in the Jo2 plus ethanol group. The enhanced hepatotoxicity of Jo2 plus ethanol and the elevated oxidative stress and TNF levels were lower in CYP2E1 knockout mice compared to wild-type mice expressing CYP2E1 but higher than saline controls. Toxicity also declined in mice treated with gadolinium chloride, an inhibitor of the inducible nitric oxide synthase or the antioxidant, N-acetyl-L-cysteine. These data indicate that acute ethanol pretreatment is capable of elevating hepatic apoptosis and liver injury induced by Jo2 Fas agonistic antibody. The enhanced hepatotoxicity involves increased oxidative and nitrosative stress, and appears to be mediated by CYP2E1-dependent and also CYP2E1-independent mechanisms.

17118330
Role of intracellular calcium and phospholipase A2 in arachidonic acid-induced toxicity in liver cells overexpressing CYP2E1.
Liver cells (HepG2 and primary hepatocytes) overexpressing CYP2E1 and exposed to arachidonic acid (AA) were previously shown to lose viability together with enhanced lipid peroxidation. These events were blocked in cells pre-incubated with antioxidants (alpha-tocopherol, glutathione ethyl ester), or in HepG2 cells not expressing CYP2E1. The goal of the current study was to evaluate the role of calcium and calcium-activated hydrolases in these CYP2E1-AA interactions. CYP2E1-expressing HepG2 cells treated with AA showed an early increase in cytosolic calcium and partial depletion of ionomycin-sensitive calcium stores. These changes in calcium were blocked by alpha-tocopherol. AA activated phospholipase A2 (PLA2) in CYP2E1-expressing liver cells, and this was inhibited by PLA2 inhibitors or alpha-tocopherol. PLA2 inhibitors prevented the cell death caused by AA, without affecting CYP2E1 activity or lipid peroxidation. AA toxicity and PLA2 activation were inhibited in calcium-depleted cells, but not by removal of extracellular calcium alone. Removal of extracellular calcium inhibited the early increase in cytosolic calcium caused by AA. CYP2E1 overexpressing HepG2 cells exposed to AA showed a decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential, which was prevented by the PLA2 inhibitors. These results suggest that AA-induced toxicity to CYPE1-expressing cells: (i) is associated with release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores that depends mainly on oxidative membrane damage; (ii) is associated with activation of PLA2 that depends on intracellular calcium and lipid peroxidation; (iii) does not depend on increased influx of extracellular calcium, and (iv) depends on the effect of converging events (lipid peroxidation, intracellular calcium, activation of PLA2) on mitochondria to induce bioenergetic failure and necrosis. These interactions may play a role in alcohol liver toxicity, which requires polyunsaturated fatty acids, and involves induction of CYP2E1.

