20570968
Large inverted repeats within Xp11.2 are present at the breakpoints of isodicentric X chromosomes in Turner syndrome.
Turner syndrome (TS) results from whole or partial monosomy X and is mediated by haploinsufficiency of genes that normally escape X-inactivation. Although a 45,X karyotype is observed in half of all TS cases, the most frequent variant TS karyotype includes the isodicentric X chromosome alone [46,X,idic(X)(p11)] or as a mosaic [46,X,idic(X)(p11)/45,X]. Given the mechanism of idic(X)(p11) rearrangement is poorly understood and breakpoint sequence information is unknown, this study sought to investigate the molecular mechanism of idic(X)(p11) formation by determining their precise breakpoint intervals. Karyotype analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping of eight idic(X)(p11) cell lines and three unbalanced Xp11.2 translocation lines identified the majority of breakpoints within a 5 Mb region, from approximately 53 to 58 Mb, in Xp11.1-p11.22, clustering into four regions. To further refine the breakpoints, a high-resolution oligonucleotide microarray (average of approximately 350 bp) was designed and array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) was performed on all 11 idic(X)(p11) and Xp11.2 translocation lines. aCGH analyses identified all breakpoint regions, including an idic(X)(p11) line with two potential breakpoints, one breakpoint shared between two idic(X)(p11) lines and two Xp translocations that shared breakpoints with idic(X)(p11) lines. Four of the breakpoint regions included large inverted repeats composed of repetitive gene clusters and segmental duplications, which corresponded to regions of copy-number variation. These data indicate that the rearrangement sites on Xp11.2 that lead to isodicentric chromosome formation and translocations are probably not random and suggest that the complex repetitive architecture of this region predisposes it to rearrangements, some of which are recurrent.

20535210
Patient-specific induced pluripotent stem-cell-derived models of LEOPARD syndrome.
The generation of reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from patients with defined genetic disorders holds the promise of increased understanding of the aetiologies of complex diseases and may also facilitate the development of novel therapeutic interventions. We have generated iPSCs from patients with LEOPARD syndrome (an acronym formed from its main features; that is, lentigines, electrocardiographic abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary valve stenosis, abnormal genitalia, retardation of growth and deafness), an autosomal-dominant developmental disorder belonging to a relatively prevalent class of inherited RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase signalling diseases, which also includes Noonan syndrome, with pleomorphic effects on several tissues and organ systems. The patient-derived cells have a mutation in the PTPN11 gene, which encodes the SHP2 phosphatase. The iPSCs have been extensively characterized and produce multiple differentiated cell lineages. A major disease phenotype in patients with LEOPARD syndrome is hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. We show that in vitro-derived cardiomyocytes from LEOPARD syndrome iPSCs are larger, have a higher degree of sarcomeric organization and preferential localization of NFATC4 in the nucleus when compared with cardiomyocytes derived from human embryonic stem cells or wild-type iPSCs derived from a healthy brother of one of the LEOPARD syndrome patients. These features correlate with a potential hypertrophic state. We also provide molecular insights into signalling pathways that may promote the disease phenotype.

20084009
Detection of low-level mosaicism and placental mosaicism by oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization.
To determine the sensitivity of whole-genome oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization for the detection of mosaic cytogenetic abnormalities. Mosaicism sensitivity was evaluated by testing artificially derived whole chromosome and segmental aneuploidies ranging from 0% to 100% abnormal and additional naturally occurring mosaic specimens. Using combined dye-reversed replicates and an unfiltered analysis, oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization detected as low as 10% and 20-30% mosaicism from whole chromosome and segmental aneuploidies, respectively. To investigate discrepancies between cultured and uncultured specimens, array comparative genomic hybridization was performed on DNA from additional direct product of conception specimens with abnormal karyotypes in culture. Interestingly, 5 of 10 product of conception specimens with double trisomies on cultured cell analysis had only a single trisomy by array comparative genomic hybridization and quantitative polymerase chain reaction on DNA from the uncultured direct specimen, and all harbored the more commonly observed trisomy. Thus, oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization revealed previously unidentified placental mosaicism in half of the products of conception with double-aneuploid conventional karyotypes. Oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization can detect low-level mosaicism for whole chromosome ( approximately 10%) and segmental ( approximately 20-30%) aneuploidies when using specific detection criteria. In addition, careful interpretation is required when performing array comparative genomic hybridization on DNA isolated from direct specimens as the results may differ from the cultured chromosome analysis.

18925931
Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification for genetic screening in autism spectrum disorders: efficient identification of known microduplications and identification of a novel microduplication in ASMT.
It has previously been shown that specific microdeletions and microduplications, many of which also associated with cognitive impairment (CI), can present with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) represents an efficient method to screen for such recurrent microdeletions and microduplications. In the current study, a total of 279 unrelated subjects ascertained for ASDs were screened for genomic disorders associated with CI using MLPA. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) and/or direct DNA sequencing were used to validate potential microdeletions and microduplications. Methylation-sensitive MLPA was used to characterize individuals with duplications in the Prader-Willi/Angelman (PWA) region. MLPA showed two subjects with typical ASD-associated interstitial duplications of the 15q11-q13 PWA region of maternal origin. Two additional subjects showed smaller, de novo duplications of the PWA region that had not been previously characterized. Genes in these two novel duplications include GABRB3 and ATP10A in one case, and MKRN3, MAGEL2 and NDN in the other. In addition, two subjects showed duplications of the 22q11/DiGeorge syndrome region. One individual was found to carry a 12 kb deletion in one copy of the ASPA gene on 17p13, which when mutated in both alleles leads to Canavan disease. Two subjects showed partial duplication of the TM4SF2 gene on Xp11.4, previously implicated in X-linked non-specific mental retardation, but in our subsequent analyses such variants were also found in controls. A partial duplication in the ASMT gene, located in the pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1) of the sex chromosomes and previously suggested to be involved in ASD susceptibility, was observed in 6-7% of the cases but in only 2% of controls (P = 0.003). MLPA proves to be an efficient method to screen for chromosomal abnormalities. We identified duplications in 15q11-q13 and in 22q11, including new de novo small duplications, as likely contributing to ASD in the current sample by increasing liability and/or exacerbating symptoms. Our data indicate that duplications in TM4SF2 are not associated with the phenotype given their presence in controls. The results in PAR1/PAR2 are the first large-scale studies of gene dosage in these regions, and the findings at the ASMT locus indicate that further studies of the duplication of the ASMT gene are needed in order to gain insight into its potential involvement in ASD. Our studies also identify some limitations of MLPA, where single base changes in probe binding sequences alter results. In summary, our studies indicate that MLPA, with a focus on accepted medical genetic conditions, may be an inexpensive method for detection of microdeletions and microduplications in ASD patients for purposes of genetic counselling if MLPA-identified deletions are validated by additional methods.

18076104
Multiple hemangiomas in a patient with a t(3q;4p) translocation: an infrequent association with Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome.
We report on the clinical phenotype of an infant with a duplication of the terminal portion of the long arm of chromosome 3(q26.3-qter) and a deletion of the terminal portion of the short arm of chromosome 4(p16.3) with multiple hemangiomas and a hamartoma. Patients with deletions of distal 4p have the characteristic features of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS); whereas those with the distal duplication of 3q have a well recognized syndrome with some features resembling Cornelia-de Lange syndrome (CdLS). Neither of these recognized chromosomal anomalies has been reported previously to be associated with multiple hemangiomas or other vascular malformations.

