20719962
Sprouty proteins inhibit receptor-mediated activation of phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C.
Sprouty (Spry) proteins are negative regulators of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling; however, their exact mechanism of action remains incompletely understood. We identified phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PLC)-? as a partner of the Spry1 and Spry2 proteins. Spry-PLC? interaction was dependent on the Src homology 2 domain of PLC? and a conserved N-terminal tyrosine residue in Spry1 and Spry2. Overexpression of Spry1 and Spry2 was associated with decreased PLC? phosphorylation and decreased PLC? activity as measured by production of inositol (1,4,5)-triphosphate (IP(3)) and diacylglycerol, whereas cells deficient for Spry1 or Spry1, -2, and -4 showed increased production of IP(3) at baseline and further increased in response to growth factor signals. Overexpression of Spry 1 or Spry2 or small-interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of PLC?1 or PLC?2 abrogated the activity of a calcium-dependent reporter gene, suggesting that Spry inhibited calcium-mediated signaling downstream of PLC?. Furthermore, Spry overexpression in T-cells, which are highly dependent on PLC? activity and calcium signaling, blocked T-cell receptor-mediated calcium release. Accordingly, cultured T-cells from Spry1 gene knockout mice showed increased proliferation in response to T-cell receptor stimulation. These data highlight an important action of Spry, which may allow these proteins to influence signaling through multiple receptors.

18156491
The MMSET protein is a histone methyltransferase with characteristics of a transcriptional corepressor.
MMSET, identified by its fusion to the IgH locus in t(4;14)-associated multiple myeloma, possesses domains found within chromatin regulators, including the SET domain. MMSET protein is overexpressed and highly associated with chromatin in myeloma cell lines carrying t(4;14). MMSET possesses methyltransferase activity for core histone H3 lysine 4 and histone 4 lysine 20, whereas MMSET made in cells only modified H4. Segments of MMSET fused to the Gal4 DNA binding domain repressed transcription of a chromatin-embedded Gal4 reporter gene. MMSET-mediated repression was associated with increased H4K20 methylation gene and loss of histone acetylation. Consistent with this repressive activity, MMSET could form a complex with HDAC1 and HDAC2, mSin3a, and the histone demethylase LSD1, suggesting that it is a component of corepressor complexes. Furthermore, MMSET coexpression enhances HDAC1- and HDAC2-mediated repression in transcriptional reporter assays. Finally, shRNA-mediated knockdown of MMSET compromised viability of a myeloma cell line, suggesting a biologic role for the protein in malignant cell growth. Collectively, these data suggest that, by acting directly as a modifier of chromatin as well as through binding of other chromatin-modifying enzymes, MMSET influences gene expression and potentially acts as a pathogenic agent in multiple myeloma.

