21477147
Nasal foreign bodies in children: considerations for the anesthesiologist.
The combination of a curious young child exploring his/her nasal cavities, with the abundance of small inert and natural objects in our society, culminates in a significant number of nasal foreign bodies (NFBs). Usually NFBs are benign entities, yielding relatively simple resolutions and mild morbidities. However, their presence can lead to much more serious consequences if they are inserted unwitnessed, grow asymptomatically for several months or years, and significantly affect surrounding tissues. Moreover, if these substances become displaced posteriorly and enter the lower respiratory tract, dire circumstances may occur. This article discusses the different types of NFBs, various clinical presentations, diagnosis, pathophysiology, and pertinent considerations for the anesthesia care provider. Increasing one's awareness of the implications of NFBs, can optimize the safe treatment of patients harboring this development.

20533965
Geriatric patients: oral health and the operating room.
Many patients requiring surgery possess poor oral health. The presence of decayed teeth and periodontitis represent potentially potent causes of odontogenic infection that could significantly compromise the surgical outcome. Geriatric patients presenting for surgery who have not had a dental examination for years may be harboring an undetected oral infection. In the perioperative period, the harmful effects of such an infection are amplified in terms of treatment and expenses. This article will elaborate on the association between oral health and systemic disease, present unique intraoral characteristics of elderly patients, and emphasize the importance of obtaining a dental evaluation and treating any acute oral infection before surgery. Augmenting the awareness of the perioperative dental considerations in the geriatric population can lead to the implementation of effective and preventive measures that can contain costs and achieve optimal patient care.

18778297
Dental considerations for cardiac surgery.
Many patients requiring cardiac surgery possess poor oral health. The presence of decayed teeth, untreated dental abscesses, and periodontitis can all represent potentially potent causes of an odontogenic infection. Ultimately, such an infection can have catastrophic consequences if it occurs during or soon after certain cardiac procedures. Since an association exists between poor oral hygiene and various systemic diseases, many patients scheduled for cardiac procedures inherently possess poor oral hygiene and untreated dental infections. Inadequate patient education, financial constraints, and dental phobia all serve as barriers for patients receiving routine intraoral care. Consequently, patients may unknowingly present for cardiac surgery with undetected oral infections that can magnify the likelihood of an adverse outcome, leading to increased costs, morbidity, and possibly mortality. It is recommended to view oral health in the perspective of systemic health, specifically, recognizing the deleterious impact that an untreated odontogenic infection can have upon cardiac surgery. Therefore, considering scheduling constraints and the urgency of the operation, if time and resources permit, then it is suggested that patients who undergo elective cardiac surgery should be screened preoperatively to ensure that any oral infection is diagnosed and definitively treated. Such an investment can yield significant improvements in surgical outcome and overall patient health.

18389671
Considerations for the use of enteral sedation in pediatric dentistry.
Treating an uncooperative, uncontrollable child can be unpleasant for all parties involved. Despite the dentist's best efforts to employ traditional techniques, the behavioral management of challenging pediatric dental patients often requires more than "tell, show, do". Consequently, pre-operative pharmacological intervention may be necessary. Enteral sedation may be the optimal adjunct for the dental treatment of such a challenging patient population. However it must be utilized with caution and is not an appropriate treatment modality for all. This paper will present various considerations for the safe, appropriate and effective use of enteral sedation in contemporary pediatric dentistry. With the strong demand for this service, properly trained practitioners can broaden their practice and provide a win-win scenario for themselves and their patients.

17678794
The value of optimizing dentition before cardiac surgery.


