21415308
Bcl-xL Is a Dominant Antiapoptotic Protein that Inhibits Homoharringtonine-Induced Apoptosis in Leukemia Cells.
Homoharringtonine (HHT) has been reported to be effective in a portion of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) or chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). To investigate its mechanism of action, cell growth inhibition and cytotoxicity of HHT were investigated in three AML cell lines, HL-60, NB4, and U937, and in three CML cell lines, K562, KU812, and KCL22. AML cells were more sensitive than CML cells to HHT-induced cytotoxicity. Using HL-60 cells, it was revealed that HHT decreased the levels of myeloid cell leukemia 1 (Mcl-1), X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), survivin, and B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2)-homology domain 3 (BH3)-only proteins as well as the mitochondrial membrane potential. The levels of Bcl-2, Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax), and Bcl-2 homologous antagonist/killer (Bak) proteins in HL-60 cells were not changed after HHT treatment. U937, K562, KU812, and KCL22 cells expressed B-cell lymphoma-extra large (Bcl-xL) and were less responsive to HHT-induced apoptosis than HL-60 cells. Silencing Mcl-1 or Bcl-xL, but not XIAP or survivin, enhanced HHT-induced apoptosis in U937 cells. The levels of HHT-induced apoptosis in K562, KCL22, and KU812 cells were inversely correlated with the levels of Bcl-xL but not those of Bcl-2 or Mcl-1. K562 cells expressing high levels of Bcl-xL but no Bcl-2 were less responsive to HHT-induced apoptosis than KCL22 cells that expressed lower levels of Bcl-xL and higher levels of Bcl-2 protein. In K562 cells, knockdown of Bcl-xL, but not of Mcl-1, enhanced HHT-induced apoptosis. Transfection of Bcl-xL into KCL22 cells attenuated HHT-induced apoptosis. These data suggest that Bcl-xL plays a more important role than Bcl-2 and Mcl-1 in protecting against HHT-induced apoptosis.

19347245
Sequences of polycythemia-type Friend spleen focus-forming virus in clone-745-derived mouse erythroleukemia cells.
Friend leukemia virus complex consists of a replication-competent virus plus one of two replication-incompetent viruses, spleen focus-forming virus anemia virus or spleen focus-forming virus polycythemia virus. The replication-incompetent viruses induce rapid malignant transformation of erythroid precursor cells. Transformed cell lines from mice infected with the complex can be induced to undergo erythrodifferentiation in vitro. However, lines containing the anemia-type virus require erythropoietin and another agent such as dimethyl sulfoxide for optimal erythrodifferentiation, whereas those containing the polycythemia-type virus do not require or respond to erythropoietin. Mice infected with the original Friend virus isolates were anemic, so sub-lines derived from these mice should be erythropoietin-dependent for induction of erythrodifferentiation. However, many of the widely studied sub-lines are erythropoietin-independent. In order to clarify this apparent anomaly, the genomes of viruses present in two commonly used erythropoietin-independent sub-lines were sequenced. Sequence analysis demonstrates that they contain the polycythemia-type virus and not the anemia-type virus.

18281494
Acetyl-keto-beta-boswellic acid induces apoptosis through a death receptor 5-mediated pathway in prostate cancer cells.
Acetyl-keto-beta-boswellic acid (AKBA), a triterpenoid isolated from Boswellia carterri Birdw and Boswellia serrata, has been found to inhibit tumor cell growth and to induce apoptosis. The apoptotic effects and the mechanisms of action of AKBA were studied in LNCaP and PC-3 human prostate cancer cells. AKBA induced apoptosis in both cell lines at concentrations above 10 microg/mL. AKBA-induced apoptosis was correlated with the activation of caspase-3 and caspase-8 as well as with poly(ADP)ribose polymerase (PARP) cleavage. The activation of caspase-8 was correlated with increased levels of death receptor (DR) 5 but not of Fas or DR4. AKBA-induced apoptosis, caspase-8 activation, and PARP cleavage were inhibited by knocking down DR5 using a small hairpin RNA. AKBA treatment increased the levels of CAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) and activated a DR5 promoter reporter but did not activate a DR5 promoter reporter with the mutant CHOP binding site. These results suggest that AKBA induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells through a DR5-mediated pathway, which probably involves the induced expression of CHOP.

17217047
The design of selective and non-selective combination therapy for acute promyelocytic leukemia.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is an unique subtype of acute myeloid leukemia typically carrying a specific reciprocal chromosome translocation, t(15;17), leading to the expression of a leukemia-generating fusion protein, PML-RARalpha. APL patients are responsive to APL-selective reagents such as all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) or arsenic trioxide and non-selective cytotoxic chemotherapy. Nearly all de novo APL patients undergo clinical remission when treated with ATRA plus chemotherapy or with the combinational selective therapy, ATRA plus As2O3. Combining ATRA with As2O3 as an induction followed by chemotherapy consolidation results in more profound clinical remissions compared to treatment with any agent alone or any of the other possible combinations. The mechanism of action of each of these agents differs. ATRA induces APL cell differentiation and PML-RARalpha proteolysis. As2O3 induces APL cell partial differentiation, PML-RARalpha proteolysis, and apoptosis. Chemotherapy, mainly using anthracyclines, induces APL cell death. The combined effects of selective APL therapy (ATRA and As2O3) and/or non-selective chemotherapy in APL cells in vitro and their mechanisms in relation to clinical protocol design are discussed.

