18082462
Uncorrected sagittal plane imbalance predisposes to symptomatic instrumentation failure.
Elucidation of the factors responsible for symptomatic failure of spinal instrumentation has been a keen interest for many investigators. To quantitate the number of symptomatic instrumentation failures (SIFs) encountered during a 2-year period. The effect of sagittal plane imbalance (corrected or uncorrected) on the rate of SIF was evaluated. Retrospective evaluation of all patients requiring spinal instrumentation to determine which factors predispose toward instrumentation failure. All patients requiring spinal instrumentation over a 2-year period were retrospectively studied. Sagittal plane imbalance pre- and postoperatively was determined using Cobb angle analysis on plain X-rays. SIF was defined as screw back-out and/or breakage, pseudarthrosis, cage migration, or rod disconnection in patients with concordant symptoms. Asymptomatic patients did not demonstrate instrumentation failure on the routine postoperative X-rays. Of the 355 patients who fit the criteria, 47 patients presented with either idiopathic or secondary sagittal plane deformity preoperatively. Additionally, long-segment fixation, smoking, age, and fixation across junctional segments were evaluated as risk factors for SIF. Of the 47 patients with sagittal plane deformity, 40 patients (85%) achieved correction demonstrated on postoperative radiographs whereas in 7 (15%), the sagittal plane imbalance was not corrected. Of these seven cases, five suffered instrumentation failure (failure rate 71.5%) versus no instrumentation failures (failure rate 0%) for the remaining 40 patients. SIF was demonstrated in 10 patients overall (failure rate of 2.8%). There was no correlation found between factors such as age, indications for surgery, or long-segment fixation, and instrumentation failure. Failure to correct sagittal plane deformity intraoperatively predisposes patients to SIF regardless of age, level of surgery, or indication of surgery.

17542503
Stress-shielding compared with load-sharing anterior cervical plate fixation: a clinical and radiographic prospective analysis of 50 patients.
In a prospective analysis the authors evaluated the clinical and radiographic outcome of 50 consecutive patients who underwent anterior cervical discectomy and fusion and fixation in which either a stress-shielding or a load-sharing plate (Orion and Premier, respectively) was placed. Data obtained in the two cohorts were analyzed to determine whether clinical or radiographic differences would emerge. All patients underwent either one- or two-level fusion in which freeze-dried allogenic tricortical iliac crest bone graft was used. In the first cohort of 25 patients entered into the study, fixation was achieved using a stress-shielding anterior cervical plate (ACP) system, whereas in the second cohort of 25 patients a load-sharing plate system was employed. Patients were evaluated during a follow-up period that ranged from 12 to 35 months. Outcome was determined using a standard questionnaire by which the authors gauged the level of pain, disability, and satisfaction following surgery. The success of surgical fusion and the magnitude of the translation were determined by radiographic evaluation. There was no statistically significant difference between the two cohorts with respect to age, sex, smoking rate, and postoperative complications. With regard to pain and functionality, there was a significant difference (p < 0.05) in favor of the load-sharing system. The fusion rates with the load-sharing and stress-shielding systems were 96 and 92%, respectively, and this difference was not significant. There was no significant difference between the two cohorts with regard to overall satisfaction. The magnitude of vertical translation was significantly greater in the stress-shielding ACP group (p < 0.05) for treatment at one level but not at two. Clinical and radiographic data were available in all patients. Load-sharing ACP systems exhibited superior clinical results compared with stress-shielding ACPs in this series of patients. The symptomatic pseudarthrosis rate was lower in the load-sharing ACP-treated patients, although this was not statistically significant.

