20486334
In vitro assessment of the allergenicity of a novel influenza vaccine produced in dog kidney cells in individuals with dog allergy.
An inactivated influenza vaccine produced in canine kidney cells (MDCK 33016-PF) contains no egg proteins and may be used to immunize egg-allergic patients. Although no major dog allergens were identified in MDCK 33016-PF cells, minor dog allergens might be present and cause reactions in dog-allergic individuals. To evaluate the allergenicity of the inactivated influenza vaccine produced in cell culture in a mediator release assay. Rat basophil leukemia (RBL) cells transfected with human IgE receptor-1 were sensitized with sera from dog-allergic adults with positive skin prick test reactions to dog extract and detectable dog dander IgE and were stimulated with serial dilutions of vaccine and dog dander extract. N-hexosaminidase release (NHR) was used as a marker of RBL cell degranulation. Western blots were performed, and UniCAP was used to measure dog-specific IgE antibody levels. The median (interquartile range) level of dog dander IgE was 8.31 kU(A)/L (1.895-14.5 kU(A)/L) and of dog epithelium IgE was 3.19 kU(A)/L (0.835-6.27 kU(A)L). Median (range) maximum NHR (at the first 10-fold dilution) was 0% (0%-1.4%) to vaccine and 10.2% (0%-35.9%) to dog dander (P < .001). In an egg-allergic control subject, the maximum NHR to a vaccine cultured in chick embryo and containing egg protein was 10.2%. IgE antibodies in pooled sera did not bind to vaccine on immunoblots but produced strong binding to dog dander and epithelium extracts. Serum from an egg-allergic control subject strongly bound embryonated egg-derived vaccine. An influenza vaccine produced in continuous canine kidney cells did not trigger degranulation in RBL cells passively sensitized with human anti-dog IgE.

20431369
Is oral immunotherapy the cure for food allergies?
To review current evidence on food oral immunotherapy (OIT). Desensitized state, defined as the ingestion of a substantial amount of food in the home diet that protects from severe reactions to accidental exposures, can be achieved by approximately 50-75% of the children treated with OIT. The rate of permanent tolerance is unknown; the longer duration of OIT may result in permanent tolerance. Side effects are common both during the initial dose escalation and during home dosing. Most reactions are mild (oral pruritus, abdominal discomfort, and rashes) and decrease in frequency with the longer duration of OIT. Severe reactions treated with epinephrine have been reported during home dosing. Factors associated with increased risk of reactions to previously tolerated doses during home dosing include exercise, viral infection, dosing on empty stomach, menses, and asthma exacerbation. These preliminary data on OIT are encouraging. Additional studies must answer multiple questions including optimal dose, ideal duration of oral/sublingual immunotherapy, degree of protection, efficacy for different ages, severity and type of food allergy responsive to treatment and need for patient protection during home administration. Until these questions are answered in rigorous multicenter randomized and placebo-controlled trials, OIT remains an experimental approach with not sufficiently well established risk-to-benefit ratio.

20226304
Correlation of IgE/IgG4 milk epitopes and affinity of milk-specific IgE antibodies with different phenotypes of clinical milk allergy.
Results from large-scale epitope mapping with a peptide microarray have been shown to correlate with clinical features of milk allergy. We sought to assess IgE and IgG4 epitope diversity and IgE affinity in different clinical phenotypes of milk allergy and identify informative epitopes that might be predictive of clinical outcomes of milk allergy. Forty-one subjects were recruited from a larger study on the effects of ingesting heat-denatured milk proteins in subjects with milk allergy. Using food challenges, subjects were characterized as being clinically reactive to all forms of milk (n = 17), being tolerant to heated milk (HM) products (n = 16), or having outgrown their milk allergy (n = 8). Eleven healthy volunteers without milk allergy served as control subjects. A peptide microarray was performed by using the previously published protocol. Subjects with milk allergy had increased epitope diversity compared with those who outgrew their allergy. HM-tolerant subjects had IgE-binding patterns similar to those who had outgrown their allergy, but IgG4-binding patterns that were more similar to those of the allergic group. Binding to higher numbers of IgE peptides was associated with more severe allergic reactions during challenge. There was no association between IgG4 peptides and clinical features of milk allergy. Using a competitive peptide microarray assay, allergic patients demonstrated a combination of high- and low-affinity IgE binding, whereas HM-tolerant subjects and those who had outgrown their milk allergy had primarily low-affinity binding. Greater IgE epitope diversity and higher affinity, as determined by using the peptide microarray, were associated with clinical phenotypes and severity of milk allergy.

20004784
Epinephrine treatment is infrequent and biphasic reactions are rare in food-induced reactions during oral food challenges in children.
Data about epinephrine use and biphasic reactions in childhood food-induced anaphylaxis during oral food challenges are scarce. To determine the prevalence and risk factors of reactions requiring epinephrine and the rate of biphasic reactions during oral food challenges (OFCs) in children. Reaction details of positive OFCs in children between 1999 and 2007 were collected by using a computerized database. Selection of patients for OFCs was generally predicated on < or =50% likelihood of a positive challenge and a low likelihood of a severe reaction on the basis of the clinical history, specific IgE levels, and skin prick tests. A total of 436 of 1273 OFCs resulted in a reaction (34%). Epinephrine was administered in 50 challenges (11% of positive challenges, 3.9% overall) for egg (n = 15, 16% of positive OFCs to egg), milk (n = 14, 12%), peanut (n = 10, 26%), tree nuts (n = 4, 33%), soy (n = 3, 7%), wheat (n = 3, 9%), and fish (n = 1, 9%). Reactions requiring epinephrine occurred in older children (median, 7.9 vs 5.8 years; P < .001) and were more often caused by peanuts (P = .006) compared with reactions not treated with epinephrine. There was no difference in the sex, prevalence of asthma, history of anaphylaxis, specific IgE level, skin prick tests, or amount of food administered. Two doses of epinephrine were required in 3 of 50 patients (6%) reacting to wheat, cow's milk, and pistachio. There was 1 (2%) biphasic reaction. No reaction resulted in life-threatening respiratory or cardiovascular compromise. Older age and reactions to peanuts were risk factors for anaphylaxis during oral food challenges. Reactions requiring multiple doses of epinephrine and biphasic reactions were infrequent.

19523674
Sarcoplasmic calcium-binding protein is an EF-hand-type protein identified as a new shrimp allergen.
Shellfish allergy is a long-lasting disorder usually persisting throughout life. Despite its high prevalence, there is limited information about allergenic shrimp proteins. Characterization of shrimp allergens. Fifty-two adults and children with a history of immediate allergic reactions to shrimp and elevated serum IgE to shrimp were selected for this study. Tryptic digests from a 20-kd IgE-binding protein were analyzed by LC-MS/MS, identifying the protein as a sarcoplasmic-calcium-binding protein. cDNA encoding sarcoplasmic calcium-binding protein (SCP) from a shrimp cDNA library (Litopenaeus vannamei) was amplified by PCR, cloned into an expression vector, and sequenced. Recombinant SCP was tested with patients' sera. ELISA inhibition experiments determined the fraction of total shrimp IgE recognizing SCP. A functional assay with a rat basophilic leukemia cell line was used to determine the capacity for mediator release induced by SCP. Immunoblotting demonstrated IgE binding by 31 of 52 (59.6%) of the sera to a 20-kd shrimp protein. The protein was identified as a SCP. Amplified cDNA encoding SCP was isolated and sequenced. Open reading frame translation provided the complete amino acid sequence of shrimp SCP. Recombinant SCP was recognized by serum IgE from 20 of 52 (38.4%) subjects, of whom 17 of 20 (85%) were children. ELISA inhibition of pooled sera IgE reactivity to BS extract using recombinant SCP was significant (as high as 79%). For some subjects, mediator release induced by recombinant SCP was higher than that induced by recombinant tropomyosin. We have identified and cloned a new shrimp allergen, Lit v 4.0101, an SCP, which appears to be of particular importance in the pediatric population.

19500710
Work Group report: oral food challenge testing.
Oral food challenges are procedures conducted by allergists/immunologists to make an accurate diagnosis of immediate, and occasionally delayed, adverse reactions to foods. The timing of the challenge is carefully chosen based on the individual patient history and the results of skin prick tests and food specific serum IgE values. The type of the challenge is determined by the history, the age of the patient, and the likelihood of encountering subjective reactions. The food challenge requires preparation of the patient for the procedure and preparation of the office for the organized conduct of the challenge, for a careful assessment of the symptoms and signs and the treatment of reactions. The starting dose, the escalation of the dosing, and the intervals between doses are determined based on experience and the patient's history. The interpretation of the results of the challenge and arrangements for follow-up after a challenge are important. A negative oral food challenge result allows introduction of the food into the diet, whereas a positive oral food challenge result provides a sound basis for continued avoidance of the food.

19474706
Food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome.
To review current knowledge and recent advances in food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES). Rice is the most common solid food causing FPIES. Rice FPIES is associated with more severe reactions than other foods. Infants presenting acutely may be hypothermic (<36 degrees C) and have thrombocytosis. Finding of hypoalbuminemia and weight gain less than 10 g/day helps to differentiate chronic infantile cow's milk FPIES from infectious causes. Gastric juice leukocytes more than 10 cells per high-power field are found in infants with positive oral food challenge to cow's milk. FPIES is a non-IgE-mediated gastrointestinal food hypersensitivity disorder. Food protein-activated intestinal lymphocytes elaborate inflammatory cytokines that result in increased intestinal permeability, malabsorption, dysmotility, emesis, diarrhea, pain, and failure to thrive. Decreased intestinal transforming growth factor beta and increased TNFalpha may be important in FPIES. Cow's milk and soy are the most common causes of FPIES, but cereal grains (rice, oat, and barley), fish, poultry, and vegetables may also cause FPIES. The majority of FPIES resolve by age of 3 years.

19444093
Rare, medium, or well done? The effect of heating and food matrix on food protein allergenicity.
To review recent advances in the area of food allergen processing and the effect on protein allergenicity. Heating generally decreases protein allergenicity by destroying conformational epitopes. In peanut and shrimp, heat-induced Maillard reaction (glycation) may increase allergenicity. The majority of milk and egg-allergic children tolerate extensively heated (baked with wheat matrix) milk and egg. Introduction of extensively heated milk and egg proteins is associated with decreasing sizes of skin prick test wheals and increasing serum food-specific IgG4 levels. Heating and other methods of food processing have different effects on food allergens, even those contained in the same complex food. Structural homology does not reliably predict the effect of processing on allergenicity, and individual food allergens have to be tested. Interactions with other proteins, fat, and carbohydrates in the food matrix are complex and poorly understood. Introduction of extensively heated milk and egg proteins into the diet of allergic children may represent an alternative approach to oral tolerance induction. Better characterization of these aspects of food allergy is critical for elucidation of food protein interactions with the gut-associated lymphoid tissue, the ability to induce IgE sensitization, the potential to trigger hypersensitivity reactions, and different clinical phenotypes of food allergy with regard to severity and persistence.

19348919
Allergen-specific basophil suppression associated with clinical tolerance in patients with milk allergy.
Children with milk allergy who tolerate heat-denatured milk (HM) have less severe reactions and outgrow the condition earlier than those who react to HM, which might be related to differences in IgE-dependent effector cell function. We sought to apply a novel assay to test the hypothesis that HM-tolerant children have suppressed IgE-mediated basophil responses. Allergic, HM-tolerant, outgrown, or control subjects were defined based on oral food challenges. Whole blood cells were stimulated in vitro with a range of milk allergen doses in the presence or absence of autologous serum or with dilutions of autologous serum. Activated basophils were identified by means of flow cytometry as CD63(bright)CD123+CD203c+HLA-DR(-)CD41a(-). HM-tolerant subjects' basophils were significantly less responsive to milk allergen stimulation at all doses than were basophils from HM-reactive (allergic) individuals. In the absence of autologous serum, HM-tolerant subjects' basophils were significantly more reactive at low allergen concentrations. To a lesser extent, autologous serum also inhibited IL-3- and anti-IgE-induced, but not N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine-induced, responses. The allergen-specific responsiveness of HM-tolerant subjects' basophils increased with dilution of autologous serum with normal pooled serum. Children with milk allergy with a favorable prognosis have evidence of extrinsically suppressed allergen-specific effector cell reactivity.

18851876
Immunologic changes in children with egg allergy ingesting extensively heated egg.
Prior studies have suggested that heated egg might be tolerated by some children with egg allergy. We sought to confirm tolerance of heated egg in a subset of children with egg allergy, to evaluate clinical and immunologic predictors of heated egg tolerance, to characterize immunologic changes associated with continued ingestion of heated egg, and to determine whether a diet incorporating heated egg is well tolerated. Subjects with documented IgE-mediated egg allergy underwent physician-supervised oral food challenges to extensively heated egg (in the form of a muffin and a waffle), with tolerant subjects also undergoing regular egg challenges (in a form of scrambled egg or French toast). Heated egg-tolerant subjects incorporated heated egg into their diets. Skin prick test wheal diameters and egg white, ovalbumin, and ovomucoid IgE levels, as well as ovalbumin and ovomucoid IgG4 levels, were measured at baseline for all subjects and at 3, 6, and 12 months for those tolerant of heated egg. Sixty-four of 117 subjects tolerated heated egg, 23 tolerated regular egg, and 27 reacted to heated egg. Heated egg-reactive subjects had larger skin test wheals and greater egg white-specific, ovalbumin-specific, and ovomucoid-specific IgE levels compared with heated egg- and egg-tolerant subjects. Continued ingestion of heated egg was associated with decreased skin test wheal diameters and ovalbumin-specific IgE levels and increased ovalbumin-specific and ovomucoid-specific IgG4 levels. The majority of subjects with egg allergy were tolerant of heated egg. Continued ingestion of heated egg was well tolerated and associated with immunologic changes that paralleled the changes observed with the development of clinical tolerance to regular egg.

18828521
Immunotherapy for food and latex allergy.


18620743
Tolerance to extensively heated milk in children with cow's milk allergy.
Cow's milk allergy is the most common childhood food allergy. Previously we noted that children who outgrew their milk allergy had milk-specific IgE antibodies primarily directed against conformational epitopes; those with persistent milk allergy also had IgE antibodies directed against specific sequential epitopes. Because high temperature largely destroys conformational epitopes, we hypothesized that some children with milk allergy would tolerate extensively heated (baked) milk products. Children with milk allergy were challenged with heated milk products; heated milk-tolerant subjects were subsequently challenged with unheated milk. Heated milk-tolerant, unheated milk-reactive subjects ingested heated milk products for 3 months and were then re-evaluated. Immune responses were assessed in all subjects; growth and intestinal permeability were followed in heated milk-tolerant subjects. One hundred children (mean age, 7.5 years; range, 2.1-17.3 years) underwent heated milk challenges. Sixty-eight subjects tolerated extensively heated milk only, 23 reacted to heated milk, and 9 tolerated both heated and unheated milk. Heated milk-reactive subjects had significantly larger skin prick test wheals and higher milk-specific and casein-specific IgE levels than other groups. At 3 months, subjects ingesting heated milk products had significantly smaller skin prick test wheals and higher casein-IgG(4) compared with baseline; other immunologic parameters, growth, and intestinal permeability were not significantly different. Heated milk-reactive subjects had more severe symptoms during heated milk challenge than heated milk-tolerant subjects experienced during their unheated milk challenge. The majority (75%) of children with milk allergy tolerate heated milk.

18547626
Use of multiple doses of epinephrine in food-induced anaphylaxis in children.
Food allergy is the most common cause of anaphylaxis outside the hospital setting. We sought to determine the rate, circumstances, and risk factors for repeated doses of epinephrine in the treatment of food-induced anaphylaxis in children. Anonymous questionnaires were distributed to families of children with food allergies during allergy outpatient visits to a food allergy referral center. Demographic information, allergy and reaction history, and details regarding the last 2 anaphylactic reactions requiring epinephrine were collected. A total of 413 questionnaires were analyzed. Seventy-eight children (median, 4.5 years of age; range, 0.5-17.5 years) reported 95 reactions for which epinephrine was administered. Two doses were administered in 12 (13%) and 3 doses in an additional 6 (6%) reactions treated with epinephrine. Peanut, tree nuts, and cow's milk were responsible for >75% of reactions requiring epinephrine. Patients receiving multiple doses of epinephrine more often had asthma (P = .027) than children receiving a single dose. The amount of food ingested or a delay in the initial administration of epinephrine were not risk factors for receiving multiple doses. The second dose of epinephrine was administered by a health care professional in 94% of reactions. In this referral population of children and adolescents with multiple food allergies, 19% of food-induced anaphylactic reactions were treated with more than 1 dose of epinephrine. Prospective studies are necessary to identify risk factors for severe anaphylaxis and to establish rational guidelines for prescribing multiple epinephrine autoinjectors for children with food allergy.

17584315
Educational clinical case series for pediatric allergy and immunology: allergic proctocolitis, food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome and allergic eosinophilic gastroenteritis with protein-losing gastroenteropathy as manifestations of non-IgE-mediated cow's milk allergy.
Cow's milk protein allergy is the most common food allergy in infants and young children. It is estimated that up to 50% of pediatric cow's milk allergy is non-IgE-mediated. Allergic proctocolitis is a benign disorder manifesting with blood-streaked stools in otherwise healthy-appearing infants who are breast- or formula-fed. Symptoms resolve within 48-72 h following elimination of dietary cow's milk protein. Most infants tolerate cow's milk by their first birthday. Food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome presents in young formula-fed infants with chronic emesis, diarrhea, and failure to thrive. Reintroduction of cow's milk protein following a period of avoidance results in profuse, repetitive emesis within 2-3 h following ingestion; 20% of acute exposures may be associated with hypovolemic shock. Treatment of acute reactions is with vigorous hydration. Most children become tolerant with age; attempts of re-introduction of milk must be done under physician supervision and with secure i.v. access. Allergic eosinophilic gastroenteritis affects infants as well as older children and adolescents. Abdominal pain, emesis, diarrhea, failure to thrive, or weight loss are the most common symptoms. A subset of patients may develop protein-losing enteropathy. Fifty percent of affected children are atopic and have evidence of food-specific IgE antibody but skin prick tests and serum food-IgE levels correlate with response to elimination diet poorly. Elemental diet based on the amino-acid formula leads to resolutions of gastrointestinal eosinophilic inflammation typically within 6 wk.

17276882
New perspectives for use of native and engineered recombinant food proteins in treatment of food allergy.
Food allergy has emerged as an important target for research on curative treatment and prevention, with most efforts focusing on peanut, cow's milk, and egg allergy. This article reviews the recent developments in the potential treatments for IgE-mediated food allergy using native and engineered recombinant food proteins.

17245088
Food allergy to proteins.
Food allergy is defined as an immune system-mediated adverse reaction to food proteins. Class 1 food allergens are represented by peanut, egg white, and cow's milk; they are heat- and acid-stable glycoproteins that induce allergic sensitization via gastrointestinal tract and cause systemic reactions. Class 2 food allergens are homologous to proteins in birch tree pollen and class 2 food allergy develops as a consequence of respiratory sensitization to the cross-reactive pollen. Class 2 food allergens are very heat-labile and tend to induce reactions limited to oral allergy symptoms. In contrast, plant nonspecific lipid transfer proteins are resistant to heating and tend to induce systemic reactions. Analysis of IgE-binding epitopes with SPOT membranes revealed that cow's milk-, egg- and peanut-allergic subjects without IgE antibodies against certain sequential epitopes of the major allergens were more likely to achieve tolerance than subjects whose IgE antibodies were directed against those epitopes. Subsequently, peptide microarray showed a correlation between reaction severity and the intensity of IgE binding and the number of epitopes recognized of patients' immune responses against peanut allergens. Taken together, these data suggest that the epitope recognition pattern and intensity of IgE binding are important determinants of severity and duration of food allergy.

