21051534
Ethanol induction of CYP2A5: permissive role for CYP2E1.
CYP2A5 metabolizes xenobiotics and activates hepatocarcinogens, and induction occurs in response to hepatic damage and cellular stress. We evaluated whether ethanol can elevate CYP2A5 and whether CYP2E1 plays a role in the ethanol induction of CYP2A5. Wild-type (WT), CYP2E1 knockout (KO), and CYP2E1 knockin (KI) mice were fed ethanol for 3 weeks. Ethanol increased CYP2E1 and CYP2A5 protein and activity in WT mice but not in the KO mice. Induction of CYP2A5 (and CYP2E1) was restored in the KI mice. Ethanol induction of CYP2A5 occurred only after CYP2E1 was first induced. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that CYP2E1 and CYP2A5 colocalize to the same zones in the liver. Ethanol also elevated CYP2A5 mRNA levels in WT and KI mice but not in KO mice. Induction of CYP2A5 by cadmium was partially decreased in KO mice compared with WT or KI mice. Ethanol elevated CYP2A4 mRNA levels in all mice although the extent of induction was lowest in the KO mice. In summary, ethanol elevated mouse hepatic CYP2A5 levels, which may be of toxicological significance because CYP2A5 metabolizes nicotine and other drugs and activates hepatocarcinogens. Induction of CYP2A5 by ethanol is potentiated by the induction of CYP2E1. We speculate that ethanol induction of CYP2E1 followed by increases in reactive oxygen species and activation of Nrf2 are important steps in the mechanism by which ethanol induces CYP2A5. The possibility that induction of CYP2E1 is permissive for the induction of CYP2A5 may reflect a new contribution by CYP2E1 to the actions of ethanol.

20692331
Chronic alcohol-induced liver injury and oxidant stress are decreased in cytochrome P4502E1 knockout mice and restored in humanized cytochrome P4502E1 knock-in mice.
A major pathway for chronic ethanol-induced liver injury is ethanol-induced oxidant stress. Several pathways contribute to mechanisms by which ethanol induces oxidant stress. Although some studies support a role for cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1), others do not. Most previous studies were conducted in the intragastric infusion model of ethanol administration. There is a need to develop oral models of significant liver injury and to evaluate the possible role of CYP2E1 in ethanol actions in such models. We evaluated chronic ethanol-induced liver injury, steatosis, and oxidant stress in wild-type (WT) mice, CYP2E1 knock out (KO) mice, and humanized CYP2E1 knock-in (KI) mice, in which the human 2E1 was added back to mice deficient in the mouse 2E1. WT mice and the CYP2E1 KO and KI mice (both provided by Dr. F. Gonzalez, National Cancer Institute) were fed a high-fat Lieber-DeCarli ethanol liquid diet for 3weeks; pair-fed controls received dextrose. Ethanol produced fatty liver and oxidant stress in WT mice but liver injury (transaminases, histopathology) was minimal. Ethanol-induced steatosis and oxidant stress were blunted in the KO mice (no liver injury) but restored in the KI mice. Significant liver injury was produced in the ethanol-fed KI mice, with elevated transaminases, necrosis, and increased levels of collagen type 1 and smooth muscle actin. This liver injury in the KI mice was associated with elevated oxidant stress and elevated levels of the human CYP2E1 compared to levels of the mouse 2E1 in WT mice. Activation of JNK and decreased levels of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL were observed in the ethanol-fed KI mice compared to the other groups. Fatty liver in the WT and the KI mice was associated with lower levels of PPAR? and acyl-CoA oxidase. No such changes were found in the ethanol-fed KO mice. These results show that CYP2E1 plays a major role in ethanol-induced fatty liver and oxidant stress. It is the absence of CYP2E1 in the KO mice that is responsible for the blunting of steatosis and oxidant stress because restoring the CYP2E1 restores the fatty liver and oxidant stress. Moreover, it is the human CYP2E1 that restores these effects of ethanol, which suggests that results for fatty liver and oxidant stress from rodent models of ethanol intake and mouse CYP2E1 can be extrapolated to human models of ethanol intake and to human CYP2E1.

19798529
CYP2E1 potentiation of LPS and TNFalpha-induced hepatotoxicity by mechanisms involving enhanced oxidative and nitrosative stress, activation of MAP kinases, and mitochondrial dysfunction.
The mechanisms by which alcohol causes cell injury are not clear. A major mechanism that is the focus of considerable research is the role of lipid peroxidation and oxidative stress in alcohol toxicity. Many pathways have been suggested to play a role in how alcohol induces oxidative stress. Considerable attention has been given to alcohol-elevated production of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and TNFalpha and to alcohol induction of CYP2E1. These two pathways are not exclusive of each other, however, associations and interactions between them, especially in vivo, have not been extensively evaluated. We have shown that increased oxidative stress from induction of CYP2E1 in vivo sensitizes hepatocytes to LPS and TNF toxicity and that oxidants, such as peroxynitrite, activation of p38 and JNK MAP kinases, inactivation of NF-kB protective pathways and mitochondrial dysfunction are downstream mediators of this CYP2E1-LPS/TNF potentiated hepatotoxicity. This review will summarize studies showing potentiated interactions between these two risk factors in promoting liver injury and the mechanisms involved.

19477265
Chronic ethanol feeding potentiates Fas Jo2-induced hepatotoxicity: role of CYP2E1 and TNF-alpha and activation of JNK and P38 MAP kinase.
We have previously shown that treatment of mice with pyrazole or acute ethanol potentiated Fas agonistic Jo2 antibody-induced liver injury by a mechanism involving induction of CYP2E1 and elevated oxidative stress. The current study evaluated whether chronic alcohol feeding potentiates Fas-induced liver injury and whether CYP2E1 plays a role in any enhanced hepatotoxicity. Wild-type and CYP2E1 knockout mice were fed ethanol or isocaloric dextrose for 4 weeks followed by a single treatment with either saline or Jo2. Mice were killed 8 h after the Jo2 challenge. There were three- to five fold increases in transaminases and more extensive eosinophilic necrosis, hemorrhage, and infiltration of inflammatory cells in the central zone of the hepatic lobule in the ethanol-fed mice treated with Jo2 compared to the dextrose/Jo2- or ethanol/saline-treated mice. Liver injury was blunted in ethanol-fed CYP2E1 knockout mice treated with Jo2. The chronic ethanol feeding produced steatosis, elevation of CYP2E1, and oxidative stress in wild-type but not CYP2E1 knockout mice. These changes in wild-type mice fed ethanol were similar after saline or Jo2 treatment. The Jo2 treatment produced activation of JNK and P38 MAP kinase, increased activity of caspase-8 and -3, and lowered hepatic GSH levels in both the dextrose- and the alcohol-fed mice. JNK was activated at early times after Jo2 treatment in the ethanol-fed mice. Serum TNF-alpha levels were strikingly elevated in the wild-type ethanol/Jo2 group, which showed liver injury, compared to all the other groups, which did not show liver injury. Inhibition of JNK or P38 MAPK partially, but not completely, prevented the elevated liver injury in the wild-type ethanol/Jo2 mice. These results show that chronic ethanol feeding enhances Fas-induced liver injury by a mechanism associated with induction of CYP2E1, elevated serum TNF-alpha levels, and activation of MAPK.

19448996
Role of oxidative stress in alcohol-induced liver injury.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are highly reactive molecules that are naturally generated in small amounts during the body's metabolic reactions and can react with and damage complex cellular molecules such as lipids, proteins, or DNA. Acute and chronic ethanol treatments increase the production of ROS, lower cellular antioxidant levels, and enhance oxidative stress in many tissues, especially the liver. Ethanol-induced oxidative stress plays a major role in the mechanisms by which ethanol produces liver injury. Many pathways play a key role in how ethanol induces oxidative stress. This review summarizes some of the leading pathways and discusses the evidence for their contribution to alcohol-induced liver injury. Special emphasis is placed on CYP2E1, which is induced by alcohol and is reactive in metabolizing and activating many hepatotoxins, including ethanol, to reactive products, and in generating ROS.

18721845
Pyrazole induced oxidative liver injury independent of CYP2E1/2A5 induction due to Nrf2 deficiency.
Pyrazole can induce CYP2E1 and 2A5, which produce reactive oxygen species (ROS). Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) regulates important antioxidant enzymes to remove ROS. In this study, we applied Nrf2 knockout mice to test the hypothesis that pyrazole will cause hepatotoxicity and elevate oxidative stress to a greater extent in Nrf2 knockout mice compared to wild type mice. Pyrazole induced severe oxidative liver damage in Nrf2 knockout mice but not in wild type mice. Activities and levels of CYP2E1 and 2A5 were elevated by pyrazole in the wild type mice but not in the Nrf2 knockout mice. However, expression or activity of Nrf2-regulated antioxidant enzymes, such as gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase (GCS), heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and glutathione-S-transferase (GST), were upregulated in the pyrazole-treated wild type mice, but to a lesser extent or not at all in the pyrazole-treated Nrf2 knockout mice. Treatment with antioxidants such as vitamin C or S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) or an inhibitor of iNOS prevented the pyrazole-induced oxidative liver damage, thus validating the role of oxidative/nitrosative stress in the pyrazole induced liver injury to the Nrf2 knockout mice. In summary, even though ROS-producing CYP2E1/2A5 were not elevated by pyrazole, impaired antioxidant capacity resulting from Nrf2 deficiency appear to be sufficient to promote pyrazole-induced oxidative liver injury.

18393316
Cytochrome P450 2E1 contributes to ethanol-induced fatty liver in mice.
Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) is suggested to play a role in alcoholic liver disease, which includes alcoholic fatty liver, alcoholic hepatitis, and alcoholic cirrhosis. In this study, we investigated whether CYP2E1 plays a role in experimental alcoholic fatty liver in an oral ethanol-feeding model. After 4 weeks of ethanol feeding, macrovesicular fat accumulation and accumulation of triglyceride in liver were observed in wild-type mice but not in CYP2E1-knockout mice. In contrast, free fatty acids (FFAs) were increased in CYP2E1-knockout mice but not in wild-type mice. CYP2E1 was induced by ethanol in wild-type mice, and oxidative stress induced by ethanol was higher in wild-type mice than in CYP2E1-knockout mice. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha), a regulator of fatty acid oxidation, was up-regulated in CYP2E1-knockout mice fed ethanol but not in wild-type mice. A PPARalpha target gene, acyl CoA oxidase, was decreased by ethanol in wild-type but not in CYP2E1-knockout mice. Chlormethiazole, an inhibitor of CYP2E1, lowered macrovesicular fat accumulation, inhibited oxidative stress, and up-regulated PPARalpha protein level in wild-type mice fed ethanol. The introduction of CYP2E1 to CYP2E1-knockout mice via an adenovirus restored macrovesicular fat accumulation. These results indicate that CYP2E1 contributes to experimental alcoholic fatty liver in this model and suggest that CYP2E1-derived oxidative stress may inhibit oxidation of fatty acids by preventing up-regulation of PPARalpha by ethanol, resulting in fatty liver.

18078827
CYP2E1 and oxidative liver injury by alcohol.
Ethanol-induced oxidative stress seems to play a major role in mechanisms by which ethanol causes liver injury. Many pathways have been suggested to contribute to the ability of ethanol to induce a state of oxidative stress. One central pathway seems to be the induction of cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) by ethanol. CYP2E1 metabolizes and activates many toxicological substrates, including ethanol, to more reactive, toxic products. Levels of CYP2E1 are elevated under a variety of physiological and pathophysiological conditions and after acute and chronic alcohol treatment. CYP2E1 is also an effective generator of reactive oxygen species such as the superoxide anion radical and hydrogen peroxide and, in the presence of iron catalysts, produces powerful oxidants such as the hydroxyl radical. This review article summarizes some of the biochemical and toxicological properties of CYP2E1 and briefly describes the use of cell lines developed to constitutively express CYP2E1 and CYP2E1 knockout mice in assessing the actions of CYP2E1. Possible therapeutic implications for treatment of alcoholic liver injury by inhibition of CYP2E1 or CYP2E1-dependent oxidative stress will be discussed, followed by some future directions which may help us to understand the actions of CYP2E1 and its role in alcoholic liver injury.

17761302
The mode of cisplatin-induced cell death in CYP2E1-overexpressing HepG2 cells: modulation by ERK, ROS, glutathione, and thioredoxin.
In a previous study, E47 HepG2 cells that overexpress human CYP2E1 were shown to be more sensitive to cisplatin than C34 cells that do not express CYP2E1. In this study, we found that this sensitivity was due to an earlier activation of ERK in the E47 cells compared to the C34 cells. Glutathione depletion by L-buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) enhanced cisplatin cytotoxicity via increasing production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and activation of ERK. In contrast, elevation of glutathione by glutathione ethyl ester (GSHE) decreased cisplatin/BSO cytotoxicity by decreasing ROS production and ERK activation. Inhibition of ERK activation by U0126 protected against cisplatin/BSO cytotoxicity via inhibiting ROS production but not restoring intracellular glutathione content. Examination of the mode of cell death showed that U0126 inhibited cisplatin-induced necrosis but not apoptosis. Cisplatin-induced apoptosis was caspases-dependent; BSO switched cisplatin-induced apoptosis to necrosis via decreasing activity of caspases, and GSHE switched cisplatin/BSO-induced necrosis back to apoptosis through maintaining activity of caspases. Similar to GSHE, U0126 partially switched cisplatin/BSO induced necrosis to apoptosis via restoring activity of caspases. Cisplatin lowered levels of thioredoxin, especially in the presence of BSO. Although U0126 failed in restoring intracellular glutathione levels, it restored thioredoxin levels, which maintain the activity of the caspases. These results suggest that thioredoxin can replace glutathione to promote the active thiol redox state necessary for caspase activity, and thus glutathione and thioredoxin regulate the mode of cisplatin toxicity in E47 cells via redox regulation of caspase activity.

