20961484
Streamlined embedding of cell monolayers on gridded glass-bottom imaging dishes for correlative light and electron microscopy.
Correlative light and electron microscopy (CLEM) has facilitated study of intracellular trafficking. Routine application of CLEM would be advantageous for many laboratories but previously described techniques are particularly demanding, even for those with access to laser scanning confocal microscopy (LSCM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). We describe streamlined methods for TEM of green fluorescent protein (GFP)-labeled organelles after imaging by LSCM using gridded glass bottom imaging dishes. GFP-MAP 1A/1B LC3 (GFP-LC3) transfected cells were treated with rapamycin, fixed and imaged by LSCM. Confocal image stacks were acquired enabling full visualization of each GFP-LC3 labeled organelle. After LSCM, cells were embedded for TEM using a simplified two step method that stabilizes the glass bottom such that the block can be separated from the glass by mild heating. All imaging and TEM processing are performed in the same dish. The LSCM imaged cells were relocated on the block and serial sectioned. Correlation of LSCM, DIC, and TEM images was facilitated by cellular landmarks. All GFP labeled structures were successfully reidentified and imaged by serial section TEM. This method could make CLEM more accessible to nonspecialized laboratories with basic electron microscopy expertise and could be used routinely to confirm organelle localization of fluorescent puncta.

20849527
?-protocadherins are enriched and transported in specialized vesicles associated with the secretory pathway in neurons.
Gamma protocadherins (Pcdh-?s) resemble classical cadherins and have the potential to engage in cell-cell interactions with homophilic properties. Emerging evidence suggests non-conventional roles for some protocadherins in neural development. We sought to determine whether Pcdh-? trafficking in neurons is consistent with an intracellular role for these molecules. Here we show that, in contrast to the largely surface localization of classical cadherins, endogenous Pcdh-?s are primarily intracellular in rat neurons in vivo and are equally distributed within organelles of subsynaptic dendritic and axonal compartments. A strikingly higher proportion of Pcdh-?-containing organelles in synaptic compartments was observed at postnatal day 16. To determine the origin of Pcdh-?-trafficking organelles, we isolated organelles with Pcdh-? antibody-coupled magnetic beads from brain organelle suspensions. Vesicles with high levels of COPII and endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC) components were isolated with the Pcdh-? antibody but not with the classical cadherin antibody. In cultured hippocampal neurons, Pcdh-? immunolabeling partially overlapped with calnexin- and COPII-positive puncta in dendrites. Mobile Pcdh-?-GFP profiles dynamically codistributed with a DsRed construct coupled to ER retention signals by live imaging. Pcdh-? expression correlated with accumulations of tubulovesicular and ER-like organelles in dendrites. Our results are consistent with the possibility that Pcdh-?s could have a unique function within the secretory pathway in addition to their documented surface roles.

20439459
LC3-dependent intracellular membrane tubules induced by gamma-protocadherins A3 and B2: a role for intraluminal interactions.
Clustered protocadherins (Pcdhs) are a family of cadherin-like molecules arranged in gene clusters (alpha, beta, and gamma). gamma-Protocadherins (Pcdh-gammas) are involved in cell-cell interactions, but their prominent intracellular distribution in vivo and different knock-out phenotypes suggest that these molecules participate in still unidentified processes. We found using correlative light and electron microscopy that Pcdh-gammaA3 and -gammaB2, but not -gammaC4, -alpha1, or N-cadherin, generate intracellular juxtanuclear membrane tubules when expressed in cells. These tubules recruit the autophagy marker MAP1A/1B LC3 (LC3) but are not associated with autophagic vesicles. Lipidation of LC3 is required for its coclustering with Pcdh-gamma tubules, suggesting the involvement of an autophagic-like molecular cascade. Expression of wild-type LC3 with Pcdh-gammaA3 increased tubule length whereas expression of lipidation-defective LC3 decreased tubule length relative to Pcdh-gammaA3 expressed alone. The tubules were found to emanate from lysosomes. Deletion of the luminal/extracellular domain of Pcdh-gammaA3 preserved lysosomal targeting but eliminated tubule formation whereas cytoplasmic deletion eliminated both lysosomal targeting and tubule formation. Deletion of the membrane-proximal three cadherin repeats resulted in tubes that were narrower than those produced by full-length molecules. These results suggest that Pcdh-gammaA and -gammaB families can influence the shape of intracellular membranes by mediating intraluminal interactions within organelles.

19136062
Gamma-protocadherin homophilic interaction and intracellular trafficking is controlled by the cytoplasmic domain in neurons.
Gamma-protocadherins (Pcdh-gammas) are good candidates to mediate specificity in synaptogenesis but their role in cell-cell interactions is a matter of debate. We proposed that Pcdh-gammas modify preformed synapses via trafficking of Pcdh-gammas-containing organelles, insertion into synaptic membranes and homophilic transcellular interaction. Here we provide evidence in support of this model. We show for the first time that Pcdh-gammas have homophilic properties and that they accumulate at dendro-dendritic and axo-dendritic interfaces during neuronal development. Pcdh-gammas are maintained in a substantial mobile intracellular pool in dendrites and cytoplasmic deletion shifts the molecule to the surface and reduces the number and velocity of the mobile packets. We monitored Pcdh-gamma temporal and spatial dynamics in transport organelles. Pcdh-gamma organelles bud and fuse with stationary clusters near synapses. These results suggest that Pcdh-gamma-mediated cell-cell interactions in synapse development or maintenance are tightly regulated by control of intracellular trafficking via the cytoplasmic domain.

