21553162
Emergent Embolization of Arterial Bleeding after Vacuum-Assisted Breast Biopsy.
Vacuum-assisted core breast biopsy has become important in evaluating patients with suspicious breast lesions. It has proven to be a relatively safe procedure that in rare cases can result in vascular complications. These are the first reported cases of transcatheter embolization of uncontrolled breast hemorrhage after vacuum-assisted breast biopsy. With increased use of biopsy and larger-gauge devices, breast imaging groups may consider embolotherapy as a safe alternative for treatment of hemorrhage in a select group of patients.

20198431
Gastroduodenal ulceration associated with radioembolization for the treatment of hepatic tumors: an institutional experience and review of the literature.
Microsphere radioembolization is a method of delivering radiation therapy directly to tumors, thereby minimizing toxicity to adjacent structures. Despite the relatively high precision of this modality, numerous adverse effects have been recognized. One particularly untoward complication is the development of severe gastroduodenal ulceration. In order to further characterize gastroduodenal ulceration associated with radioembolization, our institutional experience as well as the reported literature were reviewed. The current evidence suggests that radioembolization-associated gastroduodenal ulceration results from inadvertent delivery of microspheres to the microvasculature of the gastrointestinal tract, leading to direct radiation toxicity. The reported incidence of this entity ranges between 2.9% and 4.8%. Most patients with this complication present with abdominal pain, often associated with nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. Symptoms can arise from hours to months after radioembolization treatment; diagnosis is made by endoscopic biopsy and histopathologic evaluation of the ulcer specimen. Radiation-induced ulcers have proven to be extremely difficult to treat. Current therapy based on acid suppression has had limited success, and the evidence for the addition of antioxidants and anti-inflammatory agents is still sparse. The increasing utilization of radioembolization will lead to adverse events including gastroduodenal ulceration. This entity must be considered in any patient treated with radioactive microspheres presenting with symptoms of dyspepsia. Accurate diagnosis and aggressive treatment are necessary to improve patient outcomes.

20063098
Intra-arterial methylprednisolone infusion in treatment-resistant graft-versus-host disease.
Acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is a potentially fatal complication following allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Standard primary therapy for acute GVHD includes systemic steroids, often in combination with other agents. Unfortunately, primary treatment failure is common and carries a high mortality. There is no generally accepted secondary therapy for acute GVHD. Although few data on localized therapy for GVHD have been published, intra-arterial injection of high-dose corticosteroids may be a viable option. We treated 11 patients with steroid-resistant GVHD using a single administration of intra-arterial high-dose methylprednisolone. Three patients (27%) died periprocedurally. Four patients (36%) had a partial response to intra-arterial treatment and were discharged on total parenteral nutrition and oral medication. Four patients (36%) had a complete response and were discharged on oral diet and oral medication. No immediate treatment or procedure-related complications were noted. Twenty-seven percent of patients survived long-term. Our preliminary results suggest that regional intra-arterial treatment of steroid-resistant GVHD is a safe and potentially viable secondary therapy in primary treatment-resistant GVHD.

17446548
A novel endovascular adjustable polytetrafluoroethylene-covered stent for the management of hepatic encephalopathy after transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) is frequently complicated by hepatic encephalopathy. When medical therapy fails, TIPS narrowing and resultant increase in the portosystemic pressure gradient and blood flow to the liver is performed in order to reverse the encephalopathy. We present a method for reducing the TIPS using a polytetrafluoroethylene-covered balloon expandable stent placed over a self-expanding stent. This results in a narrowed TIPS that not only rapidly increases the portosystemic gradient but also can be adjusted by dilating the balloon expandable stent. This method was successful in narrowing the patient's TIPS, acutely increasing the portosystemic gradient and reversing the hepatic encephalopathy.

