20535456
Motion sickness induced by off-vertical axis rotation (OVAR).
We tested the hypothesis that motion sickness is produced by an integration of the disparity between eye velocity and the yaw-axis orientation vector of velocity storage. Disparity was defined as the magnitude of the cross product between these two vectors. OVAR, which is known to produce motion sickness, generates horizontal eye velocity with a bias level related to velocity storage, as well as cyclic modulations due to re-orientation of the head re gravity. On average, the orientation vector is close to the spatial vertical. Thus, disparity can be related to the bias and tilt angle. Motion sickness sensitivity was defined as a ratio of maximum motion sickness score to the number of revolutions, allowing disparity and motion sickness sensitivity to be correlated. Nine subjects were rotated around axes tilted 10 degrees-30 degrees from the spatial vertical at 30 degrees/s-120 degrees/s. Motion sickness sensitivity increased monotonically with increases in the disparity due to changes in rotational velocity and tilt angle. Maximal motion sickness sensitivity and bias (6.8 degrees/s) occurred when rotating at 60 degrees/s about an axis tilted 30 degrees. Modulations in eye velocity during OVAR were unrelated to motion sickness sensitivity. The data were predicted by a model incorporating an estimate of head velocity from otolith activation, which activated velocity storage, followed by an orientation disparity comparator that activated a motion sickness integrator. These results suggest that the sensory-motor conflict that produces motion sickness involves coding of the spatial vertical by the otolith organs and body tilt receptors and processing of eye velocity through velocity storage.

20042701
Frequency-velocity mismatch: a fundamental abnormality in parkinsonian gait.
Gait dysfunction and falling are major sources of disability for patients with advanced Parkinson's disease (PD). It is presently thought that the fundamental defect is an inability to generate normal stride length. Our data suggest, however, that the basic problem in PD gait is an impaired ability to match step frequency to walking velocity. In this study, foot movements of PD and normal subjects were monitored with an OPTOTRAK motion-detection system while they walked on a treadmill at different velocities. PD subjects were also paced with auditory stimuli at different frequencies. PD gait was characterized by step frequencies that were faster and stride lengths that were shorter than those of normal controls. At low walking velocities, PD stepping had a reduced or absent terminal toe lift, which truncated swing phases, producing shortened steps. Auditory pacing was not able to normalize step frequency at these lower velocities. Peak forward toe velocities increased with walking velocity and PD subjects could initiate appropriate foot dynamics during initial phases of the swing. They could not control the foot appropriately in terminal phases, however. Increased treadmill velocity, which matched the natural PD step frequency, generated a second toe lift, normalizing step size. Levodopa increased the bandwidth of step frequencies, but was not as effective as increases in walking velocity in normalizing gait. We postulate that the inability to control step frequency and adjust swing phase dynamics to slower walking velocities are major causes for the gait impairment in PD.

19645957
Effects of the linear vestibulo-ocular reflex on accommodative vergence eye movements.
The aim of the study was to determine whether accommodation to the relative motion of a target along the visual axis of one eye during fore-aft movement of the head could induce accurate vergence over a wide range of viewing distances and frequencies of oscillation, despite lack of vision in the second eye. This was compared to the vergence when both eyes viewed the target. Two rhesus monkeys were trained to fixate a visual target located 216-336 mm in front and along the visual axis of one eye, while being sinusoidally translated in the fore-aft direction. There was no movement of the seeing eye while the other eye converged, regardless of whether there was vision in the converged eye. Gain and phase of the convergence were determined based on the ratio of actual versus expected eye position if the target was accurately fixated. During translation at frequencies from 0.05 to 2 Hz, the eye converged on the target with an eye position gain of approximately 1, and a phase close to zero. When vision was occluded in the converging eye, gains of convergence were 0.6-0.8 Hz up to 2 Hz, and the phases remained close to zero. At low frequencies of fore-aft movement, when the acceleration was negligible, convergence was driven by accommodation in the seeing eye. At higher frequencies, vergence could also be driven by the linear vestibulo-ocular reflex (lVOR). Thus, vision in one nonmoving eye and the lVOR combine to generate convergence over a wide range of frequencies and viewing distances.

19645885
Effect of canal plugging on quadrupedal locomotion in monkey.
The vestibular system plays an important role in controling gait, but where in the labyrinths relevant activity arises is largely unknown. After the semicircular canals are plugged, low frequency (0.01-2 Hz) components of the angular vestibulo-ocular reflex (aVOR) and angular vestibulo-collic reflex (aVCR) are lost, but high frequency (3-20 Hz) components remain. We determined how loss of low frequency canal afference affects limb and head movements during quadrupedal locomotion. Head, body, and limb movements were recorded in three dimensions (3-D) in a cynomolgus monkey with a motion detection system, while the animal walked on a treadmill. All six canals were plugged, reducing the canal time constants from approximately 4.0 sec to approximately 0.07 sec. Major changes in the control of the limbs occurred after surgery. Fore and hind limbs were held farther from the body, producing a broad-based gait. Swing-phase trajectories were inaccurate, and control of medial-lateral limb movement was erratic. These changes in gait were present immediately after surgery, as well as 15 months later, when the animal had essentially recovered. Thus, control of the limbs in the horizontal plane was defective after loss of the low-frequency semicircular canal input and never recovered. Cycle-averaged pitch and roll head rotations, and 3-D head translations were also significantly larger and more erratic after than before surgery. Head rotations in yaw could not be quantified due to intrusion of voluntary head turns. These findings indicate that the semicircular canals provide critical low frequency information to maximize the accuracy of stepping and stabilize the head during normal quadrupedal locomotion.

17952421
Relative contribution of walking velocity and stepping frequency to the neural control of locomotion.
Stepping frequency is tightly coupled to walking velocity during natural locomotion. In a recent model, we demonstrated that walking velocity determines stride frequency, governs the active feedback control of the swing and determines the swing phase dynamics that governs foot movement. Here, we questioned whether the swing phase dynamics reflect independent effects of stride frequency and walking velocity. Foot movements were measured with a motion detection system (Optotrak) while subjects walked at 0.6-2.1 m/s on a treadmill. Stepping frequencies of 1.3-2.8 Hz were generated with pacing cues at each walking velocity. In the 'iso-velocity' condition, peak forward toe velocity during the swing phases was related to walking velocity and did not vary with alterations in stride frequency. In the 'iso-frequency' condition, in contrast, stepping frequency altered the relationship between toe acceleration and toe position in the fore-aft direction. The cycle frequency, main sequence (peak velocity vs. amplitude) relationships, and the shape of the phase-plane trajectories of the swing phases also reflected this relationship. The data were modeled by decoupling stepping frequency from walking velocity, while maintaining active feedback control dependent on frequency. The latter predicted both the dominant shape of the phase plane trajectories and the main sequence relationships. Thus, according to the model, walking velocity and stride frequency are independent central variables that control the dynamics of the swing phases and stepping. The ability to decouple stride frequency from walking velocity may help in navigating over uneven terrain or when executing curved trajectories while maintaining a constant velocity.

17946882
A model-based approach for assessing parkinsonian gait and effects of levodopa and deep brain stimulation.
Gait and balance disturbances are amongst the most disabling features of Parkinson's disease (PD), and are not adequately controlled with currently available medical and surgical therapies. Development of objective quantitative measures of these abnormalities would greatly help in the assessment and the development of therapeutic interventions. Recently, we developed a methodology, using dynamical system theory, for testing gait with a state-of-the-art motion-detection system (OPTOTRAK 3020, Northern Digital, Inc.). We also developed a model of the dynamics of the foot that predicts the stance and swing phase dynamics of normal walking. In the present study, we determined whether model parameters were altered in subjects with PD when they were tested on/off levodopa (LD) and on/off deep brain stimulation (DBS) in a 2 x 2 matrix.

