20851003
The optimized evaluation of diabetic foot infection by dual isotope SPECT/CT imaging protocol.
Sequential Tc-99m hydroxymethylene-diphosphonate (HDP) 3-phase bone (BS) and In-111 leukocyte scanning (WBCS) have been frequently used to evaluate the diabetic foot, as nonosteomyelitis BS uptake is repeatedly observed and osteomyelitis (OM) in WBCS is often uncertain without BS correlation. Additionally, both modalities are limited in lesion localization because of low resolution and lack of anatomic details. We investigated a method that combined BS/WBCS, and if needed, WBCS/bone marrow scanning (BMS) using SPECT/CT to accurately diagnose/localize infection in a practical protocol. Blood flow/pool images were obtained followed by WBC reinjection and next day dual isotope (DI) BS/WBCS planar and SPECT/CT. BMS/WBCS SPECT/CT (step 2 DI) was obtained on the following day when images were suspicious for mid/hindfoot OM. Diagnosis accuracy and confidence were judged for the various imaging combinations. Diagnosis was classified as OM, soft tissue infection (STI), both OM/STI, and other/no bony pathology by microbiology/pathology or follow-up. Distinction between various diagnostic categories and overall OM diagnostic accuracy in 213 patients were higher for DI than WBCS or BS alone, and for DI SPECT/CT than DI planar or SPECT only. Diagnostic confidence/lesion site was significantly higher for DI SPECT/CT than other comparative imaging methods. In a group of 97 patients with confirmed microbiologic/pathologic diagnosis, similar results were attained. Step 2 DI SPECT/CT performed in 67 patients further improved diagnostic accuracy/confidence. DI SPECT/CT is a highly accurate modality that considerably improves detection and discrimination of STI and OM while providing precise anatomic localization in the diabetic foot. This combined imaging technique promises to beneficially impact diabetic patient care.

19787311
PET/CT image fusion error due to urinary bladder filling changes: consequence and correction.
A considerable change of urinary bladder (UB) shape in PET compared with CT in integrated PET/CT system is frequently noted. This study initially evaluated this finding with and without oral contrast (OC) use. In addition, a one bed pelvic section (PLV) repeat acquisition was investigated as a solution to this problem. (18)FDG PET/CTs of 88 patients were analyzed. OC was administered in 68 patients, of whom 31 had PLV images taken 5-10 min later. Three-dimensional mid-UB CT and PET matching measurements were compared. In addition, UB walls displacement between CT and PET were analyzed. The mean UB height was significantly increased (P < 0.001) in PET when compared with CT, both anteriorly and posteriorly; however, UB width and depth were not significantly different. An upward shift of superior UB wall in PET from equivalent CT images was noted, whereas there was no appreciable displacement of the other UB walls. The percent UB height increase on PET from CT was significantly greater with than without OC use. The UB height difference between PET and CT was markedly reduced on PLV when compared with the original scans. Caution should be exerted during the interpretation of PET/CT scans of the pelvis as there is significant upward expansion of UB on PET compared with CT that appears to be exaggerated by OC use, likely due to additional fluid load. The PET/CT fusion errors of UB can be substantially resolved through a separate PLV acquisition presumably due to the shorter time interval of UB scan completion between CT and PET.

19225944
Combined rest redistribution thallium-201 SPECT and low-dose dobutamine contractility assessment in a simple and practical new viability protocol.
Rest-redistribution (RR) thallium-201 (Tl-201) imaging is commonly used for myocardial viability evaluation. Contractile reserve (CR) assessment with low-dose dobutamine (LDD) is another method that highly predicts functional recovery following revascularization. In this study, we investigate the feasibility of a new protocol that provides combined Tl-201 uptake, resting and CR functional regional myocardial information in a single examination. A total of 41 patients underwent RR-gated-SPECT Tl-201 myocardial perfusion imaging. The LDD infusion was maintained during delayed imaging. Segmental Tl-201 uptake was classified into normal, fixed decrease (mild to absent) and reversible, and sub-classified by wall motion (WM)/thickening (WT) changes between early resting and delayed LDD gated images into normal, fixed or improved dysfunctional (CR present) segments. Out of 820 examined segments, 33 showed no appreciable Tl-201 uptake to evaluate WM/WT. In a dysfunctional myocardium, CR was significantly higher (P < 0.001) in reversible and fixed than in normal Tl-201 segments. The CR in dysfunctional segments with fixed decrease Tl-201 uptake was significantly higher (P < 0.05) in mild and moderate than in severe fixed defects. Both fixed Tl-201 defects and lack of CR were observed more (P < 0.05) in akinetic/dyskinetic than in hypokinetic segments. Simultaneous assessment of myocardial viability by RR Tl-201 uptake, resting and CR functional regional information is feasible and can be easily attained using this new protocol. Moreover, this protocol requires no additional time or radioactivity when compared with the usual RR Tl-201 protocol. Validation of this protocol with patients' revascularization data is needed.

