19273754
PGC-1alpha expression decreases in the Alzheimer disease brain as a function of dementia.
To explore mechanisms through which altered peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha) expression may influence Alzheimer disease (AD) amyloid neuropathology and to test the hypothesis that promotion of PGC-1alpha expression in neurons might be developed as a novel therapeutic strategy in AD. Case-control. Patients Human postmortem brain (hippocampal formation) samples from AD cases and age-matched non-AD cases. Using genome-wide complementary DNA microarray analysis, we found that PGC-1alpha messenger RNA expression was significantly decreased as a function of progression of clinical dementia in the AD brain. Following confirmatory real-time polymerase chain reaction assay, we continued to explore the role of PGC-1alpha in clinical dementia and found that PGC-1alpha protein content was negatively associated with both AD-type neuritic plaque pathology and beta-amyloid (Abeta)(X-42) contents. Moreover, we found that the predicted elevation of amyloidogenic Abeta(1-42) and Abeta(1-40) peptide accumulation in embryonic cortico-hippocampal neurons derived from Tg2576 AD mice under hyperglycemic conditions (glucose level, 182-273 mg/dL) coincided with a dose-dependent attenuation in PGC-1alpha expression. Most importantly, we found that the reconstitution of exogenous PGC-1alpha expression in Tg2576 neurons attenuated the hyperglycemic-mediated beta-amyloidogenesis through mechanisms involving the promotion of the "nonamyloidogenic" alpha-secretase processing of amyloid precursor protein through the attenuation of the forkheadlike transcription factor 1 (FoxO3a) expression. Therapeutic preservation of neuronal PGC-1alpha expression promotes the nonamyloidogenic processing of amyloid precursor protein precluding the generation of amyloidogenic Abeta peptides.

19159013
S100A7, a novel Alzheimer's disease biomarker with non-amyloidogenic alpha-secretase activity acts via selective promotion of ADAM-10.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia among older people. At present, there is no cure for the disease and as of now there are no early diagnostic tests for AD. There is an urgency to develop a novel promising biomarker for early diagnosis of AD. Using surface-enhanced laser desorption ionization-mass spectrometry SELDI-(MS) proteomic technology, we identified and purified a novel 11.7-kDa metal- binding protein biomarker whose content is increased in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and in the brain of AD dementia subjects as a function of clinical dementia. Following purification and protein-sequence analysis, we identified and classified this biomarker as S100A7, a protein known to be involved in immune responses. Using an adenoviral-S100A7 expression system, we continued to examine the potential role of S100A7 in AD amyloid neuropathology in in vitro model of AD. We found that the expression of exogenous S100A7 in primary cortico-hippocampal neuron cultures derived from Tg2576 transgenic embryos inhibits the generation of beta-amyloid (Abeta)(1-42) and Abeta(1-40) peptides, coincidental with a selective promotion of "non- amyloidogenic" alpha-secretase activity via promotion of ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase)-10. Finally, a selective expression of human S100A7 in the brain of transgenic mice results in significant promotion of alpha-secretase activity. Our study for the first time suggests that S100A7 may be a novel biomarker of AD dementia and supports the hypothesis that promotion of S100A7 expression in the brain may selectively promote alpha-secretase activity in the brain of AD precluding the generation of amyloidogenic peptides. If in the future we find that S1000A7 protein content in CSF is sensitive to drug intervention experimentally and eventually in the clinical setting, S100A7 might be developed as novel surrogate index (biomarker) of therapeutic efficacy in the characterization of novel drug agents for the treatment of AD.

