21447414
The serotonin 1B receptor: a new target for depression therapeutics?


21377656
Tryptophan depletion and emotional processing in healthy volunteers at high risk for depression.
Studies in depressed patients have demonstrated the presence of emotional bias toward negative stimuli, as well as dysregulated brain serotonin function. The present study compared the effects of acute tryptophan depletion (ATD) on both an emotional processing and a planning task in never-depressed healthy volunteers at high and low familial risk for depression. Young adults with no personal psychiatric history were stratified into two groups based on family history (n = 25). Participants were enrolled in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover ATD study and completed the affective go/no-go and Tower of London tasks once during each condition. There was a significant treatment by valence by group interaction on the affective go/no-go, driven primarily by a greater frequency of inappropriate responses to sad than to happy distracters in the high-risk group during ATD. No group differences were observed on the Tower of London. Asymptomatic individuals at high familial risk for depression showed abnormalities in emotional processing while undergoing experimentally induced tryptophan depletion. These findings support emotional processing disturbances as potential trait-level abnormalities associated with the risk of mood disorder.

20480149
Reduced ventral striatal/ventral pallidal serotonin1B receptor binding potential in major depressive disorder.
Although serotonin (5-HT) dysregulation is implicated in the pathophysiology of major depressive disorder (MDD), the role of specific receptor subtypes remains to be elucidated. Emerging preclinical research suggests an important role for the 5-HT(1B) receptor in behavioral regulation and depressive phenotypes. In particular, 5-HT(1B) heteroreceptors located within the striatum have been shown to play an essential role in antidepressant action. The objective of this study was to determine 5-HT(1B) receptor binding potential (BP (ND)) in the region of the ventral striatum/ventral pallidum (VS/VP) in individuals with MDD and healthy control participants. Ten participants with MDD (30.8?±?9.5 years, five men/five women) in a current major depressive episode (MDE) and ten healthy control participants (30.7?±?10.5 years, five men/five women) underwent positron emission tomography (PET) scanning with the selective 5-HT(1B) receptor radioligand [(11)C]P943. Within the VS/VP region of interest, [(11)C]P943 BP (ND) was significantly reduced in the MDD group compared with the healthy control group (1.37?±?0.13 and 1.68?±?0.16, respectively; 18.7% between-group difference; p?<?0.001). Consistent with preclinical and postmortem data, our findings suggest abnormally reduced function of VS/VP 5-HT(1B) receptors in humans with MDD. Abnormal 5-HT(1B) heteroreceptor function may contribute to dysfunctional reward signaling within the striatum, including the nucleus accumbens, via interaction with dopamine, ?-amino-butyric acid, or glutamate systems. Our findings suggest reduced 5-HT(1B) receptor signaling in the VS/VP in MDD and contribute to the therapeutic rationale for testing 5-HT(1B) agonists as a novel class of antidepressants.

