21570620
Noncardiac entrapment of a pulmonary artery catheter during heart transplantation: inadvertent cannulation and perforation of the internal thoracic vein.
Placement of a central venous catheter into an internal thoracic vein occurs in approximately 2% of all catheterizations. A case in which a pulmonary artery catheter was trapped within the internal thoracic vein during orthotopic heart transplantation is presented.

21317633
Case scenario: Cesarean section complicated by rheumatic mitral stenosis.


20881483
Laboratory point-of-care monitoring in the operating room.
The fundamental advantage of point-of-care testing (POCT) is rapid acquisition of laboratory data. This is particularly advantageous in the operative arena because of the urgency of timeliness in anesthetic patient care. Technology is persistently evolving, such that it is imperative to regularly review available devices and investigate new devices that emerge each year. This review provides a comprehensive, current summary of POCT most pertinent to the anesthesiologist, and recent investigations that evaluate them. Perioperative POCT includes arterial blood gas monitoring, chemistry, co-oximetry panels, parathyroid hormone assays, and coagulation testing. Parathyroid hormone assays continue to guide surgical resection of the parathyroid glands. Coagulation testing aids anesthesiologists in diagnosis of coagulopathy as well as therapeutic optimization of anticoagulants such as clopidogrel and aspirin. POCT, although generally found to be more expensive compared to laboratory testing, has been shown to quicken result time. POCT will continue to be useful in the realm of anesthesiology in management of the surgical patient to guide drug therapy, surgical strategy, and medical management. A major challenge to POCT continues to be developing platforms to configure, organize, and distribute laboratory results as well as minimizing cost.

20006933
Electronic storage of echocardiographic images: from clips to bits.


19299768
Systolic anterior motion as a result of relative "undersizing" of a mitral valve annulus in a patient with Barlow's disease.


19020149
A mission-based productivity compensation model for an academic anesthesiology department.
We replaced a nearly fixed-salary academic physician compensation model with a mission-based productivity model with the goal of improving attending anesthesiologist productivity. The base salary system was stratified according to rank and clinical experience. The supplemental pay structure was linked to electronic patient records and a scheduling database to award points for clinical activity; educational, research, and administrative points systems were constructed in parallel. We analyzed monthly American Society of Anesthesiologist (ASA) unit data for operating room activity and physician compensation from 2000 through mid-2007, excluding the 1-yr implementation period (July 2004-June 2005) for the new model. Comparing 2005-2006 with 2000-2004, quarterly ASA units increased by 14% (P = 0.0001) and quarterly ASA units per full-time equivalent increased by 31% (P < 0.0001), while quarterly ASA units per anesthetizing location decreased by 10% (P = 0.046). Compared with a baseline year (2001), Instructor and Assistant Professor faculty compensation increased more than Associate Professor and Professor faculty (P < 0.001) in both pre- and postimplementation periods. There were larger compensation increases for the postimplementation period compared with preimplementation across faculty rank groupings (P < 0.0001). Academic and educational output was stable. Implementing a productivity-based faculty compensation model in an academic department was associated with increased mean supplemental pay with relatively fewer faculty. ASA units per month and ASA units per operating room full-time equivalent increased, and these metrics are the most likely drivers of the increased compensation. This occurred despite a slight decrease in clinical productivity as measured by ASA units per anesthetizing location. Academic and educational output was stable.

18249332
Clopidogrel treatment before coronary artery bypass graft surgery increases postoperative morbidity and blood product requirements.
An increasing number of patients are referred for coronary artery bypass graft surgery while treated with clopidogrel. This agent inhibits the platelet P2Y12 adenosine-5'-diphosphate (ADP) receptor, which results in an inhibition of platelet aggregation. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of preoperative clopidogrel treatment on postoperative bleeding, mortality, and morbidity in patients after coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Retrospective cohort study. University hospital (single institution). One hundred forty-four patients who underwent isolated coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Seventy-two patients who received clopidogrel during the preoperative period formed the study group. Seventy-two patients (matched based on age, sex, and preoperative risk profile) served as the control group. Clopidogrel-treated patients received significantly more platelet (4.4 +/- 5.7 v 1.3 +/- 3.2 U, p < 0.001) and red blood cell (5.1 +/- 4.2 v 2.6 +/- 2.6 U, p < 0.001) transfusions compared with the control group. All-cause mortality and morbidity were significantly higher in clopidogrel-treated patients (n = 7, 9% v n = 1, 1%; p = 0.031). In addition, the lengths of stay in the intensive care unit and the hospital were significantly longer in these patients (2.5 +/- 2.7 v 1.4 +/- 0.9 days, p = 0.002; 9.9 +/- 11 v 6 +/- 2.5 days, p = 0.003). Despite an increased morbidity in the clopidogrel group, the midterm survival was similar between the 2 groups (1-year and 5-year survival 97% +/- 2% and 95.7% +/- 3% v 100% +/- 0% and 87% +/- 10%, respectively; p = 0.885). Preoperative clopidogrel is associated with increased transfusion requirement after coronary artery bypass graft surgery. The present data suggest that all-cause mortality and major morbidity may also increase in these patients. In clopidogrel-treated patients, coronary artery bypass graft surgery should be delayed in the absence of specific medical indications as recommended by recent American Heart Association guidelines.

17905287
Endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair: emerging developments and anesthetic considerations.


17711972
Anesthetic consideration for descending thoracic aortic aneurysm repair.
Anesthesia for surgery of the aorta poses some of the most difficult challenges for anesthesiologists. Major hemodynamic and physiologic stresses and sophisticated techniques of extracorporeal support are superimposed on patients with complex medical disease states. In this review, etiologies, natural history, and surgical techniques of thoracic aortic aneurysm are presented. Anesthetic considerations are discussed in detail, including the management of distal perfusion using partial cardiopulmonary bypass. Considerations of spinal cord protection, including management of proximal hypertension, cerebral spinal fluid drainage, and pharmacological therapies, are presented.

