21355091
The dominant negative {beta} isoform of the glucocorticoid receptor is uniquely expressed in erythroid cells expanded from polycythemia vera patients.
Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) agonists increase erythropoiesis in-vivo and in-vitro. To clarify the effect of the dominant negative GR? isoform (unable to bind STAT-5) on erythropoiesis, erythroblast (EB) expansion cultures of mononuclear cells (MNC) from 18 normal donors (ND) and 16 polycythemia vera patients (PV) were studied. GR? was expressed in all PV EBs but in EBs from only 1 ND. The A3669G polymorphism which stabilizes GR? mRNA had great frequency in PV (55%, n=22, p=0.0028) and myelofibrosis (35%, n=20) patients than in ND (9%, n=22) or essential thrombocythemia patients (6%, n=15). Dexamethasone (DXM) stimulation of ND cultures increased the number of immature EBs characterized by low GATA1 and ?-globin expression but PV cultures generated great numbers of immature EBs with low levels of GATA1 and ?-globin irrespective of DXM stimulation. In ND EBs, STAT-5 was not phosphorylated after DXM+erythropoietin treatment and did not form transcriptionally active complexes with GR? while in PV EBs STAT-5 was constitutively phosphorylated but the formation of GR/STAT-5 complexes was prevented by expression of GR?. These data indicate that GR? expression and the presence of A3669G likely contribute to development of erythrocytosis in PV and provide a potential target for identification of novel therapeutic agents.

19659677
Long-term storage does not alter functionality of in vitro generated human erythroblasts: implications for ex vivo generated erythroid transfusion products.
Cultured human erythroid cells derived in vitro may represent alternative transfusion products. It is unknown, however, if these ex vivo expanded erythroid cells remain functional or develop genetic abnormalities after storage. Using mononuclear cells from four adult blood donors, erythroblasts were generated ex vivo in expansion cultures supplemented with stem cell factor, interleukin-3, erythropoietin (EPO), dexamethasone, and estradiol. The viability and in vitro function of freshly expanded or short (1-2 months)- and long (8 years)-term-stored erythroblasts cryopreserved in dimethyl sulfoxide were compared. Erythroblast function was defined as ability to proliferate in expansion media and mature in response to EPO. Cell number was determined manually and expressed as fold increase. Viability was assessed by trypan blue and propidium iodide exclusion. Maturation was evaluated by morphologic analyses and CD36/CD235a expression profiling. Cytogenetic evaluation included karyotype and multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses. Equivalent numbers (>80%) of erythroblasts were viable after short- and long-term storage. Freshly expanded and short- and long-term-stored erythroblasts equally doubled in number (fold increase, 2.4) retaining an immature phenotype (23% of the cells were CD36(high)CD235a(neg)) when cultured for 4 days under expansion conditions. The numbers of freshly expanded and short-term-stored erythroblasts that matured when exposed for 4 days to EPO were also similar (approx. 22% of the cells became CD36(neg)CD235a(high)). In spite of the massive amplification, ex vivo generated erythroblasts demonstrated a normal (46,XY) karyotype with no obvious genomic rearrangements. Ex vivo expanded erythroblasts remain functional and genetically normal after long-term storage.

19444099
Erythroid cells in vitro: from developmental biology to blood transfusion products.
Red blood cells (RBCs) transfusion plays a critical role in numerous therapies. Disruption of blood collection by political unrest, natural disasters and emerging infections and implementation of restrictions on the use of erythropoiesis-stimulating agents in cancer may impact blood availability in the near future. These considerations highlight the importance of developing alternative blood products. Knowledge about the processes that control RBC production has been applied to the establishment of culture conditions allowing ex-vivo generation of RBCs in numbers close to those (2.5 x 10 cells/ml) present in a transfusion, from cord blood, donated blood units or embryonic stem cells. In addition, experimental studies demonstrate that such cells protect mice from lethal bleeding. Therefore, erythroid cells generated ex vivo may be suitable for transfusion provided they can be produced safely in adequate numbers. However, much remains to be done to translate a theoretical production of approximately 2.5 x 10 RBCs in the laboratory into a 'clinical grade production process'. This review summarizes the state-of-the-art in establishing ex-vivo culture conditions for erythroid cells and discusses the most compelling issues to be addressed to translate this progress into a clinical grade transfusion product.

