21051534
Ethanol induction of CYP2A5: permissive role for CYP2E1.
CYP2A5 metabolizes xenobiotics and activates hepatocarcinogens, and induction occurs in response to hepatic damage and cellular stress. We evaluated whether ethanol can elevate CYP2A5 and whether CYP2E1 plays a role in the ethanol induction of CYP2A5. Wild-type (WT), CYP2E1 knockout (KO), and CYP2E1 knockin (KI) mice were fed ethanol for 3 weeks. Ethanol increased CYP2E1 and CYP2A5 protein and activity in WT mice but not in the KO mice. Induction of CYP2A5 (and CYP2E1) was restored in the KI mice. Ethanol induction of CYP2A5 occurred only after CYP2E1 was first induced. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that CYP2E1 and CYP2A5 colocalize to the same zones in the liver. Ethanol also elevated CYP2A5 mRNA levels in WT and KI mice but not in KO mice. Induction of CYP2A5 by cadmium was partially decreased in KO mice compared with WT or KI mice. Ethanol elevated CYP2A4 mRNA levels in all mice although the extent of induction was lowest in the KO mice. In summary, ethanol elevated mouse hepatic CYP2A5 levels, which may be of toxicological significance because CYP2A5 metabolizes nicotine and other drugs and activates hepatocarcinogens. Induction of CYP2A5 by ethanol is potentiated by the induction of CYP2E1. We speculate that ethanol induction of CYP2E1 followed by increases in reactive oxygen species and activation of Nrf2 are important steps in the mechanism by which ethanol induces CYP2A5. The possibility that induction of CYP2E1 is permissive for the induction of CYP2A5 may reflect a new contribution by CYP2E1 to the actions of ethanol.

20932821
CYP2E1 enhances ethanol-induced lipid accumulation but impairs autophagy in HepG2 E47 cells.
The regulation and function of autophagy and lipid metabolism have recently been reported to be reciprocally related. Macroautophagy mediates the breakdown of lipids stored in lipid droplets. An inhibition of autophagy leads to the development of a fatty liver. We evaluated the ability of CYP2E1 to modulate the effects of ethanol on lipid accumulation and autophagy in vitro. The E47 HepG2 cell which expresses CYP2E1 was treated with ethanol at 50, 100 and 150mM for 4 or 5days. Ethanol-induced lipid accumulation and an increase of triglycerides (TG) in E47 cells to a greater extent than in control C34 cells which do not express CYP2E1. In contrast, autophagy (LC3 II/LC3 I ratio) was significantly induced by ethanol in C34 cells to a greater extent than in E47 cells. P62 was significantly increased in E47 cells after ethanol treatment. Thus, there is a reciprocal relationship between the effects of ethanol on lipid accumulation and autophagy in the CYP2E1-expressing cells. Inhibition of autophagy by 3-methyladenine (3MA), increased lipid accumulation and TG levels in C34 cells which display elevated autophagy, but enhanced lipid accumulation and TG level to a lesser extent in E47 cells which displayed lower autophagy. Ethanol induced CYP2E1 activity and oxidative stress in E47 cells compared with C34 cells. These experiments suggest that the expression of CYP2E1 may impair autophagy formation which contributes to lipid accumulation in the liver. We hypothesize that CYP2E1-induced oxidative stress promotes the accumulation of lipid droplets by ethanol and this may be responsible for the suppression of autophagy in the liver.

20692331
Chronic alcohol-induced liver injury and oxidant stress are decreased in cytochrome P4502E1 knockout mice and restored in humanized cytochrome P4502E1 knock-in mice.
A major pathway for chronic ethanol-induced liver injury is ethanol-induced oxidant stress. Several pathways contribute to mechanisms by which ethanol induces oxidant stress. Although some studies support a role for cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1), others do not. Most previous studies were conducted in the intragastric infusion model of ethanol administration. There is a need to develop oral models of significant liver injury and to evaluate the possible role of CYP2E1 in ethanol actions in such models. We evaluated chronic ethanol-induced liver injury, steatosis, and oxidant stress in wild-type (WT) mice, CYP2E1 knock out (KO) mice, and humanized CYP2E1 knock-in (KI) mice, in which the human 2E1 was added back to mice deficient in the mouse 2E1. WT mice and the CYP2E1 KO and KI mice (both provided by Dr. F. Gonzalez, National Cancer Institute) were fed a high-fat Lieber-DeCarli ethanol liquid diet for 3weeks; pair-fed controls received dextrose. Ethanol produced fatty liver and oxidant stress in WT mice but liver injury (transaminases, histopathology) was minimal. Ethanol-induced steatosis and oxidant stress were blunted in the KO mice (no liver injury) but restored in the KI mice. Significant liver injury was produced in the ethanol-fed KI mice, with elevated transaminases, necrosis, and increased levels of collagen type 1 and smooth muscle actin. This liver injury in the KI mice was associated with elevated oxidant stress and elevated levels of the human CYP2E1 compared to levels of the mouse 2E1 in WT mice. Activation of JNK and decreased levels of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL were observed in the ethanol-fed KI mice compared to the other groups. Fatty liver in the WT and the KI mice was associated with lower levels of PPAR? and acyl-CoA oxidase. No such changes were found in the ethanol-fed KO mice. These results show that CYP2E1 plays a major role in ethanol-induced fatty liver and oxidant stress. It is the absence of CYP2E1 in the KO mice that is responsible for the blunting of steatosis and oxidant stress because restoring the CYP2E1 restores the fatty liver and oxidant stress. Moreover, it is the human CYP2E1 that restores these effects of ethanol, which suggests that results for fatty liver and oxidant stress from rodent models of ethanol intake and mouse CYP2E1 can be extrapolated to human models of ethanol intake and to human CYP2E1.

20438834
Activation of ASK-1 and downstream MAP kinases in cytochrome P4502E1 potentiated tumor necrosis factor alpha liver injury.
Cytochrome P4502E1 (CYP2E1) potentiates TNFalpha toxicity by a mechanism involving increased oxidative stress and activation of JNK and p38 MAPKs. This study evaluated the upstream mediators of this MAPK activation with a special focus on studying whether apoptosis signal regulating kinase-1 (ASK-1) is activated in the CYP2E1-TNFalpha hepatotoxic model. Wild-type and CYP2E1(-/-) mice were treated with pyrazole (PY) for 3days to induce CYP2E1 and challenged with TNFalpha on day 3. Liver injury occurred between 8 and 12h after TNFalpha administration only to the wild-type PY-treated mice. Oxidative stress was elevated in the PY mice at 4h, a time before the liver injury. ASK-1 was dissociated from the thioredoxin-ASK-1 complex and was activated at 4h after administration of TNFalpha to PY mice. This was followed by activation of MKK3/MKK6 and MKK4/MKK7 at 4-8 or 12h and then JNK/p38 MAPK at 8 to 12h. MAPK phosphatase-1 was decreased 12 to 24h after TNFalpha administration. This may promote a sustained activation of JNK. Bax was elevated, whereas Bcl-2 and cFLIP(S/L) were lowered at 4h after administration of TNFalpha. These changes were followed by increases in caspase 8 and 3 activities and apoptosis. None of the above changes were observed when TNFalpha was administered to PY-treated CYP2E1(-/-) mice. These studies show that TNFalpha increases oxidative stress in mice with elevated CYP2E1, with subsequent activation of ASK-1 via a mechanism involving thioredoxin-ASK-1 dissociation, followed by activation of downstream MKK and MAPK. We speculate that similar interactions between CYP2E1 and TNFalpha may be important for alcohol-induced liver injury.

19448996
Role of oxidative stress in alcohol-induced liver injury.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are highly reactive molecules that are naturally generated in small amounts during the body's metabolic reactions and can react with and damage complex cellular molecules such as lipids, proteins, or DNA. Acute and chronic ethanol treatments increase the production of ROS, lower cellular antioxidant levels, and enhance oxidative stress in many tissues, especially the liver. Ethanol-induced oxidative stress plays a major role in the mechanisms by which ethanol produces liver injury. Many pathways play a key role in how ethanol induces oxidative stress. This review summarizes some of the leading pathways and discusses the evidence for their contribution to alcohol-induced liver injury. Special emphasis is placed on CYP2E1, which is induced by alcohol and is reactive in metabolizing and activating many hepatotoxins, including ethanol, to reactive products, and in generating ROS.

19387914
Oxidative stress and alcoholic liver disease.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are highly reactive molecules that are naturally generated in small amounts during the body's metabolic reactions and can react with and damage complex cellular molecules such as lipids, proteins, or DNA. This review describes pathways involved in ROS formation, why ROS are toxic to cells, and how the liver protects itself against ROS. Acute and chronic ethanol treatment increases the production of ROS, lowers cellular antioxidant levels, and enhances oxidative stress in many tissues, especially the liver. Ethanol-induced oxidative stress plays a major role in the mechanisms by which ethanol produces liver injury. Many pathways play a key role in how ethanol induces oxidative stress. This review summarizes some of the leading pathways and discusses the evidence for their contribution to alcohol-induced liver injury.

19063961
Role of nitric oxide and nuclear factor-kappaB in the CYP2E1 potentiation of tumor necrosis factor alpha hepatotoxicity in mice.
Induction of CYP2E1 by pyrazole (PY) potentiated the hepatotoxicity induced by TNFalpha in mice. We evaluated the role of nitrosative and oxidative stress and the NF-kappaB activation pathway in this liver injury. The iNOS inhibitor N-(3-aminomethyl)benzylacetamindine (1400W) or the antioxidant N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC) prevented this liver injury. TNFalpha plus PY treatment triggered radical stress in the liver with increased lipid peroxidation and decreased glutathione and caused mitochondrial damage as reflected by elevated membrane swelling and cytochrome c release. The radical stress and mitochondrial damage were prevented by 1400W and NAC. TNFalpha plus PY treatment elevated 3-nitrotyrosine adduct formation and induced NOS2 in the liver; 1400W and NAC blocked these changes. A lower extent of liver injury and oxidative stress was found in NOS2(-/-) mice treated with TNFalpha plus PY compared with wild-type controls. Neither 1400W nor NAC modified CYP2E1 activity or protein. Activation of JNK and p38MAPK was weaker in TNFalpha plus PY-treated NOS2(-/-) mice and 1400W and NAC blocked the activation of JNK and p38MAPK in wild-type mice. IKKalpha/beta protein levels were decreased by TNFalpha plus PY treatment, whereas IkappaBalpha and IkappaBbeta protein levels were elevated compared with saline, PY, or TNFalpha alone. NF-kappaB DNA binding activity was increased by TNFalpha alone but lowered by TNFalpha plus PY. All these changes were blocked by 1400W and NAC. NF-kappaB activation products such as Bcl-2, Bcl-X(L), cFLIP(S), cFLIP(L), and Mn-SOD were reduced by TNFalpha plus PY and restored by 1400W or NAC. We conclude that TNFalpha plus CYP2E1 induces oxidative/nitrosative stress, which plays a role in the activation of JNK or p38MAPK and mitochondrial damage. These effects combine with the blunting of the NF-kappaB activation pathways and the synthesis of protective factors to cause liver injury.

18369917
Development and properties of HepG2 cells that constitutively express CYP2E1.
CYP2E1, a member of the cytochrome P450 family, is induced by ethanol. CYP2E1 activates many hepatotoxins to their reactive toxic intermediate form, and generates reactive oxygen species (ROS) during its catalytic cycle. Induction of CYP2E1 plays an important role in ethanol-induced oxidant stress and ethanol toxicity. To study the biochemical and toxicological properties of CYP2E1, our laboratory developed a HepG2 cell line which constitutively expresses the human CYP2E1 form. These cells displayed elevated oxidative stress, loss of mitochondrial function and loss of viability when challenged with prooxidants such as ethanol, polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) such as arachidonic acid, iron, or when depleted of the critical antioxidant glutathione, as compared with control HepG2 cells which do not express CYP2E1. In the sections below , protocols are described for use of these cell lines to assay for CYP2E1-dependent oxidant stress and toxicity. Methods are described as to how the cell lines were established and maintained, how CYP2E1 is assayed, how cellular viability, mitochondrial function and generation of oxidant stress are determined.

18095305
Cytochrome P4502E1 sensitizes to tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced liver injury through activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases in mice.
The goal of this study was to evaluate the role of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in cytochrome P4502E1 (CYP2E1) potentiation of lipopolysaccharide or tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha)-induced liver injury. Treatment of C57/BL/6 mice with pyrazole (PY) plus lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced liver injury compared with mice treated with PY or LPS alone. The c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitor SP600125 or p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580 prevented this liver injury. PY plus LPS treatment activated p38 MAPK and JNK but not extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK). PY plus LPS treatment triggered oxidative stress in the liver with increases in lipid peroxidation, decrease of glutathione (GSH) levels, and increased production of 3-nitrotyrosine adducts and protein carbonyl formation. This oxidative stress was blocked by SP600125 or SB203580. PY plus LPS treatment elevated TNF-alpha production, and this was blocked by SP600125 or SB203580. Neither SP600125 nor SB203580 affected CYP2E1 activity or protein levels. Treating C57/BL/6 mice with PY plus TNF-alpha also induced liver injury and increased lipid peroxidation and decreased GSH levels. Prolonged activation of JNK and p38 MAPK was observed. All of these effects were blocked by SP600125 or SB203580. In contrast to wild-type SV 129 mice, treating CYP2E1 knockout mice with PY plus TNF-alpha did not induce liver injury, thus validating the role of CYP21E1 in this potentiated liver injury. Liver mitochondria from PY plus LPS or PY plus TNF-alpha treated mice underwent calcium-dependent, cyclosporine A-sensitive swelling, which was prevented by SB203580 or SP600125. CONCLUSION: These results show that CYP2E1 sensitizes liver hepatocytes to LPS or TNF-alpha and that the CYP2E1-enhanced LPS or TNF-alpha injury, oxidant stress, and mitochondrial injury is JNK or p38 MAPK dependent.

17920235
Synergistic toxicity induced by prolonged glutathione depletion and inhibition of nuclear factor-kappaB signaling in liver cells.
TNF-alpha, GSH depletion and CYP2E1 are factors that play an important role in alcoholic liver disease. Activation of NF-kappaB prevents hepatocyte damage caused by TNF-alpha. This work describes the effect of NF-kappaB inhibition on toxicities caused by GSH depletion or arachidonic acid (AA) treatment in liver cells, and evaluates the possible influence of CYP2E1 overexpression. Cells were exposed to the NF-kappaB inhibitor BAY11-7082, in the absence or presence of l-buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) to block GSH synthesis. BSO toxicity was higher in CYP2E1-expressing E47 HepG2 cells compared to control cells; the incubation with BAY11-7082 potentiated BSO toxicity in both cell lines comparably. Several other agents which suppress activation of NF-kappaB increased BSO toxicity in E47 cells. NF-kappaB inhibition, however, did not sensitize E47 cells to AA toxicity. Suppressing activity of NF-kappaB also potentiated BSO, but not AA toxicity, in isolated rat hepatocytes. BAY11-7082 plus BSO induced a greater p38 MAPK activation as compared to BAY11-7082 or BSO alone, and a p38 MAPK inhibitor protected against the synergistic toxicity. In summary, inhibition of NF-kappaB sensitizes liver cells to toxicity linked to GSH depletion, probably accelerating the processes of thiol homeostasis deregulation and induction of apoptosis through a mechanism mediated by p38 MAPK.

