21415197
Role of FDG PET/CT in staging of recurrent ovarian cancer.
Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer death among women in the United States and has a high likelihood of recurrence despite aggressive treatment strategies. Detection and exact localization of recurrent lesions are critical for guiding management and determining the proper therapeutic approach, which may prolong survival. Because of its high sensitivity and specificity compared with those of conventional techniques such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, fluorine 18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET) combined with CT is useful for detection of recurrent or residual ovarian cancer and for monitoring response to therapy. However, PET/CT may yield false-negative results in patients with small, necrotic, mucinous, cystic, or low-grade tumors. In addition, in the posttherapy setting, inflammatory and infectious processes may lead to false-positive PET/CT results. Despite these drawbacks, PET/CT is superior to CT and MR imaging for depiction of recurrent disease.

20961409
Extraperitoneal urine leak after renal transplantation: the role of radionuclide imaging and the value of accompanying SPECT/CT - a case report.
The differentiation of the nature of a fluid collection as a complication of kidney transplantation is important for management and treatment planning. Early and delayed radionuclide renography can play an important role in the evaluation of a urine leak. However, it is sometimes limited in the evaluation of the exact location and extent of a urine leak. A 71-year-old male who had sudden anuria, scrotal swelling and elevated creatinine level after cadaveric renal transplantation performed Tc-99 m MAG3 renography to evaluate the renal function, followed by an ultrasound which was unremarkable. An extensive urine leak was evident on the planar images. However, an exact location of the urine leak was unknown. Accompanying SPECT/CT images confirmed a urine leak extending from the lower aspect of the transplant kidney to the floor of the pelvic cavity, presacral region and the scrotum via right inguinal canal as well as to the right abdominal wall. Renal scintigraphy is very useful to detect a urine leak after renal transplantation. However, planar imaging is sometimes limited in evaluating the anatomical location and extent of a urine leak accurately. In that case accompanying SPECT/CT images are very helpful and valuable to evaluate the anatomical relationships exactly.

20851003
The optimized evaluation of diabetic foot infection by dual isotope SPECT/CT imaging protocol.
Sequential Tc-99m hydroxymethylene-diphosphonate (HDP) 3-phase bone (BS) and In-111 leukocyte scanning (WBCS) have been frequently used to evaluate the diabetic foot, as nonosteomyelitis BS uptake is repeatedly observed and osteomyelitis (OM) in WBCS is often uncertain without BS correlation. Additionally, both modalities are limited in lesion localization because of low resolution and lack of anatomic details. We investigated a method that combined BS/WBCS, and if needed, WBCS/bone marrow scanning (BMS) using SPECT/CT to accurately diagnose/localize infection in a practical protocol. Blood flow/pool images were obtained followed by WBC reinjection and next day dual isotope (DI) BS/WBCS planar and SPECT/CT. BMS/WBCS SPECT/CT (step 2 DI) was obtained on the following day when images were suspicious for mid/hindfoot OM. Diagnosis accuracy and confidence were judged for the various imaging combinations. Diagnosis was classified as OM, soft tissue infection (STI), both OM/STI, and other/no bony pathology by microbiology/pathology or follow-up. Distinction between various diagnostic categories and overall OM diagnostic accuracy in 213 patients were higher for DI than WBCS or BS alone, and for DI SPECT/CT than DI planar or SPECT only. Diagnostic confidence/lesion site was significantly higher for DI SPECT/CT than other comparative imaging methods. In a group of 97 patients with confirmed microbiologic/pathologic diagnosis, similar results were attained. Step 2 DI SPECT/CT performed in 67 patients further improved diagnostic accuracy/confidence. DI SPECT/CT is a highly accurate modality that considerably improves detection and discrimination of STI and OM while providing precise anatomic localization in the diabetic foot. This combined imaging technique promises to beneficially impact diabetic patient care.

20833849
PET/CT evaluation of cervical cancer: spectrum of disease.
The prognosis of invasive cervical cancer is based on the stage, size, and histologic grade of the primary tumor and the status of the lymph nodes. Assessment of disease stage is essential in determining proper management in individual cases. In the posttherapy setting, the timely detection of recurrence is essential for guiding management and may lead to increased survival. However, the official clinical staging system of the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics has inherent flaws that may lead to inaccurate staging and improper management. Combined positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) represents a major technologic advance, consisting of two integrated complementary modalities whose combined strength tends to overcome their respective weaknesses. PET/CT has higher sensitivity and specificity than do conventional anatomic modalities and is valuable in determining the extent of disease and detecting recurrent or residual tumor. The combination of 2-[fluorine-18]fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose PET with intravenous contrast material-enhanced high-resolution CT has proved useful for avoiding the interpretative weaknesses associated with either modality alone and in increasing the accuracy of staging or restaging. Nonetheless, accurate PET/CT interpretation requires a knowledge of the characteristics of disease spread or recurrence and an awareness of various imaging pitfalls if false interpretations are to be avoided.

20441235
Quantitative comparison of yttrium-90 (90Y)-microspheres and technetium-99m (99mTc)-macroaggregated albumin SPECT images for planning 90Y therapy of liver cancer.
Yttrium-90 ((90)Y)-microspheres administered via the hepatic artery has been used for the treatment of unresectable primary or metastatic cancer in the liver. Prior to (90)Y therapy, however, the (90)Y administered activity and the percent shunting to lungs must be determined, most commonly by gamma camera imaging of technetium-99m ((99m)Tc)-macroaggregated albumin (MAA). The purpose of the current study was to identify and evaluate an objective measure of the correlation of (90)Y and MAA activity distributions and thus assess the reliability of MAA imaging for evaluation of (90)Y administered activity and tumor and liver radiation doses. The MAA study consisted of two acquisitions. After administration of 185 MBq of MAA, a partial-body or so-called breakthrough scan was performed in order to determine the percent shunting to lungs. Immediately after a breakthrough scan, a combined single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)/transmission computed tomography (CT) scanner was used to image MAA distribution in order to derived the prescribed (90)Y administered activity based on tumor and liver dosimetry. (90)Y SPECT/CT was performed 2-4 weeks later and activities used were in the range of 777-2,442 MBq. In order to compare (90)Y and MAA SPECT images, first the respective CT image sets were registered using a transform based on normalized mutual information. The transform thus derived was used to align the 90Y and MAA SPECT image sets, and the Spearman's (rho) rank correlation as well as image distance (L2-norm) between the registered SPECT images were then calculated. The Spearman's rank correlation values ranged from 0.451 to 0.818 and the L2 distances from 0.626 to 2.889. Based on visual inspection, the registration of the (90)Y and MAA SPECT images appeared reasonably accurate. The regression coefficient (r) between visual scoring and the Spearman's rank correlation was 0.65 and between visual scoring and L2 distance 0.61. The Spearman's rank correlation thus appears to be more reliable than the image distance for assessing the correlation of the (90)Y and MAA images.

20198431
Gastroduodenal ulceration associated with radioembolization for the treatment of hepatic tumors: an institutional experience and review of the literature.
Microsphere radioembolization is a method of delivering radiation therapy directly to tumors, thereby minimizing toxicity to adjacent structures. Despite the relatively high precision of this modality, numerous adverse effects have been recognized. One particularly untoward complication is the development of severe gastroduodenal ulceration. In order to further characterize gastroduodenal ulceration associated with radioembolization, our institutional experience as well as the reported literature were reviewed. The current evidence suggests that radioembolization-associated gastroduodenal ulceration results from inadvertent delivery of microspheres to the microvasculature of the gastrointestinal tract, leading to direct radiation toxicity. The reported incidence of this entity ranges between 2.9% and 4.8%. Most patients with this complication present with abdominal pain, often associated with nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. Symptoms can arise from hours to months after radioembolization treatment; diagnosis is made by endoscopic biopsy and histopathologic evaluation of the ulcer specimen. Radiation-induced ulcers have proven to be extremely difficult to treat. Current therapy based on acid suppression has had limited success, and the evidence for the addition of antioxidants and anti-inflammatory agents is still sparse. The increasing utilization of radioembolization will lead to adverse events including gastroduodenal ulceration. This entity must be considered in any patient treated with radioactive microspheres presenting with symptoms of dyspepsia. Accurate diagnosis and aggressive treatment are necessary to improve patient outcomes.

19808576
Relationships among regional arterial inflammation, calcification, risk factors, and biomarkers: a prospective fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography/computed tomography imaging study.
Fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography (FDG PET) imaging of atherosclerosis has been used to quantify plaque inflammation and to measure the effect of plaque-stabilizing drugs. We explored how atherosclerotic plaque inflammation varies across arterial territories and how it relates to arterial calcification. We also tested the hypotheses that the degree of local arterial inflammation measured by PET is correlated with the extent of systemic inflammation and presence of risk factors for vascular disease. Forty-one subjects underwent vascular PET/computed tomography imaging with FDG. All had either vascular disease or multiple risk factors. Forty subjects underwent carotid imaging, 27 subjects underwent aortic, 24 subjects iliac, and 13 subjects femoral imaging. Thirty-three subjects had a panel of biomarkers analyzed. We found strong associations between FDG uptake in neighboring arteries (left versus right carotid, r=0.91, P<0.001; ascending aorta versus aortic arch, r=0.88, P<0.001). Calcification and inflammation rarely overlapped within arteries (carotid artery FDG uptake versus calcium score, r=-0.42, P=0.03). Carotid artery FDG uptake was greater in those with a history of coronary artery disease (target-to- <0.01) and in males versus females (target-to- <0.05). Similar findings were also noted in the aorta and iliac arteries. Subjects with the highest levels of FDG uptake also had the greatest concentrations of inflammatory biomarkers (descending aorta target-to- =0.53, P=0.01; carotid target-to- =0.50, P=0.01). Nonsignificant positive trends were seen between FDG uptake and levels of interleukin-18, fibrinogen, and C-reactive protein. Finally, we found that the atheroprotective biomarker adiponectin was negatively correlated with the degree of arterial inflammation in the descending aorta (r=-0.49, P=0.03). This study shows that FDG PET imaging can increase our knowledge of how atherosclerotic plaque inflammation relates to calcification, serum biomarkers, and vascular risk factors. Plaque inflammation and calcification rarely overlap, supporting the theory that calcification represents a late, burnt-out stage of atherosclerosis. Inflammation in one arterial territory is associated with inflammation elsewhere, and the degree of local arterial inflammation is reflected in the blood levels of several circulating biomarkers. We suggest that FDG PET imaging could be used as a surrogate marker of both atherosclerotic disease activity and drug effectiveness. Prospective, event-driven studies are now underway to determine the role of this technique in clinical risk prediction.

19443582
Quantification of inflammation within rabbit atherosclerotic plaques using the macrophage-specific CT contrast agent N1177: a comparison with 18F-FDG PET/CT and histology.
Macrophages play a key role in atherosclerotic plaque rupture. The iodine-based contrast agent N1177 accumulates in macrophages, allowing for their detection with CT. In this study, we tested whether the intensity of enhancement detected with CT in the aortic wall of rabbits injected with N1177 correlated with inflammatory activity evaluated with (18)F-FDG PET/CT and macrophage density on histology. Atherosclerotic plaques were induced in the aorta of New Zealand White rabbits (n = 7) by a repeated balloon injury (4 wk apart) and 4 mo of hyperlipemic diet. Noninjured rabbits, fed a chow diet, were used as controls (n = 3). A CT scan of the aorta (n = 10) was acquired in each rabbit before, during, and at 2 h after intravenous injection of N1177 (250 mg of iodine/kg). One week later, the same rabbits underwent PET/CT 3 h after injection of (18)F-FDG (37 MBq/kg [1 mCi/kg]). CT enhancement was calculated as the difference in aortic wall densities between images obtained before and images obtained at 2 h after injection of N1177. Mean standardized uptake values were measured on PET axial slices of the aorta in regions of interest encompassing the vessel wall. Macrophage density was measured by immunohistology (anti-RAM-11 antibody) on corresponding aortic cross-sections. N1177-enhanced CT measured stronger enhancement in the aortic wall of atherosclerotic rabbits than in control rabbits (10.0 +/- 5.2 vs. 2.0 +/- 2.1 Hounsfield units, respectively; P < 0.05). After the injection of (18)F-FDG, PET detected higher standardized uptake values in the aortic wall of atherosclerotic rabbits than in control rabbits (0.61 +/- 0.12 vs. 0.21 +/- 0.02; P < 0.05). The intensity of enhancement in the aortic wall measured with CT after injection of N1177 correlated with (18)F-FDG uptake on PET/CT (r = 0.61, P < 0.001) and macrophage density on immunohistology (r = 0.63, P < 0.001). The intensity of enhancement detected with CT in the aortic wall of rabbits injected with N1177 correlates with intense uptake of (18)F-FDG measured with PET and with macrophage density on histology, suggesting a role for N1177 in noninvasive identification of high-risk atherosclerotic plaques with CT.

18979182
In vivo non-invasive serial monitoring of FDG-PET progression and regression in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis.
We investigated the ability of fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG PET) imaging to serially monitor macrophage content in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis was induced in rabbits (n = 8) by a combination of atherogenic diet and balloon denudation of the aorta. At the end of nine months, the rabbits were randomized to a further six months of the same atherogenic diet (progression group) or normal diet (regression group). In vivo uptake of FDG by the thoracic aorta was measured using aortic uptake-to-blood radioactivity ratios at the start and end of the randomized period. A significant increase in FDG uptake of the progression group after continued cholesterol feeding (aortic uptake-to-blood radioactivity: 0.57 +/- 0.02 to 0.68 +/- 0.02, P = 0.001), and a corresponding fall in FDG uptake of the regression group after returning to a normal chow diet (aortic uptake-to-blood radioactivity ratios: 0.67 +/- 0.02 to 0.53 +/- 0.02, P < 0.0001). FDG PET can quantify in vivo macrophage content and serially monitor changes in FDG activity in this rabbit model.

18498030
Fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography for evaluation of indeterminate lung nodules: assigning a probability of malignancy may be preferable to binary readings.
To assess the diagnostic value of fluorine-18 fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) using standard uptake values (SUV) in the differential diagnoses of indeterminate pulmonary nodules. Specifically, we assessed the probability of malignancy for various SUV ranges, and compared the diagnostic efficacy of SUV with and without correction for partial volume effects on the basis of lesion size. The FDG-PET scans performed on 158 patients with biopsy-proven pulmonary lesions seen on computed tomography (CT) scan were retrospectively reviewed. Histopathological confirmation was obtained to establish the diagnosis of the lesions. A region of interest (ROI) was drawn for each lesion, and FDG uptake was quantified (SUV(raw)). The SUV(raw) values were normalized for the "size" of the pulmonary lesions measured on CT (SUV(size)). Sensitivity and specificity of FDG-PET for pulmonary lesions <2 cm in diameter or > or =2 cm in diameter were determined at SUV cutoff values of 2.5. The areas under the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve for SUV(raw) and SUV(size) regarding the presence of malignancy were compared for statistical differences. The frequency of malignant lesions for each range of SUVs was obtained to produce the probability of cancer (POC). The mean SUV(raw) was 3.17 +/- 2.76 and 9.18 +/- 6.72 for benign and malignant lesions, respectively. When a SUV(raw) value of 2.5 was used as a cutoff, sensitivity and specificity were 89% and 51%, respectively, for all lesion sizes. The sensitivity and specificity at a cutoff SUV(raw) of 2.5 for lesions less than 2 cm in diameter were 75% and 72%, respectively, and 92% and 41% for lesions 2 cm or greater, respectively. The sensitivity and specificity at a cutoff SUV(size) of 2.5 were 88% and 42%, respectively. The area under the ROC curves for SUV(raw) and SUV(size) was 0.816 and 0.743, respectively (P value 0.034). When the SUV(raw) was divided into three groups, the probability of malignancy was 26% when the SUV(raw) was <2, 57% for 2 < or = SUV(raw) < 6, and 89% for SUV(raw) > or = 6. The FDG-PET is a reasonably accurate and useful tool for characterizing the nature of indeterminate pulmonary lesions, although the specificity was not as high as that reported in the literature, probably owing in part to our patient population and selection bias. Our data suggest that reporting the results of PET studies as a probability rather than as positive or negative for malignancy would be more useful for further management decision making. Correction of SUVs for tumor size did not improve accuracy.

18483100
Atherosclerosis inflammation imaging with 18F-FDG PET: carotid, iliac, and femoral uptake reproducibility, quantification methods, and recommendations.
Atherosclerosis imaging with 18F-FDG PET is useful for tracking inflammation within plaque and monitoring the response to drug therapy. Short-term reproducibility of this technique in peripheral artery disease has not been assessed, and the optimal method of 18F-FDG quantification is still debated. We imaged 20 patients with vascular disease using 18F-FDG PET twice, 14 d apart, and used these data to assess reproducibility measures and compare 2 methods of 18F-FDG uptake measurement. We also reviewed the literature on quantification methods to determine the optimal measures of arterial 18F-FDG uptake for future studies. Twenty patients with vascular disease underwent PET/CT of the iliac, femoral, and carotid arteries 90 min after 18F-FDG administration. In 19 patients, repeat testing was performed at 2 wk. Coregistration and attenuation correction were performed with CT. Vessel 18F-FDG uptake was measured as both the mean and maximum blood-normalized standardized uptake value (SUV), known as the target-to-background ratio (TBR). We assessed interscan, interobserver, and intraobserver agreement. Nineteen patients completed both imaging sessions. The carotid and peripheral arteries all have excellent short-term reproducibility of the 18F-FDG signal, with intraclass correlation coefficients all greater than 0.8 for all measures of reproducibility. Both mean and maximum TBR measurements for quantifying 18F-FDG uptake are equally reproducible. 18F-FDG uptake was significantly higher in the carotid arteries than in both iliac and femoral vessels (P < 0.001 for both). We found that both mean and maximum TBR in the carotid, iliac, and femoral arteries were highly reproducible. We suggest the mean TBR be used for tracking systemic arterial therapies, whereas the maximum TBR is optimal for detecting and monitoring local, plaque-based therapy.

18467641
Detection of neovessels in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits using dynamic contrast enhanced MRI and 18F-FDG PET.
The association of inflammatory cells and neovessels in atherosclerosis is considered a histological hallmark of high-risk active lesions. Therefore, the development and validation of noninvasive imaging techniques that allow for the detection of inflammation and neoangiogenesis in atherosclerosis would be of major clinical interest. Our aim was to test 2 techniques, black blood dynamic contrast enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) and 18-fluorine-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) PET, to quantify inflammation expressed as plaque neovessels content in a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Atherosclerotic plaques were induced in the aorta of 10 rabbits by a combination of 2 endothelial abrasions and 4 months hyperlipidemic diet. Six rabbits underwent MRI during the injection of Gd-DTPA, whereas 4 rabbits were imaged after injection of 18F-FDG with PET. We found a positive correlation between neovessels count in atherosclerotic plaques and (1) Gd-DTPA uptake parameters evaluated by DCE-MRI (r=0.89, P=0.016) and (2) 18F-FDG uptake evaluated by PET (r=0.5, P=0.103 after clustered robust, Huber-White, standard errors analysis). DCE-MRI and 18F-FDG PET may allow for the evaluation of inflammation in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits. These noninvasive imaging modalities could be proposed as clinical tools in the evaluation of lesion prognosis and monitoring of anti-angiogenic therapies.

18339784
Cardiac involvement in patients with sarcoidosis: diagnostic and prognostic value of outpatient testing.
Cardiac sarcoidosis (CS) causes substantial morbidity and sudden death. Early diagnosis and risk stratification are warranted. Ambulatory patients with sarcoidosis were interviewed to determine whether they experienced palpitations, syncope, or presyncope, and were evaluated with ECG, Holter monitoring, and echocardiography (transthoracic echocardiogram [TTE]). Those with symptoms or abnormal results were studied with cardiac MRI (CMRI) or positron emission tomography (PET) scanning. The diagnosis of CS was based on abnormalities detected by these imaging studies. Patients with CS were referred for risk stratification by electrophysiology study (EPS). Among the 62 patients evaluated, the prevalence of CS was 39%. Patients with CS had more cardiac symptoms than those without CS (46% vs 5%, respectively; p < 0.001), and were more likely to have abnormal Holter monitoring findings (50% vs 3%, respectively; p < 0.001) and TTE findings (25% vs 5%, respectively; p = 0.02). The degree of pulmonary impairment did not predict CS. Two of the 17 patients who underwent EPS had abnormal test findings and received implantable cardioverter-defibrillators. No patients died, had ventricular arrhythmias that triggered defibrillator therapy, or had heart failure develop during almost 2 years of follow-up. This diagnostic approach was more sensitive than the established criteria for identifying CS. CS is common among patients with sarcoidosis. A structured clinical assessment incorporating advanced cardiac imaging with PET scanning or CMRI is more sensitive than the established criteria for the identification of CS. Sarcoidal lesions seen on CMRI or PET scanning do not predict arrhythmias in ambulatory patients with preserved cardiac function, who appear to be at low risk for short-term mortality.

18157529
Temporal relation between temperature change and FDG uptake in brown adipose tissue.
It has been reported that the prevalence of (18)F fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in brown adipose tissue (BAT) is related to outdoor temperature, i.e., more frequent during the colder periods of the year. The purpose of this study was to assess the temporal relationship between BAT FDG uptake and temperature. We correlated the prevalence of BAT with average temperatures (divided into five temperature ranges) of seven different durations. One thousand four hundred ninety-five consecutive FDG Positron emission tomography (PET) studies in 1,159 patients (566 male and 593 female, mean age = 60.4 years) were retrospectively reviewed. FDG uptake with distinct patterns compatible with BAT was identified by a consensus of two readers. The local daily average temperature from January 2000 to November 2003 (beginning 60 days before the date of first PET scan) were obtained, and 2-, 3-, 7-, 14-, 30-, and 60-day average temperatures before the date of a PET study were calculated. The prevalence of BAT FDG uptake was correlated with these various average temperatures. The daily, 2-day, 3-day, and 7-day average temperature had an inverse relation with the prevalence of BAT, i.e., the lower the temperature, the higher prevalence of BAT. When the temperature was averaged over 14 days or longer, this inverse relationship between the temperature and the prevalence of BAT was no longer preserved. Our data suggest that increased FDG uptake in BAT occurs more often as an acute response to cold weather (1-7 days) rather than to prolonged periods of average cold weather.

18030049
FDG PET/CT imaging to rule out extrahepatic metastases before liver transplantation.
FDG PET/CT, an established imaging modality for staging and restaging workup of malignancies, also demonstrates increased uptake in infectious or inflammatory conditions, including both infectious and noninfectious granulomatous processes. A 65-year-old man with a history of hepatocellular carcinoma status post-wedge resection and chemoembolization of the primary tumor referred for evaluation of extrahepatic metastases for determining the surgical eligibility for a liver transplantation. The patient underwent FDG PET/CT imaging associated with a separately acquired contrast enhanced CT (CECT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. FDG PET/CT imaging revealed multiple FDG-avid pulmonary nodules that were subsequently confirmed to represent Mycobacterium avium intracellular infection on histology.

17925421
Results of 188 whole-body fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography scans in 137 patients with sarcoidosis.
To study the role of whole-body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) scans in the identification of occult biopsy sites and reversible granulomatous disease in patients with sarcoidosis. A retrospective review was undertaken of 188 FDG PET scans performed in 137 patients with proven sarcoidosis. All patients had given a complete medical history and undergone a physical examination, standard chest radiograph, spirometry, diffusing capacity determination, and measurement of serum angiotensin-converting enzymes levels. One hundred thirty-nine whole-body scans had positive findings. The most common positive sites were mediastinal lymph nodes (54 scans), extrathoracic lymph nodes (30 scans), and lung (24 scans). The standardized uptake value (SUV) ranged from 2.0 to 15.8. Twenty occult disease sites were identified. Eleven repeat scans exhibited decreased SUV with corticosteroid therapy. The positive pulmonary FDG PET scan findings occurred in two thirds of patients with radiographic stage II and III sarcoidosis. Negative pulmonary FDG PET scan findings were common in patients with radiographic stage 0, I, and IV sarcoidosis. Whole-body FDG PET scans are of value in identifying occult and reversible granulomas in patients with sarcoidosis. However, a positive FDG PET scan finding, by itself, is not an indication for treatment.

17719477
(18)Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography imaging of atherosclerotic plaque inflammation is highly reproducible: implications for atherosclerosis therapy trials.
This study tested the near-term reproducibility of (18)fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) imaging of atherosclerosis. It is known that FDG-PET can measure inflammation within the aorta, carotid, and vertebral arteries with histologic validation in humans and animal models of disease. By tracking changes in inflammation over time, PET could be used as a surrogate marker of antiatheroma drug efficacy. However, the short-term variability and reproducibility of the technique are unknown. We imaged the carotid arteries and aorta in 11 subjects with FDG-PET/computed tomography twice, 14 days apart. We assessed interobserver and intraobserver agreement and interscan variability. Interscan plaque FDG variability over 2 weeks was very low; intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) ranged between 0.79 and 0.92. Interobserver agreement was high across all territories imaged except aortic arch (ICC values from 0.90 to 0.97, arch 0.71). Intraobserver agreement was high, with ICC values between 0.93 and 0.98. Spontaneous change in plaque FDG uptake is low over 2 weeks, with favorable inter- and intraobserver agreement. Power calculations suggest that drug studies using FDG-PET imaging would require few subjects compared with other imaging modalities. This study strengthens the case for FDG-PET as a noninvasive plaque imaging technique.

17242559
Appearance of descended superior parathyroid adenoma on SPECT parathyroid imaging.
An ectopic superior parathyroid adenoma (SPA) descends inferoposteriorly and can migrate to the posterior mediastinum. It often appears on sestamibi planar parathyroid imaging as an inferior lesion, which can be misleading to inexperienced surgeons. Its correct identification before surgery will be of great help for correct surgical planning. We assessed the appearance of descended SPA on SPECT imaging. Sestamibi SPECT imaging studies performed on 103 patients who had parathyroid adenomas with their origin and locations confirmed by surgery and histology were retrospectively reviewed. Abnormal foci seen on the SPECT images were grouped as to location relative to the thyroid gland as superior (S), middle (M), and inferior (I). The proximity between the focus and the thyroid on the sagittal SPECT images was graded from 0 to 2 with 2 being widely separated. Of the 103 SPECT studies, 89 were positive. Eleven of the 89 visualized foci were at the S level: all were SPA. Ten foci were at the M level, including 6 SPA and 4 inferior parathyroid adenomas (IPA). There were 68 foci at the I level; none (0%) of 56 in the I0 location, 2 (25%) of 8 foci in the I1 location, and all (100%) of 4 abnormal foci in the I2 location were descended SPAs. The more posteriorly located the abnormal focus, the higher the probability of descended SPA. Recognition of the characteristic appearance of descended SPA on SPECT imaging can have a significant impact on the surgical approach and prevent failed neck exploration.

