21175525
Palliative care needs of seriously ill, older adults presenting to the emergency department.
The objective was to identify the palliative care needs of seriously ill, older adults in the emergency department (ED). The authors conducted a cross-sectional structured survey. A convenience sample of 50 functionally impaired adults 65 years or older with coexisting cancer, congestive heart failure, end-stage liver or renal disease, stroke, oxygen-dependent pulmonary disease, or dementia was recruited from an urban academic tertiary care ED. Face-to-face interviews were conducted using the Needs Near the End-of-Life Screening Tool (NEST), McGill Quality of Life Index (MQOL), and Edmonton Symptom Assessment Survey (ESAS) to assess 1) range and severity of symptoms, 2) goals of care, 3) psychological well-being, 4) health care utilization, 5) spirituality, 6) social connectedness, 7) financial burden, 8) the patient-clinician relationship, and 9) overall quality of life (QOL). Mean (±SD) age was 74.3 (±6.5) years and cancer was the most common diagnosis. Mean (±SD) QOL on the MQOL was 3.6 (±2.9). Over half of the patients exceeded intratest severity-of-needs cutoffs in four categories of the NEST: physical symptoms (47/50, 94%), finances (36/50, 72%), mental health (31/50, 62%), and access to care (29/50, 58%). The majority of patients reported moderate to severe fatigue, pain, dyspnea, and depression on the ESAS. Seriously ill, older adults in an urban ED have substantial palliative care needs. Future work should focus on the role of emergency medicine and the new specialty of palliative care in addressing these needs.

21054293
The quality of emergency department pain care for older adult patients.
To determine whether there are differences in emergency department (ED) pain assessment and treatment for older and younger adults. Retrospective observational cohort. Urban, academic tertiary care ED during July and December 2005. Adult patients with conditions warranting ED pain care. Age, Charlson comorbidity score, number of prior medications, sex, race and ethnicity, triage severity, degree of pain, treating clinician, and final ED diagnosis. Pain care process measures were pain assessment and treatment and time of activities. One thousand thirty-one ED visits met inclusion criteria; 92% of these had a documented pain assessment. Of those reporting pain, 41% had follow-up pain assessments, and 59% received analgesic medication (58% of these as opioids, 24% as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)). In adjusted analyses, there were no differences according to age in pain assessment and receiving any analgesic. Older patients (65-84) were less likely than younger patients (18-64) to receive opioid analgesics for moderate to severe (odds ratio (OR) = 0.44, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.22-0.88) and were more likely to more likely to receive NSAIDs for mild pain (OR = 3.72, 95% CI = 0.97-14.24). Older adults had a lower reduction of initial to final recorded pain scores (P = .002). There appear to be differences in acute ED pain care for older and younger adults. Lower overall reduction of pain scores and less opioid use for the treatment of painful conditions in older patients highlight disparities of concern. Future studies should determine whether these differences represent inadequate ED pain care.

20434048
Effectiveness of stroke education in the emergency department waiting room.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of stroke education provided to patients and their significant others in the emergency department (ED) waiting area. Our focus was on the 4 main aspects of stroke: signs and symptoms, risk factors, behavior modification, and the urgency to seek medical attention. We hypothesized that showing educational videos, providing one-on-one counseling, and distributing literature would result in greater stroke knowledge and positive behavioral modification. In this pilot, randomized controlled trial, our research team enrolled patients and visitors in the fast-track waiting area of the ED. After obtaining informed written consent, participants were randomly assigned to the control group or to the intervention group. The intervention group received an educational video program, one-on-one counseling, and stroke education materials, and completed a 13-question test after receiving the education. The control group completed the same test without receiving any education. Both groups completed the same test again at 1 and 3 months to assess stroke knowledge retention. There were a total of 329 participants: 151 in the control group and 178 in the intervention group. Gender, age, and educational level of participants did not differ between groups. At all time points of the study, participants receiving stroke education demonstrated better test scores than those in the control group. However, knowledge retention in the intervention group gradually declined during the follow-up. Individuals enrolled in the intervention group appeared to be more motivated to reduce their smoking habits, compared with control subjects; however, the number of cigarettes they smoked per day did not dramatically decrease in comparison with their own baseline. Receiving the education session did not result in positive diet or physical activity changes. ED stroke education, which includes video program, one-on-one counseling, and written educational materials, is able to significantly increase stroke knowledge. Modification and reinforcement of education is needed to achieve better knowledge retention and favorable lifestyle modifications.

20402375
Clinical information system and process redesign improves emergency department efficiency.
Fueled by a decade-long increase in emergency department (ED) visits with a concomitant decrease in hospital bed capacity and the number of hospital EDs, ED crowding has reached crisis proportions. Robust information systems and process redesign are two strategies to improve the safety and quality of emergency care. At the ED at the Mount Sinai Medical Center, an urban, tertiary care academic medical center in New York City, elements of departmental work flow were redesigned to streamline patient throughput before implementation of a fully integrated emergency department information system (EDIS) with patient tracking, computerized charting and order entry, and direct access to patient historical data from the hospital data repository. Pre- and postintervention data were analyzed to examine the impact on (ED) efficiency. The length of stay for all patients (arrival to time patient left ED) decreased by 1.94 hours, from 6.69 (n = 508) pre-intervention to 4.75 (n = 691) postintervention (p < .001); doctor-to-disposition time (first doctor-patient contact to disposition decision) decreased by 1.90 hours, from 3.64 (n = 508) to 1.74 (n = 691; p < .001); door-to-doctor time (triage to first doctor-patient contact) decreased by 0.54 hours, from 1.22 (n = 508) to 0.68 (n = 691; p < .001). X-ray turnaround time (TAT) decreased by 0.18 hours from 0.92 (n = 60) to 0.74 (n = 108; p = .179); computerized tomography (CT) scan TAT decreased by 1.56 hours, from 3.89 (n = 40) to 2.33 (n = 29; p < .001), lab TAT decreased by 0.59 hours, from 2.03 (n = 121) to 1.44 (n = 271; p = .006). Increasing the clinical information available at the bedside and improving departmental work flow through EDIS implementation and process redesign led to decreased patient throughput times and improved ED efficiency.

20309927
Access to health and health care: how race and ethnicity matter.
Racial and ethnic disparities in health are multifactorial; they reflect differences in biological vulnerability to disease as well as differences in social resources, environmental factors, and health care interventions. Understanding and intervening in health inequity require an understanding of the disparate access to all of the personal resources and environmental conditions that are needed to generate and sustain health, a set of circumstances that constitute access to health. These include access to health information, participation in health promotion and disease prevention activities, safe housing, nutritious foods, convenient exercise spaces, freedom from ambient violence, adequate social support, communities with social capital, and access to quality health care. Access to health care is facilitated by health insurance, a regular source of care, and a usual primary care provider. Various mechanisms through which access to health and access to health care are mediated by race and ethnicity are discussed; these include the built environment, social environment, residential segregation, stress, racism, and discrimination. Empirical evidence supporting the association between these factors and health inequities is also reviewed.

20079955
Health information exchange, biosurveillance efforts, and emergency department crowding during the spring 2009 H1N1 outbreak in New York City.
Novel H1N1 influenza spread rapidly around the world in spring 2009. Few places were as widely affected as the New York metropolitan area. Emergency departments (EDs) in the region experienced daily visit increases in 2 distinct temporal peaks, with means of 36.8% and 60.7% over baseline in April and May, respectively, and became, in a sense, the "canary in the coal mine" for the rest of the country as we braced ourselves for resurgent spread in the fall. Biosurveillance efforts by public health agencies can lead to earlier detection, potentially forestalling spread of outbreaks and leading to better situational awareness by frontline medical staff and public health workers as they respond to a crisis, but biosurveillance has traditionally relied on manual reporting by hospital administrators when they are least able: in the midst of a public health crisis. This article explores the use of health information exchange networks, which enable the secure flow of clinical data among otherwise unaffiliated providers across entire regions for the purposes of clinical care, as a tool for automated biosurveillance reporting. Additionally, this article uses a health information exchange to assess H1N1's effect on ED visit rates and discusses preparedness recommendations and lessons learned from the spring 2009 H1N1 experience across 11 geographically distinct EDs in New York City that participate in the health information exchange.

19328379
Disparities in use of computed tomography for patients presenting with headache.
Headache is a common presenting complaint in the emergency department (ED). Physicians may choose to screen for causes of headache using computed tomography (CT). It is not known whether patient characteristics influence this decision. This study sought to identify patient demographic factors associated with CT evaluation for adult patients with headache. This study used a retrospective cohort review at an academic, urban ED. Study eligibility was based on chief complaint of headache and final diagnosis of the same. Detailed demographic (age, sex, race/ethnicity, insurance) and clinical (Emergency Severity Index [ESI], Charlson comorbidity score, pain score) data were abstracted from the ED medical record. The main outcome studied was whether a head CT was part of clinical evaluation. One hundred fifty-five patients were reviewed. Mean age was 42 years (SD, +/-18 years); 75% female, 17% white, 41% black, and 33% Hispanic; 73% were insured; mean ESI was 3.06 (SD, +/-0.64); and Charlson score was 0.60 (SD, +/-1.55). Thirty-seven percent of patients underwent head CT. In multivariable analyses, patients were more likely to undergo head CT if they had greater acuity (ESI < or = 3; odds ratio [OR], 5.11; P < .01) but were less likely to undergo head CT if they were black (OR, 0.21; P < .01) when adjusting for each other as well as older age, sex, comorbidity, insurance status, and history of migraine. In this study, patients who were black were significantly less likely to undergo head CT during their ED evaluation for headache, independent of clinical and demographic factors.

