21183473
Boc modifies the holoprosencephaly spectrum of Cdo mutant mice.
Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is caused by a failure to form the midline of the forebrain and/or midface. It is one of the most common human birth defects, but clinical expression is extremely variable. HPE is associated with mutations in the sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway. Mice lacking the Shh pathway regulator Cdo (also called Cdon) display HPE with strain-dependent penetrance and expressivity, implicating silent modifier genes as one cause of the variability. However, the identities of potential HPE modifiers of this type are unknown. We report here that whereas mice lacking the Cdo paralog Boc do not have HPE, Cdo;Boc double mutants on a largely Cdo-resistant genetic background have lobar HPE with strong craniofacial anomalies and defects in Shh target gene expression in the developing forebrain. Boc is therefore a silent HPE modifier gene in mice. Furthermore, Cdo and Boc have specific, selective roles in Shh signaling in mammals, because Cdo;Boc double-mutant mice do not display the most severe HPE phenotype seen in Shh-null mice, nor do they have major defects in digit patterning or development of vertebrae, which are also Shh-dependent processes. This is in contrast to reported observations in Drosophila, where genetic removal of the Cdo and Boc orthologs Ihog and Boi results in a complete loss of response to the hedgehog ligand. Therefore, there is evolutionary divergence between mammals and insects in the requirement of the hedgehog pathway for Cdo/Ihog family members, with mammalian development involving additional factors and/or distinct mechanisms at this level of pathway regulation.

20647774
Abl promotes cadherin-dependent adhesion and signaling in myoblasts.
Cell-cell contact promotes myogenic differentiation but the mechanisms that regulate this phenomenon are not well understood. Cdo (also known as Cdon), an Ig superfamily member, functions as a component of cell surface complexes to promote myogenic differentiation through activation of p38alpha/beta MAP kinase. We recently showed that N-cadherin ligation activated p38alpha/beta in a Cdo-dependent manner, whereas N-cadherin ligation-dependent activation of ERK MAP kinase was not affected by loss of Cdo. The non-receptor tyrosine kinase Abl associates with Cdo during myoblast differentiation and is necessary for full activition of p38alpha/beta during this process. The Abl SH3 domain binds to a PxxP motif in the Cdo intracellular domain, and both these motifs are required for their promyogenic activity. Here we show that Abl is necessary for p38alpha/beta activation initiated by N-cadherin ligation, but in contrast to Cdo, Abl is also required for N-cadherin-dependent ERK activation. Moreover, Abl is required for efficient cadherin-mediated myoblast aggregation via modulation of RhoA-ROCK signaling. Therefore, Abl regulates N-cadherin-mediated p38alpha/beta activation by multiple mechanisms, more generally through regulation of cell-cell adhesion and specifically as a component of Cdo-containing complexes. The role of Cdo as a multifunctional coreceptor with roles in several pathways is also discussed.

20471976
Regulation of promyogenic signal transduction by cell-cell contact and adhesion.
Skeletal myoblast differentiation involves acquisition of the muscle-specific transcriptional program and morphological changes, including fusion into multinucleated myofibers. Differentiation is regulated by extracellular signaling cues, including cell-cell contact and adhesion. Cadherin and Ig adhesion receptors have been implicated in distinct but overlapping stages of myogenesis. N-cadherin signals through the Ig receptor Cdo to activate p38 MAP kinase, while the Ig receptor neogenin signals to activate FAK; both processes promote muscle-specific gene expression and myoblast fusion. M-cadherin activates Rac1 to enhance fusion. Specific Ig receptors (Kirre and Sns) are essential for myoblast fusion in Drosophila, also signaling through Rac, and vertebrate orthologs of Kirre and Sns have partially conserved function. Mice lacking specific cytoplasmic signaling factors activated by multiple receptors (e.g., Rac1) have strong muscle phenotypes in vivo. In contrast, mice lacking individual adhesion receptors that lie upstream of these factors have modest phenotypes. Redundancy among receptors may account for this. Many of the mammalian Ig receptors and cadherins associate with each other, and multivalent interactions within these complexes may require removal of multiple components to reveal dramatic defects in vivo. Nevertheless, it is possible that the murine adhesion receptors rate-limiting in vivo have not yet been identified or fully assessed.

20160094
N-cadherin ligation, but not Sonic hedgehog binding, initiates Cdo-dependent p38alpha/beta MAPK signaling in skeletal myoblasts.
The p38alpha/beta mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway promotes muscle-specific gene expression and myoblast differentiation but how pathway activity is initiated during these processes is poorly understood. During myoblast differentiation, the intracellular region of the promyogenic cell surface protein Cdo (also known as Cdon) binds to Bnip-2 and JLP, scaffold proteins for Cdc42 and p38alpha/beta MAPK, respectively. The Bnip-2/Cdc42 and JLP/p38alpha/beta complexes associate in a Cdo-dependent manner, resulting in Bnip-2/Cdc42-dependent p38alpha/beta activation and stimulation of cell differentiation. Although the Cdo ectodomain binds to several different proteins, it is unclear how Cdo-dependent p38alpha/beta activation is initiated. In myoblasts, Cdo interacts with the cell-cell adhesion molecule N-cadherin. Cdo also binds directly to the secreted morphogen Sonic hedgehog (Shh) to promote Shh pathway signaling. We report here that N-cadherin ligation activates p38alpha/beta in myoblasts in a Cdo-, Bnip-2-, and JLP-dependent manner. Furthermore, these proteins and activated Cdc42 cluster at sites of N-cadherin ligation. In contrast, neither JLP nor Bnip-2 is associated with Cdo bound to Shh, and Shh does not activate p38alpha/beta in myoblasts. Taken together, these results link cadherin-based cell-cell adhesion to a defined signaling pathway (Cdo --> p38alpha/beta) that directly regulates a cell-type-specific differentiation program. Furthermore, they are consistent with a model whereby Cdo serves as a multifunctional coreceptor with mechanistically distinct roles in multiple signaling pathways.

19812254
Neogenin regulates skeletal myofiber size and focal adhesion kinase and extracellular signal-regulated kinase activities in vivo and in vitro.
A variety of signaling pathways participate in the development of skeletal muscle, but the extracellular cues that regulate such pathways in myofiber formation are not well understood. Neogenin is a receptor for ligands of the netrin and repulsive guidance molecule (RGM) families involved in axon guidance. We reported previously that neogenin promoted myotube formation by C2C12 myoblasts in vitro and that the related protein Cdo (also Cdon) was a potential neogenin coreceptor in myoblasts. We report here that mice homozygous for a gene-trap mutation in the Neo1 locus (encoding neogenin) develop myotomes normally but have small myofibers at embryonic day 18.5 and at 3 wk of age. Similarly, cultured myoblasts derived from such animals form smaller myotubes with fewer nuclei than myoblasts from control animals. These in vivo and in vitro defects are associated with low levels of the activated forms of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), both known to be involved in myotube formation, and inefficient expression of certain muscle-specific proteins. Recombinant netrin-2 activates FAK and ERK in cultured myoblasts in a neogenin- and Cdo-dependent manner, whereas recombinant RGMc displays lesser ability to activate these kinases. Together, netrin-neogenin signaling is an important extracellular cue in regulation of myogenic differentiation and myofiber size.

19754878
Ocular abnormalities in mice lacking the immunoglobulin superfamily member Cdo.
Vertebrate eye development requires a series of complex morphogenetic and inductive events to produce a lens vesicle centered within the bilayered optic cup and a posteriorly positioned optic stalk. Multiple congenital eye defects, including microphthalmia and coloboma, result from defects in early eye morphogenesis. Cdo is a multifunctional cell surface immunoglobulin superfamily member that interacts with and mediates signaling by cadherins and netrins to regulate myogenesis. In addition, Cdo plays an essential role in early forebrain development by functioning as coreceptor for sonic hedgehog. It is reported here that Cdo is expressed in a dynamic, but dorsally restricted, fashion during early eye development, and that mice lacking Cdo display multiple eye defects. Anomalies seen in Cdo(-/-) mice include coloboma (failure to close the optic fissure); failure to form a proper boundary between the retinal pigmented epithelium and optic stalk; defective lens formation, including failure to separate from the surface ectoderm; and microphthalmia. Consistent with this wide array of defects, developing eyes of Cdo(-/-) mice show altered expression of several regulators of dorsoventral eye patterning, including Pax6, Pax2, and Tbx5. Taken together, these findings show that Cdo is required for normal eye development and is required for normal expression of patterning genes in both the ventral and dorsal domains. The multiple eye development defects seen in Cdo(-/-) mice suggest that mutations in human Cdo could contribute to congenital eye anomalies, such as Jacobsen syndrome, which is frequently associated with ocular defects, including coloboma and Peters' anomaly.

19470755
Cdo binds Abl to promote p38alpha/beta mitogen-activated protein kinase activity and myogenic differentiation.
The p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is required for differentiation of skeletal myoblasts, but how the pathway is activated during this process is not well understood. One mechanism involves the cell surface receptor Cdo (also known as Cdon), which binds to Bnip-2 and JLP, scaffold proteins for Cdc42 and p38, respectively; formation of these complexes results in Bnip-2/Cdc42-dependent activation of p38. It has been reported that the tyrosine kinase Abl promotes myogenic differentiation in a manner dependent on its cytoplasmic localization, but the cytoplasmic signaling proteins with which it interacts to achieve this effect are unidentified. We report that Abl associates with both Cdo and JLP during myoblast differentiation. Abl binds a proline-rich motif in Cdo via its SH3 domain, and these regions of Abl and Cdo are required for their promyogenic effects. Cdo is important for full Abl kinase activity, and Abl is necessary for full activation of p38 MAPK, during myogenic differentiation. As seen with myoblasts depleted of Cdo, the diminished differentiation displayed by Abl-depleted cells is rescued by the expression of an activated form of the immediate upstream p38-activating kinase MAPK kinase 6. Abl's promyogenic effect is therefore linked to a multiprotein cell surface complex that regulates differentiation-dependent p38 activation.

19186244
Murine models of holoprosencephaly.
Holoprosencephaly (HPE), the most common developmental defect of the forebrain and midface, is caused by a failure to delineate the midline in these structures. Both genetic and environmental etiologies exist for HPE, and clinical presentation is highly variable. HPE occurs in sporadic and inherited forms, and even HPE in pedigrees is characterized by incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. Heterozygous mutations in eight different genes have been identified in human HPE, and disruption of Sonic hedgehog expression and/or signaling in the rostroventral region of the embryo is a major common effect of these mutations. An understanding of the mechanisms whereby genetic defects and teratogenic exposures become manifest as developmental anomalies of varying severity requires experimental models that accurately reproduce the spectrum of defects seen in human HPE. The mouse has emerged as such a model, because of its ease of genetic manipulation and similarity to humans in development of the forebrain and face. HPE is generally observed in mice homozygous for mutations in orthologs of human HPE genes though, unlike humans, rarely in mice with heterozygous mutations. Moreover, reverse genetics in the mouse has provided a wealth of new candidate human HPE genes. Construction of hypomorphic alleles, interbreeding to produce double mutants, and analysis of these mutations on different genetic backgrounds has generated multiple models of HPE and begun to provide insight into the conundrum of the HPE spectrum. Here, we review forebrain development with an emphasis on the pathways known to be defective in HPE and describe the strengths and weaknesses of various murine models of HPE.

18678706
A Cdo-Bnip-2-Cdc42 signaling pathway regulates p38alpha/beta MAPK activity and myogenic differentiation.
The p38alpha/beta mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway promotes skeletal myogenesis, but the mechanisms by which it is activated during this process are unclear. During myoblast differentiation, the promyogenic cell surface receptor Cdo binds to the p38alpha/beta pathway scaffold protein JLP and, via JLP, p38alpha/beta itself. We report that Cdo also interacts with Bnip-2, a protein that binds the small guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) Cdc42 and a negative regulator of Cdc42, Cdc42 GTPase-activating protein (GAP). Moreover, Bnip-2 and JLP are brought together through mutual interaction with Cdo. Gain- and loss-of-function experiments with myoblasts indicate that the Cdo-Bnip-2 interaction stimulates Cdc42 activity, which in turn promotes p38alpha/beta activity and cell differentiation. These results reveal a previously unknown linkage between a cell surface receptor and downstream modulation of Cdc42 activity. Furthermore, interaction with multiple scaffold-type proteins is a distinctive mode of cell surface receptor signaling and provides one mechanism for specificity of p38alpha/beta activation during cell differentiation.

18227060
Regulation of myoblast motility and fusion by the CXCR4-associated sialomucin, CD164.
Myoblast fusion is fundamental to the development and regeneration of skeletal muscle. To fuse, myoblasts undergo cell-cell recognition and adhesion and merger of membranes between apposing cells. Cell migration must occur in advance of these events to bring myoblasts into proximity, but the factors that regulate myoblast motility are not fully understood. CD164 is a cell surface sialomucin that is targeted to endosomes and lysosomes via its intracellular region. In hematopoietic progenitor cells, CD164 forms complexes with the motility-stimulating chemokine receptor, CXCR4, in response to the CXCR4 ligand, CXCL12/SDF-1 (Forde, S., Tye, B. J., Newey, S. E., Roubelakis, M., Smythe, J., McGuckin, C. P., Pettengell, R., and Watt, S. M. (2007) Blood 109, 1825-1833). We have previously shown that CD164 stimulates myotube formation in vitro. We report here that CD164 is associated with CXCR4 in C2C12 myoblasts. Cells in which CD164 levels are increased or decreased via overexpression or RNA interference-mediated knockdown, respectively, show enhanced or reduced myotube formation and cell migration, the latter both basally and in response to CXCL12/SDF-1. Furthermore, expression of CD164 cytoplasmic tail mutants that alter the endosome/lysosome targeting sequence and, consequently, the subcellular localization in myoblasts, reveals a similar correlation between cell motility and myotube formation. Finally, Cd164 mRNA is expressed in the dorsal somite (the early myogenic compartment of the mouse embryo) and in premuscle masses. Taken together, these results suggest that CD164 is a regulator of myoblast motility and that this property contributes to its ability to promote myoblast fusion into myotubes.

17888203
Holoprosencephaly: new models, new insights.
Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a common congenital malformation that is characterised by a failure to divide the forebrain into left and right hemispheres and is usually accompanied by defects in patterning of the midline of the face. HPE exists in inherited, autosomal dominant (familial) forms and mutation-associated sporadic forms, but environmental factors are also implicated. There are several features of HPE that are not well understood, including the extremely variable clinical presentation, even among obligate carriers of familial mutations, and the restriction of structural anomalies to the ventral anterior midline, despite association with defects in signal transduction pathways that regulate development of many additional body structures. The new animal models described in this review may help unravel these puzzles. Furthermore, these model systems suggest that human HPE arises from a complex interaction between the timing and strength of developmental signalling pathways, genetic variation and exposure to environmental agents.

