21442038
JAK/STAT Pathways in Cytokine Signaling and Myeloproliferative Disorders: Approaches for Targeted Therapies.
Hematopoiesis is the cumulative result of intricately regulated signaling pathways that are mediated by cytokines and their receptors. Studies conducted over the past 10-15 years have revealed that hematopoietic cytokine receptor signaling is largely mediated by a family of tyrosine kinases termed Janus Kinases (JAKs) and their downstream transcription factors, termed STATs (signal transducers and activators of transcription). Aberrations in these pathways, such as those caused by the recently identified JAK2V617F mutation and translocations of the JAK2 gene, are underlying causes of leukemias and other myeloproliferative disorders. This review discusses the role of JAK/STAT signaling in normal hematopoiesis as well as myeloproliferative and myelodisplastic syndromes. This review also summarizes the status of several small molecule JAK2 inhibitors that are currently at various stages of clinical development. Several of these compounds appear to improve the quality of life of patients with myeloproliferative disorders by palliation of disease-related symptoms. However, to date, these agents do not seem to significantly affect bone marrow fibrosis, alter marrow histopathology, reverse cytopenias, reduce red cell transfusion requirements or significantly reduce allele burden. These results suggest that additional mutational events might be associated with the development of these neoplasms and indicate the need for additional therapeutic approaches as the nature of these additional molecular events is better understood.

21225870
Continued azacitidine therapy beyond time of first response improves quality of response in patients with higher-risk myelodysplastic syndromes.
BACKGROUND:: In the AZA-001 trial, azacitidine (75 mg/m(2)/d subcutaneously for Days 1-7 of every 28-day cycle) demonstrated improved survival compared with conventional care regimens in patients with International Prognostic Scoring System-defined intermediate-2- or high-risk myelodysplastic syndrome and World Health Organization-defined acute myeloid leukemia with 20% to 30% bone marrow blasts. METHODS:: This secondary analysis of the AZA-001 phase 3 study evaluated the time to first response and the potential benefit of continued azacitidine treatment beyond first response in responders. RESULTS:: Overall, 91 of 179 patients achieved a response to azacitidine; responding patients received a median of 14 treatment cycles (range, 2-30). Median time to first response was 2 cycles (range, 1-16). Although 91% of first responses occurred by 6 cycles, continued azacitidine improved response category in 48% of patients. Best response was achieved by 92% of responders by 12 cycles. Median time from first response to best response was 3.5 cycles (95% confidence interval [CI], 3.0-6.0) in 30 patients who ultimately achieved a complete response, and 3.0 cycles (95% CI, 1.0-3.0) in 21 patients who achieved a partial response. CONCLUSIONS:: Continued azacitidine therapy in responders was associated with a quantitative increase in response to a higher response category in 48% of patients, and therefore may enhance clinical benefit in patients with higher-risk MDS. Cancer 2011. © 2011 American Cancer Society.

21153773
Therapeutic modalities for patients with lower-risk myelodysplastic syndromes: current options and future directions.
The treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) involves a complex algorithm that depends on multiple factors, including symptoms, performance status, and severity of disease. Current therapies are aimed at promoting hematopoiesis, inhibiting apoptosis, and reducing the risk of transformation to acute myeloid leukemia. Although there is no cure for MDS outside of allogeneic stem cell transplantation, goals of treatment include improvement of peripheral blood cytopenias, reduction of transfusions, improvement of the quality of life, and prolongation of survival. Patients with lower-risk MDS are often asymptomatic and can be monitored for long periods without therapeutic intervention. Anemia, the most common symptomatic cytopenia, warrants treatment in an attempt to eliminate transfusion dependence. This article reviews current treatment strategies for lower-risk MDS and examines the data for selected novel agents that are available or are being developed for the treatment of this disease.

20501913
Discontinuous drug binding to proteins: binding of an antineoplastic benzyl styryl sulfone to albumin and enzymes in vitro and in phase I clinical trials.
Sodium (E)-{N-[2-methyloxy-5-(2',4',6'-trimethoxy-styrylsulfonyl) methylenephenyl]amino}acetate (C(21)H(24)NNaO(8)S, ON 01910.Na) is a novel, synthetic benzyl styryl sulfone, currently in phase I clinical trials in cancer patients. Our objective was to use electrospray mass spectrometry to determine, in intact complexes, the number of drug molecules bound to albumin and selected enzymes. Native and recombinant albumin incubated with the drug, at various molar ratios, revealed simultaneous and discontinuous progression of drug binding, yielding intact albumin-drug complexes containing up to 22 drug molecules. Comparable complex protein-drug patterns were obtained for several enzymes, e.g., carbonic anhydrase. Intact albumin-ON 01910 complexes were also found in all patient samples. The drug-binding profiles were comparable, but not identical, for increasing sampling times and different doses (400-1700 mg/m(2)). We concluded that the techniques developed are capable of detecting the simultaneous formation of intact protein-drug complexes and of determining the number of drug molecules bound to proteins. The results enhance our hypothesis that drug binding may lead to conformational changes in proteins that, in turn, account for the exclusion of specific binding complexes and may influence protein behavior and activity. Application of these techniques reveals new insights about the nature of the antineoplastic drug ON 01910 in patient plasma, and the information obtained may have significance in understanding drug delivery to tumors.

20004792
Hypomethylating agents in myelodysplastic syndromes changing the inevitable: the value of azacitidine as maintenance therapy, effects on transfusion and combination with other agents.
The implication of DNA hypermethylation in the pathogenesis of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) provides a rationale for using hypomethylating agents such as azacitidine. Growing evidence suggests that azacitidine may reverse epigenetic gene silencing at specific genomic targets. AZA-001 established azacitidine as the first agent to provide a significant overall survival benefit in MDS patients. These data confirmed that azacitidine has a progressively cumulative effect on the MDS clone and support the value of maintenance therapy. Prolonged survival was independent of achieving complete response. Azacitidine in combination with histone deacetylase inhibitors might offer better efficacy by modulating the methylation and acetylation states of silenced genes.

19708287
Clinical roundtable monograph. Overall survival and maintenance of MDS patients.
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) represent a collection of heterogeneous malignant bone marrow stem cell disorders that result in the production of dysplastic and ineffective blood cells. The disease is marked by gradually worsening cytopenias and a variable risk for the eventual transformation to acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). The risk of developing MDS increases with age, and disease onset before 50 years is unusual. Several morphologic subtypes of MDS have been identified. Each of these subtypes has specific prognostic and morphologic and/or cytogenetic features which make it unique. The International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) was developed to aid in determining the prognosis of patients with MDS; this system categorizes patients into four risk groups for both overall survival and transformation to AML: low, intermediate-1, intermediate-2, and high. The management of MDS is based on the goal of controlling cytopenia-related symptoms, improving survival, improving quality of life, and decreasing risk of progression to AML. Treatment strategies include supportive care, iron chelation, treatment with hematopoietic growth factors,immunosuppressive therapies including lenalidomide, antithymocyte globulin, chemotherapy (eg, azacitidine, decitabine, low-dose Ara-C, 7+3 chemotherapy), and stem cell transplantation. However, selecting the appropriate therapy for each individual patient is critical to optimize clinical benefit. This monograph discusses treatment selection for the MDS patient,including a discussion of the overall survival and maintenance of MDS patients, how an appropriate therapy should be chosen in the community setting, and how MDS classification and risk stratification impacts treatment decisions.

