21134573
Food allergy herbal formula 2 protection against peanut anaphylactic reaction is via inhibition of mast cells and basophils.
Mast cells and basophils are key effector cells of IgE-mediated anaphylactic reactions. The Chinese herbal formula, food allergy herbal formula 2 (FAHF-2), protects against peanut anaphylaxis in mice. However, the mechanisms underlying this effect are not fully elucidated. To investigate whether FAHF-2 inhibits mast cell/basophil numbers and IgE-mediated activation. Mice with peanut allergy (PNA mice) were treated with FAHF-2 intragastrically for 7 weeks and challenged intragastrically with peanut 1 day and 4 weeks posttreatment. Peripheral blood basophil numbers and peritoneal mast cell numbers and Fc?RI expression were determined. Direct effects of FAHF-2 on the murine mast cell line MC/9, and effects of 4 fractions and 3 compounds isolated from FAHF-2 on rat basophilic leukemia cells (RBL-2H3) and human skin mast cells degranulation and on the IgE-mediated spleen tyrosine kinase signaling pathway, were determined. Although all sham-treated PNA mice developed anaphylaxis, FAHF-2-treated PNA mice were protected against anaphylaxis after peanut challenge at 1 day and 4 weeks posttherapy. Reduction of peripheral blood basophils began after 1 week of treatment and continued for at least 4 weeks posttherapy. The number and Fc?RI expression of peritoneal mast cells were also significantly decreased 4 weeks posttherapy. FAHF-2-treated MC/9 cells showed significantly reduced IgE-induced Fc?RI expression, Fc?RI ? mRNA subunit expression, proliferation, and histamine release on challenge. Fraction 2 from FAHF-2 inhibited RBL-2H3 cell and human mast cell degranulation. Three compounds from fraction 2-berberine, palmatine, and jatrorrhizine-inhibited RBL-2H3 cell degranulation via suppressing spleen tyrosine kinase phosphorylation. Food allergy herbal formula 2 reduction of basophils and mast cell numbers as well as suppression of IgE-mediated mast cell activation may contribute to FAHF-2's persistent protection against peanut anaphylaxis.

20642207
Safety, tolerability, and immunologic effects of a food allergy herbal formula in food allergic individuals: a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, dose escalation, phase 1 study.
Food allergy is a common and serious health problem. A new herbal product, called food allergy herbal formula 2 (FAHF-2), has been demonstrated to have a high safety profile and potent long-term efficacy in a murine model of peanut-induced anaphylaxis. To evaluate the safety and tolerability of FAHF-2 in patients with food allergy. In this randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, dose escalation, phase 1 trial, patients received 1 of 3 doses of FAHF-2 or placebo: 2.2 g (4 tablets), 3.3 g (6 tablets), or 6.6 g (12 tablets) 3 times a day for 7 days. Four active and 2 placebo patients were treated at each dose level. Vital signs, physical examination results, laboratory data, pulmonary function test results, and electrocardiogram data were monitored. Immunomodulatory studies were also performed. Nineteen food allergic participants were included in the study. Two patients (1 in the FAHF-2 group and 1 in the placebo group) reported mild gastrointestinal symptoms. One patient withdrew from the study because of an allergic reaction that was unlikely related to the study medication. No significant differences were found in vital signs, physical examination results, laboratory data, pulmonary function test results, and electrocardiogram data obtained before and after treatment visits. Significantly decreased interleukin (IL) 5 levels were found in the active treatment group after 7 days. In vitro studies of peripheral blood mononuclear cells cultured with FAHF-2 also demonstrated a significant decrease in IL-5 and an increase in culture supernatant interferon gamma and IL-10 levels. FAHF-2 appeared to be safe and well tolerated in patients with food allergy.

20377113
The traditional Chinese herbal formula ASHMI inhibits allergic lung inflammation in antigen-sensitized and antigen-challenged aged mice.
Although asthma is typically characterized as a childhood disease, it can develop later in life. Older asthmatic patients may be at increased risk for corticosteroid adverse effects. We developed a novel traditional Chinese medicine to treat asthma called antiasthma simplified herbal medicine intervention (ASHMI). Herbal products may offer safer adjunctive treatment for older asthmatic patients. To investigate the effects of ASHMI on characteristics of allergic asthma in an aged mouse model of asthma. BALB/c mice (6 weeks old [young] and 6, 12, and 18 months old [aged]) received ASHMI treatment before and during intraperitoneal ovalbumin sensitization and intratracheal challenges. The control groups were untreated, age-matched, ovalbumin-sensitized and ovalbumin-challenged mice (ovalbumin mice) and naive mice. After the final antigen challenge, airway pressure (defined as the time-integrated change in peak airway pressure) after acetylcholine provocation was measured, representing airway hyperresponsiveness, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, sera, lung tissues for histologic analysis, messenger RNA, and collagen were collected. Mean time-integrated change in peak airway pressure values in 6-week-old and 6-, 12-, and 18-month-old ASHMI ovalbumin mice were significantly reduced compared with those of age-matched, nontreated ovalbumin mice. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid eosinophil numbers were significantly lower in all ASHMI ovalbumin mice. Treatment with ASHMI of young and aged ovalbumin mice resulted in significantly decreased lung inflammation, detected via hematoxylin-eosin staining; airway mucous cell metaplasia, determined by means of periodic acid-Schiff staining; and messenger RNA copy numbers of the mucin gene MUC5AC. Levels of ovalbumin specific IgE and the T(H)2 cytokines interleukin 4 (IL-4), IL-5, and IL-13 in lung and splenocyte cultures were reduced. Interferon gamma secretion was increased. Treatment with ASHMI reduced collagen production. Treatment with ASHMI reduces several features of asthma in aged antigen-sensitized and antigen-challenged mice.

19998324
Pharmacology and immunological actions of a herbal medicine ASHMI on allergic asthma.
Allergic asthma is a chronic and progressive inflammatory disease for which there is no satisfactory treatment. Studies reported tolerability and efficacy of an anti-asthma herbal medicine intervention (ASHMI) for asthma patients, developed from traditional Chinese medicine. To investigate the pharmacological actions of ASHMI on early- and late-phase airway responses (EAR and LAR), Ovalbumin (OVA)-sensitized mice received 6 weeks of ASHMI treatment beginning 24 h following the first intratracheal OVA challenge. EAR were determined 30 min following the fourth challenge and LAR 48 h following the last challenge. ASHMI effects on cytokine secretion, murine tracheal ring contraction and human bronchial smooth muscle cell prostaglandin (PG) production were also determined.ASHMI abolished EAR, which was associated with significantly reduced histamine, leukotriene C4, and OVA-specific IgE levels, as well as LAR, which was associated with significantly reduced bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) eosinophils, decreased airway remodeling, and lower Th2 cytokine levels in BALF and splenocyte cultures. Furthermore, ASHMI inhibited contraction of murine tracheal rings and increased production of the potent smooth muscle relaxer PGI(2). ASHMI abrogation of allergic airway responses is associated with broad effects on asthma pathological mechanisms.

21121976
Efficacy, safety and immunological actions of butanol-extracted Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 on peanut anaphylaxis.
Therapies for peanut allergy (PNA) are urgently needed. Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 (FAHF-2) has profound therapeutic effects in a murine PNA model and is safe for food-allergic adults in clinical trials. However, the large FAHF-2 pill-load is not conducive to clinical studies in children. Thus, refining FAHF-2 to decrease pill-load is essential for the inclusion of children in clinical trials and to facilitate studying FAHF-2 as a clinically useful botanical drug. Testing long-term efficacy and safety of a butanol-purified extract of FAHF-2 (B-FAHF-2) in a murine model of PNA, and to explore its immunological mechanisms of action. FAHF-2 was purified by butanol extraction. C3H/HeJ mice with established PNA received the first course of B-FAHF-2 at 6 mg, twice daily for 7 weeks (PNA/B-FAHF-2) or water (PNA/sham) and were then challenged immediately after completing the treatment and six more times every 1-2 months post-treatment up to week 50. Mice then received a second course of B-FAHF-2 treatment at week 52 and were challenged at week 65. In vivo and in vitro immunological effects on T, B and mast cells were also determined. Butanol purification reduced the volume of the effective dose ?5-fold. All PNA/B-FAHF-2 mice were completely protected from PN anaphylaxis until the fifth challenge after the first course of treatment, as compared with PNA/sham mice. Partial protection persisted up to 50 weeks. A second treatment course restored complete protection. B-FAHF-2 significantly suppressed Th2 cytokine, IgE and histamine levels in vivo, and showed direct inhibition of Th2, IgE-producing B cells and mast cell activation in vitro. B-FAHF-2 had a high margin of safety. B-FAHF-2 produced long-lasting protection against PN anaphylaxis for approximately half of the murine life span without side-effects. B-FAHF-2 exhibited direct effects on multiple food allergy effector cells.

20573156
Anti-Asthma Simplified Herbal Medicine Intervention-induced long-lasting tolerance to allergen exposure in an asthma model is interferon-?, but not transforming growth factor-? dependent.
Chronic allergic asthma is the result of a T-helper type 2 (Th2)-biased immune status. Current asthma therapies control symptoms in some patients, but a long-lasting therapy has not been established. Anti-Asthma Simplified Herbal Medicine Intervention (ASHMI™), a Chinese herbal formula, improved symptoms and lung function, and reduced Th2 responses in a controlled trial of patients with persistent moderate to severe asthma. We evaluated the persistence of ASHMI™ beneficial effects following therapy in a murine model of chronic asthma and the immunological mechanisms underlying such effects. Methods BALB/c mice sensitized intraperitoneally with ovalbumin (OVA) received 3 weekly intratracheal OVA challenges to induce airway hyper-reactivity (AHR) and inflammation (OVA mice). Additionally, OVA mice were treated with ASHMI™ (OVA/ASHMI™) or water (OVA/sham) for 4 weeks, and then challenged immediately and 8 weeks post-therapy. In other experiments, OVA mice received ASHMI™ treatment with concomitant neutralization of IFN-? or TGF-?. Effects on airway responses, cytokine- and OVA-specific IgE levels were determined 8 weeks post-therapy. Before treatment, OVA mice exhibited AHR and pulmonary eosinophilic inflammation following OVA challenge, which was almost completely resolved immediately after completing treatment with ASHMI™ and did not re-occur following OVA re-challenge up to 8 weeks post-therapy. Decreased allergen-specific IgE and Th2 cytokine levels, and increased IFN-? levels also persisted at least 8 weeks post-therapy. ASHMI™ effects were eliminated by the neutralization of IFN-?, but not TGF-?, during therapy. ASHMI™ induced long-lasting post-therapy tolerance to antigen-induced inflammation and AHR. IFN-? is a critical factor in ASHMI™ effects.

