21285079
Massive nodular pseudoangiomatous stromal hyperplasia (PASH) of the breast arising simultaneously in the axilla and vulva.
The authors describe a 52-year-old woman with a history of bilateral mastectomies for macromastia caused by massive nodular pseudoangiomatous stromal hyperplasia (PASH), who presented with 2 large growths in her left axilla and groin. These masses had been increasing in size for nearly a year. When excised, the axillary mass had dimensions of 14.0 × 14.0 × 5.5 cm(3) and weighed 664 g. The groin mass was slightly smaller at 14.5 × 11.0 × 5.0 cm(3) and 518 g. Microscopic examination of both masses revealed breast tissue expanded by a hyalinized stroma with prominent slit-like pseudovascular spaces, consistent with PASH. Small incidental foci of PASH are common findings in breast excisions; however, large nodular foci are rare. Furthermore, nodular foci in accessory breast tissue are exceedingly rarer and can raise clinical concerns for malignancy. Histopathologically, PASH can be mistaken for low-grade angiosarcoma. To the authors' knowledge, the present case appears to be the first description of multiple simultaneous foci of massive nodular PASH arising in accessory breast tissue.

21240257
Benign mucocele-like lesions of the breast: revisited.
Mucocele-like lesions of the breast are ruptured ducts that discharge their contents into the stroma. They constitute a spectrum from benign to atypical to malignant. The current management of these lesions diagnosed on core biopsy is excision. The goal of our study was to evaluate the necessity of this practice for benign mucocele-like lesions. Retrospective review of the pathology database from 1 January 2000 to 1 June 2008 identified 61 cases, with follow-up information available in 50 cases. Clinical, radiological, and pathological information was correlated. Core biopsies were reviewed to confirm the diagnosis and verify previous biopsy site. In all, 45 patients underwent surgery, whereas 5 patients were followed for >1 year and remained stable. Patient's ages ranged from 44 to 76 years. Most benign mucoceles were diagnosed stereotactically while targeting calcifications (93.3%); rarely, the lesion was a sonographically detected mass. Most excisions had no residual mucocele (37/45=82%). In seven cases (15.6%), atypical duct hyperplasia was present, three with residual mucocele. In one case, the residual mucocele showed a continuum from florid to atypical duct hyperplasia at the core biopsy site. The other six cases showed atypical duct hyperplasia adjacent to but not directly at the core biopsy site. The sizes of the benign mucoceles ranged from incipient to 0.6?cm, all containing calcifications except one, which was incidental. Radiological-pathological correlation was concordant in all cases except one with suspicious calcification, which was ductal carcinoma in situ on excision. In this series, the largest of its kind, the upstage rate of benign mucoceles diagnosed on core biopsy was 17.8%. With the exception of the ductal carcinoma in situ case, no radiological or morphological features were predictive of atypia. Thus, because of associated atypical duct hyperplasia, sampling reasons, and intralesional heterogeneity, we continue to recommend excision of benign mucocele-like lesions diagnosed on core biopsy.

19961252
Adequate histologic sampling of breast magnetic resonance imaging-guided core needle biopsy.
-The increasing use of contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the breast as a valuable adjunct to mammography and ultrasound in the detection of breast lesions, in association with needle core biopsy taken from the suspicious areas, has major workload implications for histopathology laboratories wherever breast MRI is practiced. -To establish the number of histologic levels necessary for the evaluation of breast MRI-guided needle core biopsy specimens taken from suspicious areas on breast MRI examination. -Retrospective histologic review of a series of breast MRI-guided core needle biopsies, initially examined routinely at 4 levels, in the Pathology Department at Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, New York. -Accurate diagnostic classification was possible after examination of the first level in 95.4% of cases. For a small group of patients (4.4%), 4 levels were considered to provide additional useful information, although this information did not alter the diagnosis. In only a single case (0.2%) was it likely that routine examination of 4 levels could have led to an incidental finding of a very small intraductal papilloma (0.15 cm) present only at the second histologic level. However, this incidental finding would have not changed the patient outcome. -Needle core biopsies for MRI-detected abnormalities should be routinely examined at only 1 level. Further levels may be needed in occasional cases to identify more conclusively an associated pathologic abnormality and may be of particular value when assessing atypical intraductal proliferative epithelial lesions.

19402174
Excision is indicated for intraductal papilloma of the breast diagnosed on core needle biopsy.
Although it has been accepted that intraductal papillomas with atypia or malignancy diagnosed on core needle biopsy require surgical excision, the management of pure intraductal papillomas has been controversial. Because some series reported a small but definite incidence of atypia or malignancy, whereas others claimed that radiologic follow-up was adequate, this study evaluated results of excision of all pure intraductal papillomas diagnosed on core needle biopsy at this institution. By using computerized pathology files from January of 2000 to December of 2004, 200 cases of intraductal papillomas on core needle biopsy were identified. Information regarding excision was available in 104 cases. All specimens were reviewed to confirm both the diagnoses as well as the presence of biopsy site changes in excision specimens, and the findings were correlated with radiologic data. The age of the patients ranged from 25 to 82 years (mean, 55.5). The diagnoses on excision were as follows: intraductal papillomas = 71 cases (68.3%), no residual intraductal papillomas = 16 (15.3%), atypical duct hyperplasia = 8 (7.7%), ductal carcinoma in situ = 6 (5.8%), and invasive carcinoma = 3 (2.9%). In cases with atypia or malignancy, these findings were adjacent to but not in the biopsy site. In cases with atypical duct hyperplasia or ductal carcinoma in situ, a spectrum of histologic changes ranging from florid to atypical duct hyperplasia (14 cases), to ductal carcinoma in situ (6 cases) were present, all involving intraductal papillomas. The upstage rate of pure intraductal papillomas on core needle biopsy to atypia or malignancy on excision was 16.4%. Because of sampling error and the close proximity of atypia or malignancy to the intraductal papillomas (suggesting precancerous potential), excision was recommended of these lesions diagnosed on core needle biopsy. Close radiologic-pathologic correlation was important in the evaluation of these lesions.

19342943
Neurothekeoma and plexiform fibrohistiocytic tumor: mere histologic resemblance or histogenetic relationship?
Neurothekeoma (NTK) and plexiform fibrohistiocytic tumor (PFHT) are dermal neoplasms that share many clinical and histologic features and whose histogenesis is equally disputed. We analyzed the morphologic and immunohistochemical features of 43 NTK and 18 PFHT to evaluate a possible relationship between these tumors. On the basis of the amount of myxoid stroma, we divided NTK into myxoid neurothekeoma (MyNTK) (8 cases), mixed neurothekeoma (MiNTK) (15 cases), and cellular neurothekeoma (CNTK) (20 cases). MyNTK and MiNTK were well circumscribed lesions composed of spindle cells. CNTK had an infiltrative quality and consisted of predominantly epithelioid cells, with over 50% of the cases containing multinucleated giant cells. PFHT were predominantly composed of epithelioid cells in 11 cases, spindle cells in 1, and an even admixture of spindle and epithelioid cells in 6 cases. Their morphologic features (particularly those of the more epithelioid examples) were superimposable to those of CNTK. Immunohistochemically, there was positivity for S100 protein in 8 of 8 MyNTK, 4 of 15 MiNTK, 1 of 19 CNTK, and 0 of 18 PFHT. There was positivity for CD68 in 0 of 8 MyNTK, 6 of 15 MiNTK, 9 of 17 CNTK, and 6 of 11 PFHT. These results suggest the existence of a continuum between MyNTK and MiNTK. Furthermore, the marked morphologic and phenotypic similarities between CNTK and PFHT suggest a common histogenesis for these 2 tumors, different from that of MyNTK and MiNTK.

19061295
Intraductal carcinoma arising in intraductal papilloma in an axillary lymph node: review of the literature and proposed theories of evolution.
We report a case of an axillary lymph node containing benign glandular lesions, intraductal papilloma with florid and atypical duct hyperplasia, and ductal carcinoma in situ. We propose 2 theories for the development of the intraductal papilloma: from adjacent benign glandular inclusions, or from displaced epithelial cells from a previous intraductal papilloma in the ipsilateral breast. This case identifies yet another etiology for false-positive sentinel lymph nodes morphologically and by immunohistochemistry.

18948766
Occult axillary node metastases in breast cancer are prognostically significant: results in 368 node negative patients with 20-year follow-up.


18533395
Ultrasound detection of nonpalpable mammographically occult malignancy.
To evaluate the prevalence of occult malignancy with screening breast ultrasound. All ultrasound-guided core needle breast biopsies performed between January 1, 1999, and June 30, 2001, were retrospectively reviewed. Lesions were identified during screening breast ultrasound in high-risk women with no mammographic or palpable abnormality in either breast, a unilateral mammographic or palpable abnormality in the contralateral breast, or a unilateral mammographic or palpable abnormality in a different quadrant of the same breast. All ultrasound-detected lesions were histologically verified. Six hundred and fifty-two women with a mean age of 49 years underwent 698 biopsies during the study period. Three hundred and forty-nine of these lesions were detected at screening breast ultrasound. Out of 349, 11 (3.2%) had a mammographically and clinically occult malignancy. Nine cancers were found in women with no mammographic or palpable abnormality. Two cancers were found in the same breast as the mammographic or palpable abnormality. None were found in the breast contralateral to a palpable or mammographic abnormality. Screening breast ultrasound of high-risk women has a similar detection rate for occult carcinoma as screening mammography, but has a low positive predictive value in cases where biopsy is performed.

17987337
Atypical ductal hyperplasia at margin of breast biopsy--is re-excision indicated?
Atypical duct hyperplasia (ADH) observed during core needle biopsy is associated with a high rate of cancer upon excision. Controversy exists regarding the need to re-excise ADH involving a margin. The purpose of this study was to determine the rate of residual pathology in patients that underwent re-excision for ADH involving the margin. In a retrospective review of the pathology database from 1 January 2000 to 1 June 2006, we identified 44 lumpectomy specimens with ADH involving the margin; 24 patients (55%) had a re-excision. Slides were reviewed to verify the diagnosis of ADH near the margin and the presence of residual disease on re-excision associated with the biopsy cavity. Patients had pure ADH (15, 63%), ADH and ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) (7, 29%) or ADH with invasive carcinoma (2, 8%). Residual ADH or cancer was found in 14 of 24 patients (58%). Of 15 patients with pure ADH, 6 (40%) had residual pathology: ADH (2), DCIS (2) and invasive carcinoma (2). In this group, 27% of patients were reassessed as having DCIS or invasive carcinoma. Of the 9 patients with cancer, 8 (89%) had residual disease in the form of ADH (4) or DCIS (4). ADH found at the margin of a lumpectomy specimen is associated with a high rate of residual ADH and cancer. Over one quarter of the patients with an initial diagnosis of ADH were reassessed as having DCIS or invasive carcinoma. Re-excision in all patients with ADH involving the margin is recommended.

17350670
Immunohistochemical detection of antiapoptotic protein X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis in mammary carcinoma.
An immunohistochemical survey of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) expression in mammary carcinoma was performed. XIAP, the most potent of the inhibitor of apoptosis family of caspase inhibitors, has been linked to tumor aggressiveness and therapeutic resistance in several malignancies and is considered an attractive target for cancer drug discovery. Routinely processed sections from 94 ductal carcinomas, 9 lobular carcinomas, and 10 ductal carcinomas with lobular components or features were subjected to citrate-based antigen retrieval, immunostained with anti-XIAP (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ), Envision+ reagents (Dako, Carpinteria, CA), and diaminobenzidine. Positive staining was found in 22.7% of grade 1, 44% of grade 2, and 89.5% of grade 3 ductal carcinomas. Strong staining occurred in no cases of grade 1, 13% of grade 2, and 55.2% of grade 3 ductal carcinomas. XIAP staining increased overall with grade of ductal carcinoma in situ as well. The staining intensity of invasive carcinoma correlated with that of the corresponding ductal carcinoma in situ in 70% of cases. Ductal carcinomas overall showed more staining than lobular carcinomas. XIAP is most strongly and commonly detected in grade 3 ductal carcinoma. The degree of XIAP expression appears frequently to be determined in the preinvasive intraductal phase of tumorigenesis. These findings suggest a possible role of XIAP in the more aggressive clinical behavior of grade 3, compared with lower-grade ductal carcinomas.

