21362163
Ha-Ras stabilization mediates pro-fibrotic signals in dermal fibroblasts.
ABSTRACT: Scleroderma (systemic sclerosis; SSc) is a clinically heterogeneous and often lethal acquired disorder of the connective tissue that is characterized by vascular, immune/inflammatory and fibrotic manifestations. Tissue fibrosis is the main cause of morbidity and mortality in SSc and an unmet medical challenge, mostly because of our limited understanding of the molecular factors and signalling events that trigger and sustain disease progression. Recent evidence has correlated skin fibrosis in SSc with stabilization of proto-oncogene Ha-Ras secondary to auto-antibody stimulation of reactive oxygen species production. The goal of the present study was to explore the molecular connection between Ha-Ras stabilization and collagen I production, the main read-out of fibrogenesis, in a primary dermal fibroblast culture system that replicates the early stages of disease progression in SSc. Forced expression of proto-oncogene Ha-Ras in dermal fibroblasts demonstrated the promotion of an immediate collagen I up-regulation, as evidenced by enhanced activity of a collagen I-driven luciferase reporter plasmid and increased accumulation of endogenous collagen I proteins. Moreover, normal levels of Tgf? transcripts and active transforming growth factor-beta (TGF?) implied Ha-Ras stimulation of the canonical Smad2/3 signalling pathway independently of TGF? production or activation. Heightened Smad2/3 signalling was furthermore correlated with greater Smad3 phosphorylation and Smad3 protein accumulation, suggesting that Ha-Ras may target both Smad2/3 activation and turnover. Additional in vitro evidence excluded a contribution of ERK1/2 signalling to improper Smad3 activity and collagen I production in cells that constitutively express Ha-Ras. Our study shows for the first time that constitutively elevated Ha-Ras protein levels can directly stimulate Smad2/3 signalling and collagen I accumulation independently of TGF? neo-synthesis and activation. This finding therefore implicates the Ha-Ras pathway with the early onset of fibrosis in SSc and implicitly identifies new therapeutic targets in SSc.

21285373
Primary cilia dynamics instruct tissue patterning and repair of corneal endothelium.
Primary cilia are required for several signaling pathways, but their function in cellular morphogenesis is poorly understood. Here we show that emergence of an hexagonal cellular pattern during development of the corneal endothelium (CE), a monolayer of neural crest-derived cells that maintains corneal transparency, depends on a precise temporal control of assembly of primary cilia that subsequently disassemble in adult corneal endothelial cells (CECs). However, cilia reassembly occurs rapidly in response to an in vivo mechanical injury and precedes basal body polarization and cellular elongation in mature CECs neighboring the wound. In contrast, CE from hypomorphic IFT88 mutants (Tg737(orpk)) or following in vivo lentiviral-mediated IFT88 knockdown display dysfunctional cilia and show disorganized patterning, mislocalization of junctional markers, and accumulation of cytoplasmic acetylated tubulin. Our results indicate an active role of cilia in orchestrating coordinated morphogenesis of CECs during development and repair and define the murine CE as a powerful in vivo system to study ciliary-based cellular dynamics.

21109758
Fluid shear stress induces renal epithelial gene expression through polycystin-2-dependent trafficking of extracellular regulated kinase.
The cilium and cilial proteins have emerged as principal mechanosensors of renal epithelial cells responsible for translating mechanical forces into intracellular signals. Polycystin-2 (PC-2), a cilial protein, regulates flow/shear-induced changes in intracellular Ca(2+) ([Ca(2+)](i)) and recently has been implicated in the regulation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases. We hypothesize that fluid shear stress (FSS) activates PC-2 which regulates MAP kinase and, in turn, induces MAP kinase-dependent gene expression, specifically, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1). To test this, PC-2 expression was constitutively reduced in a murine inner medullary collecting duct (IMCD3) cell line, and the expression of FSS-induced MCP-1 expression and MAP kinase signaling compared between the parental (PC-2-expressing) and PC-2-deficient IMCD3 cells. FSS induces MAP kinase signaling and downstream MCP-1 mRNA expression in wild-type IMCD3 cells, while inhibitors of MAP kinase prevented the FSS-induced MCP-1 mRNA response. In contradistinction, FSS did not induce MCP-1 mRNA expression in PC-2-deficient cells, but did increase activation of the upstream MAP kinases. Wild-type cells exposed to FSS augmented the nuclear abundance of activated MAP kinase while PC-2-deficient cells did not. PC-2 regulates FSS-induced MAP kinase trafficking into the nucleus of CD cells.

20479248
Prothymosin-alpha inhibits HIV-1 via Toll-like receptor 4-mediated type I interferon induction.
Induction of type I interferons (IFN) is a central feature of innate immune responses to microbial pathogens and is mediated via Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent and -independent pathways. Prothymosin-alpha (ProTalpha), a small acidic protein produced and released by CD8(+) T cells, inhibits HIV-1, although the mechanism for its antiviral activity was not known. We demonstrate that exogenous ProTalpha acts as a ligand for TLR4 and stimulates type I IFN production to potently suppress HIV-1 after entry into cells. These activities are induced by native and recombinant ProTalpha, retained by an acidic peptide derived from ProTalpha, and lost in the absence of TLR4. Furthermore, we demonstrate that ProTalpha accounts for some of the soluble postintegration HIV-1 inhibitory activity long ascribed to CD8(+) cells. Thus, a protein produced by CD8(+) T cells of the adaptive immune system can exert potent viral suppressive activity through an innate immune response. Understanding the mechanism of IFN induction by ProTalpha may provide therapeutic leads for IFN-sensitive viruses.

18566106
Loss of polycystin-1 causes centrosome amplification and genomic instability.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most common monogenetic disease predominantly caused by alteration or dysregulation of the PKD1 gene, which encodes polycystin-1 (PC1). The disease is characterized by the progressive expansion of bilateral fluid-filled renal cysts that ultimately lead to renal failure. Individual cysts, even within patients with germline mutations, are genetically heterogeneous, displaying diverse chromosomal abnormalities. To date, the molecular mechanisms responsible for this genetic heterogeneity remain unknown. Using a lentiviral-mediated siRNA expression model of Pkd1 hypomorphism, we show that loss of PC1 function is sufficient to produce centrosome amplification and multipolar spindle formation. These events lead to genomic instability characterized by gross polyploidism and mitotic catastrophe. Following these dramatic early changes, the cell population rapidly converges toward a stable ploidy in which centrosome amplification is significantly decreased, though cytological abnormalities such as micronucleation, chromatin bridges and aneuploidy remain common. In agreement with our in vitro findings, we provide the first in vivo evidence that significant centrosome amplification occurs in kidneys from conditional Pkd1 knockout mice at early and late time during the disease progression as well as in human ADPKD patients. These findings establish a novel function of PC1 in ADPKD pathogenesis and a genetic mechanism that may underlie the intrafamilial variability of ADPKD progression.

18256315
Mechanoregulation of intracellular Ca2+ in human autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease cyst-lining renal epithelial cells.
Mutations of cilia-expressed proteins are associated with an attenuated shear-induced increase in intracellular Ca(2+) concentration ([Ca(2+)](i)) in renal epithelial cell lines derived from murine models of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). We hypothesized that human ARPKD cyst-lining renal epithelial cells also exhibited dysregulated mechanosensation. To test this, conditionally immortalized cell lines derived from human fetal ARPKD cyst-lining (pool and clone 5E) cell lines with low levels of fibrocystin/polyductin expression and age-matched normal collecting tubule [human fetal collecting tubule (HFCT) pool and clone 2C] cell lines were grown in culture, loaded with a Ca(2+) indicator dye, and subjected to laminar shear. Clonal cell lines were derived from single cells present in pools of cells from cyst-lining and collecting tubules, microdissected from human kidney. Resting and peak [Ca(2+)](i) were similar between ARPKD 5E and pool, and HFCT 2C and pool; however, the flow-induced peak [Ca(2+)](i) was greater in ARPKD 5E (700 +/- 87 nM, n = 21) than in HFCT 2C (315 +/- 58 nM, n = 12; P < 0.01) cells. ARPKD 5E cells treated with Gd(3+), an inhibitor of nonselective cation channels, inhibited but did not abolish the shear-induced [Ca(2+)](i) transient. Cilia were approximately 20% shorter in ARPKD than HFCT cells, but no difference in ciliary localization or total cellular expression of polycystin-2, a mechanosenory Gd(3+)-sensitive cation channel, was detected between ARPKD and HFCT cells. The intracellular Ca(2+) stores were similar between cells. In summary, human ARPKD cells exhibit an exaggerated Gd(3+)-sensitive mechano-induced Ca(2+) response compared with controls; whether this represents dysregulated polycystin-2 activity in ARPKD cells remains to be explored.

17980165
Protein kinase X (PRKX) can rescue the effects of polycystic kidney disease-1 gene (PKD1) deficiency.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a common, genetically determined developmental disorder of the kidney that is characterized by cystic expansion of renal tubules and is caused by truncating mutations and haplo-insufficiency of the PKD1 gene. Several defects in cAMP-mediated proliferation and ion secretion have been detected in ADPKD cyst-lining epithelia. Unlike the ubiquitous PKA, the cAMP-dependent CREB-kinase, Protein Kinase X (PRKX) is developmentally regulated, tissue restricted and induces renal epithelial cell migration, and tubulogenesis in vitro as well as branching morphogenesis of ureteric bud in developing kidneys. The possibility of functional interactions between PKD1-encoded polycystin-1 and PRKX was suggested by the renal co-distribution of PRKX and polycystin-1 and the binding and phosphorylation of the C-terminal of polycystin-1 by PRKX at S4166 in vitro. Early consequences of PKD1 mutation include increased tubule epithelial cell-matrix adhesion, decreased migration, reduced ureteric bud branching and aberrant renal tubule dilation. To determine whether PRKX might counteract the adverse effects of PKD1 mutation, human ADPKD epithelial cell lines were transfected with constitutively active PRKX and shown to rescue characteristic adhesion and migration defects. In addition, the co-injection of constitutively active PRKX with inhibitory pMyr-EGFP-PKD1 into the ureteric buds of mouse embryonic kidneys in organ culture resulted in restoration of normal branching morphogenesis without cystic tubular dilations. These results suggest that PRKX can restore normal function to PKD1-deficient kidneys and have implications for the development of preventative therapy for ADPKD.

