20878285
Can the change in center-edge angle during pincer trimming be reliably predicted?
Femoroacetabular impingement is recognized as a cause of hip pain in young adults and as a precursor to osteoarthritis although many questions persist regarding its management. One in particular is when to resect a pincer lesion and how much to resect. Instability can result from overresection and persistent impingement can result from underresection. We therefore determined the correlation between the change in center-edge (CE) angle and the amount of acetabular rim resection. We performed open acetabular rim trimming on 10 cadaveric hips. Radiographs were performed before and after rim resection every millimeter from 1 to 5 mm and we determined the CE angle. We performed linear regression to establish any correlation of the CE angle with the amount of resection. The CE angle could be predicted by -1.3X + 1.5 (R(2) = 0.99), in which X = the amount of resection for 1 to 3 mm of resection. The average CE angle before resection was 35° ± 8.8° (range, 19°-58°). The CE angle changes in a predictable way with acetabular rim trimming with larger amounts of resection resulting in greater changes in the CE angle. The ability to accurately plan the amount of acetabular rim resection in hip arthroscopy by knowing the exact change in CE angle with amount of rim removal may help prevent overresection or underresection in pincer trimming.

20569237
Tendon-derived stem/progenitor cell aging: defective self-renewal and altered fate.
Aging is a major risk factor for tendon injury and impaired tendon healing, but the basis for these relationships remains poorly understood. Here we show that rat tendon- derived stem ? progenitor cells (TSPCs) differ in both self-renewal and differentiation capability with age. The frequency of TSPCs in tendon tissues of aged animals is markedly reduced based on colony formation assays. Proliferation rate is decreased, cell cycle progression is delayed and cell fate patterns are also altered in aged TSPCs. In particular, expression of tendon lineage marker genes is reduced while adipocytic differentiation increased. Cited2, a multi-stimuli responsive transactivator involved in cell growth and senescence, is also downregulated in aged TSPCs while CD44, a matrix assembling and organizing protein implicated in tendon healing, is upregulated, suggesting that these genes participate in the control of TSPC function.

20506457
Sports-related injuries in the young female athlete.
The number of females participating in sports continues to increase. Adolescent and preadolescent females are at a risk injury to both their open growth plates as well as their joints. The purpose of this article is to review the common injuries seen with the most popular sports with females. Mt Sinai J Med 77:307-314, 2010. (c) 2010 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

19460813
The role of concussion history and gender in recovery from soccer-related concussion.
This study was designed to investigate differences in recovery in male and female soccer athletes. Soccer players with a history of concussion will perform worse on neurocognitive testing than players without a history of concussion. Furthermore, female athletes will demonstrate poorer performance on neurocognitive testing than male athletes. Cohort study (prognosis): Level of evidence, 2. Computer-based neuropsychological testing using reaction time, memory, and visual motor-speed composite scores of the ImPACT test battery was performed postconcussion in soccer players ranging in age from 8 to 24 years (N = 234; 141 females, 93 males). A multivariate analysis of variance was conducted to examine group differences in neurocognitive performance between male and female athletes with and without a history of concussion. Soccer players with a history of at least 1 previous concussion performed significantly worse on ImPACT than those who had not sustained a prior concussion (F = 2.92, P =.03). In addition, female soccer players performed worse on neurocognitive testing (F = 2.72, P =.05) and also reported more symptoms (F = 20.1, P =.00001) than male soccer players. There was no significant difference in body mass index between male and female players (F =.04, P =.85). A history of concussion and gender may account for significant differences in postconcussive neurocognitive test scores in soccer players and may play a role in determining recovery. These differences do not appear to reflect differences in mass between genders and may be related to other gender-specific factors that deserve further study.

19399476
Avoiding pitfalls in anatomic ACL reconstruction.
As interest in double-bundle anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction grows, we continue to refine our technique to perform the most anatomic reconstruction possible. Our experience has brought to our attention the potential mistakes that should be avoided when performing an anatomic double-bundle ACL reconstruction. These mistakes include (1) failure to visualize the femoral insertion completely, (2) use of the clock face to reference femoral tunnel positioning, (3) nonanatomic tunnel placement leading to graft impingement, (4) mismatching tibial and femoral tunnels, and (5) failure to restore the native tension pattern of the ACL. It is also important to recognize that a double-bundle ACL reconstruction is not necessarily equivalent to an anatomic double-bundle reconstruction. This article reviews potential mistakes in DB ACL reconstruction and describes our way of avoiding them.

19356351
Return to sports following operatively treated ankle fractures.
This study investigated which variables influence patients' return to sports after operative fixation of an unstable ankle fracture. Over a 5-year period, 488 patients underwent surgical repair of an unstable ankle fracture. 243 patients preoperatively identified themselves as participating in vigorous activity. Clinical evaluation, functional outcome scores, and radiographic findings were reviewed retrospectively. At 3 months postoperatively, only 3% of all patients had returned to full sports. At 6 months, 14% of patients had returned, while at one year, only 24% of patients had returned. Younger age was predictive of return to sports by 3 months (p = 0.02), 6 months (p = 0.02) and 12 months (p = 0.0001). Males were more likely to return to sports at 6 (p = 0.001) and 12 months (p = 0.040). At 1 year, 88% of recreational athletes had returned to sports, while only 11.6% of competitive athletes had returned to sports (p = 0.043). At 12 months, bimalleolar injuries were more likely to return to sports than unimalleolar ankle fractures (p = 0.042). Furthermore, patients without an associated syndesmotic injury were more likely to return to athletic activities at 12 months (p = 0.011). A patient with an ASA of one or two was ten times more likely to return to sports versus a patient with an ASA of three or four (odds ratio > 10, p = 0.010). Predictors of return to sporting activities at one year include younger age, male gender, no or mild systemic disease, and a less severe ankle fracture. Negative predictors include older age, female gender, and the presence of severe medical comorbidities.

19047722
Patellar instability.
Recurrent patellar instability can result from osseous abnormalities, such as patella alta, a distance of >20 mm between the tibial tubercle and the trochlear groove, and trochlear dysplasia, or it can result from soft-tissue abnormalities, such as a torn medial patellofemoral ligament or a weakened vastus medialis obliquus. Nonoperative treatment includes physical therapy, focusing on strengthening of the gluteal muscles and the vastus medialis obliquus, and patellar taping or bracing. Acute medial-sided repair may be indicated when there is an osteochondral fracture fragment or a retinacular injury. The recent literature does not support the use of an isolated lateral release for the treatment of patellar instability. A patient with recurrent instability, with or without trochlear dysplasia, who has a normal tibial tubercle-trochlear groove distance and a normal patellar height may be a candidate for a reconstruction of the medial patellofemoral ligament with autograft or allograft. Distal realignment procedures are used in patients who have an increased tibial tubercle-trochlear groove distance or patella alta. The degree of anteriorization, distalization, and/or medialization depends on associated arthrosis of the lateral patellar facet and the presence of patella alta. Associated medial or proximal patellar chondrosis is a contraindication to distal realignment because of the potential to overload tissues that have already undergone degeneration.

