21561720
Obesity may protect against benign brain tumors.


21498720
No circulating cytomegalovirus in five patients with glioblastoma multiforme.
Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common and most aggressive type of primary brain tumor, accounting for 52% of all primary brain tumor cases and 20% of all intracranial tumors. Recently, evidence for a viral cause has been postulated, possibly SV40 or more likely cytomegalovirus (CMV). One report indicated that 80% of patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme have detectable cytomegalovirus DNA in their peripheral blood, while sero-positive normal donors and other surgical patients did not exhibit detectable virus. In the current study, we examined peripheral blood of 5 patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme. Peripheral blood was collected in anticoagulated tubes from five patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme referred for radiation therapy. We used standard methods for detecting CMV by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and peripheral blood culture. None of our patients had circulating CMV. There are four subtypes of glioblastoma. We hypothesize that circulating CMV might be limited to some, but not all of these subtypes, and that our failure to detect CMV might be attributed to the fact that none of these patients had the appropriate subtype or subtypes.

20838323
A Systematic Review of Patient-Rated Measures of Radiodermatitis in Breast Cancer Radiotherapy.
During breast cancer radiotherapy, nearly all patients will experience radiodermatitis. Study objectives were as follows: (1) systematically review the literature on radiodermatitis and breast cancer; (2) summarize and describe patient-rated radiodermatitis measures; (3) determine whether consensus exists regarding subjective radiodermatitis measurement; and (4) provide recommendations for future research. PubMed and CINAHL were searched from their inception through August 2009. Study inclusion and exclusion criteria were: full abstract available, manuscript in English, focused on radiodermatitis resulting from breast cancer radiotherapy, and described a patient-rated empirical assessment of radiodermatitis. Three reviewers examined abstracts, and decisions about inclusion were reached by consensus. Twenty-two of 237 mutually identified studies met selection criteria. Using a standardized abstraction form, 3 authors independently extracted relevant information. Results indicated that (1) only 9% of the studies reviewed included a patient-rated measure; (2) generally, extant scales are very brief and focus almost exclusively on physical reactions, and (3) there is no "gold standard" measure of patient-rated radiodermatitis at this time. We conclude that significantly more research is needed to determine the best (most valid, reliable, sensitive, comprehensive) measure(s) to evaluate the experience of radiodermatitis from the patient's perspective, and that further scale development efforts are needed.

20589524
Association between number of cell phone contracts and brain tumor incidence in nineteen U.S. States.
Some concern has arisen about adverse health effects of cell phones, especially the possibility that the low power microwave-frequency signal transmitted by the antennas on handsets might cause brain tumors or accelerate the growth of subclinical tumors. We analyzed data from the Statistical Report: Primary Brain Tumors in the United States, 2000-2004 and 2007 cell phone subscription data from the Governing State and Local Sourcebook. There was a significant correlation between number of cell phone subscriptions and brain tumors in nineteen US states (r = 0.950, P < 0.001). Because increased numbers of both cell phone subscriptions and brain tumors could be due solely to the fact that some states, such as New York, have much larger populations than other states, such as North Dakota, multiple linear regression was performed with number of brain tumors as the dependent variable, cell phone subscriptions, population, mean family income and mean age as independent variables. The effect of cell phone subscriptions was significant (P = 0.017), and independent of the effect of mean family income (P = 0.894), population (P = 0.003) and age (0.499). The very linear relationship between cell phone usage and brain tumor incidence is disturbing and certainly needs further epidemiological evaluation. In the meantime, it would be prudent to limit exposure to all sources of electro-magnetic radiation.

20238306
A qualitative analysis of acute skin toxicity among breast cancer radiotherapy patients.
One of the most common acute side effects of breast cancer radiotherapy is treatment-induced skin changes, referred to as skin toxicity. Yet no research to date has focused expressly on skin toxicity-related quality of life (QOL) in breast cancer radiotherapy patients. Therefore, our aim was to use qualitative approaches to better understand the impact of skin toxicity on QOL. Semistructured interviews were conducted with 20 women (Stage 0-III breast cancer), during their last week of external beam radiotherapy. Each interview was transcribed verbatim, and thematic analysis was performed. Three themes were identified based on the interview responses: First, skin changes affect multiple dimensions of QOL. They cause physical discomfort, body image disturbance, emotional distress, and impair both day-to-day functioning and satisfaction with radiation treatment. Second, individual differences affect women's experiences. Generally African American women, younger women, women who are not currently in a relationship, women who are being treated during the summer, and women who are more invested in their appearance are more distressed by skin toxicity. Third, women use a variety of symptom management strategies including self-medication, complementary/alternative medicine approaches, and psychological strategies. Implications of results are as follows: (1) skin toxicity affects numerous dimensions of QOL, and assessment approaches and psychosocial interventions should address this; (2) individual differences may affect the experience of skin toxicity and should be considered in treatment and education approaches; and (3) participants' own creativity and problem-solving should be used to improve the treatment experience.

19450037
Fatigue during breast cancer radiotherapy: an initial randomized study of cognitive-behavioral therapy plus hypnosis.
The study purpose was to test the effectiveness of a psychological intervention combining cognitive-behavioral therapy and hypnosis (CBTH) to treat radiotherapy-related fatigue. Women (n = 42) scheduled for breast cancer radiotherapy were randomly assigned to receive standard medical care (SMC) (n = 20) or a CBTH intervention (n = 22) in addition to SMC. Participants assigned to receive CBTH met individually with a clinical psychologist. CBTH participants received training in hypnosis and CBT. Participants assigned to the SMC control condition did not meet with a study psychologist. Fatigue was measured on a weekly basis by using the fatigue subscale of the Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy (FACIT) and daily using visual analogue scales. Multilevel modeling indicated that for weekly FACIT fatigue data, there was a significant effect of the CBTH intervention on the rate of change in fatigue (p < .05), such that on average, CBTH participants' fatigue did not increase over the course of treatment, whereas control group participants' fatigue increased linearly. Daily data corroborated the analyses of weekly data. The results suggest that CBTH is an effective means for controlling and potentially preventing fatigue in breast cancer radiotherapy patients.

19226611
A randomized trial of a cognitive-behavioral therapy and hypnosis intervention on positive and negative affect during breast cancer radiotherapy.
Breast cancer radiotherapy can be an emotionally difficult experience. Despite this, few studies have examined the effectiveness of psychological interventions to reduce negative affect, and none to date have explicitly examined interventions to improve positive affect among breast cancer radiotherapy patients. The present study examined the effectiveness of a multimodal psychotherapeutic approach, combining cognitive-behavioral therapy and hypnosis (CBTH), to reduce negative affect and increase positive affect in 40 women undergoing breast cancer radiotherapy. Participants were randomly assigned to receive either CBTH or standard care. Participants completed weekly self-report measures of positive and negative affect. Repeated and univariate analyses of variance revealed that the CBTH approach reduced levels of negative affect [F(1, 38)=13.49; p=.0007, omega(2)=.56], and increased levels of positive affect [F(1, 38)=9.67; p=.0035, omega(2)=.48], during the course of radiotherapy. Additionally, relative to the control group, the CBTH group demonstrated significantly more intense positive affect [F(1, 38)=7.09; p=.0113, d=.71] and significantly less intense negative affect [F(1, 38)=10.30; p=.0027, d=.90] during radiotherapy. The CBTH group also had a significantly higher frequency of days where positive affect was greater than negative affect (85% of days assessed for the CBTH group versus 43% of the Control group) [F(1, 38)=18.16; p=.0001, d=1.16]. Therefore, the CBTH intervention has the potential to improve the affective experience of women undergoing breast cancer radiotherapy.

17517479
Possession of ATM sequence variants as predictor for late normal tissue responses in breast cancer patients treated with radiotherapy.
The ATM gene product is a central component of cell cycle regulation and genomic surveillance. We hypothesized that DNA sequence alterations in ATM predict for adverse effects after external beam radiotherapy for early breast cancer. A total of 131 patients with a minimum of 2 years follow-up who had undergone breast-conserving surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy were screened for sequence alterations in ATM using DNA from blood lymphocytes. Genetic variants were identified using denaturing high performance liquid chromatography. The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group late morbidity scoring schemes for skin and subcutaneous tissues were applied to quantify the radiation-induced effects. Of the 131 patients, 51 possessed ATM sequence alterations located within exons or in short intron regions flanking each exon that encompass putative splice site regions. Of these 51 patients, 21 (41%) exhibited a minimum of a Grade 2 late radiation response. In contrast, of the 80 patients without an ATM sequence variation, only 18 (23%) had radiation-induced adverse responses, for an odds ratio of 2.4 (95% confidence interval, 1.1-5.2). Fifteen patients were heterozygous for the G-->A polymorphism at nucleotide 5557, which causes substitution of asparagine for aspartic acid at position 1853 of the ATM protein. Of these 15 patients, 8 (53%) exhibited a Grade 2-4 late response compared with 31 (27%) of the 116 patients without this alteration, for an odds ratio of 3.1 (95% confidence interval, 1.1-9.4). Sequence variants located in the ATM gene, in particular the 5557 G-->A polymorphism, may predict for late adverse radiation responses in breast cancer patients.

