21150463
Delayed selective cerebral hypothermia decreases infarct volume after reperfused stroke in baboons.
Hypothermia is known to provide neuroprotection from focal ischemia. However, lethal cardiovascular complications resulting from total body cooling have greatly restricted hypothermia as a therapy for stroke. This study determined whether selective cerebral cooling induced after reversible cerebral artery occlusion would decrease the infarct volume. Under general anesthesia, 8 baboons were subjected to 1-hour simultaneous occlusion of the left internal carotid artery and anterior cerebral arteries by transorbital surgical approach. Four animals were treated with selective cerebral hypothermia to 25°C, initiated 2.5 hours after placement of cerebral artery clips. Selective cerebral hypothermia was achieved, after heparinization, by continuous withdrawal of femoral arterial blood into an extracorporeal closed-circuit pump system, cooling by water bath and perfusion into the right internal carotid artery. Pump flow was adjusted to maintain right internal carotid artery pressure near systemic blood pressure. Cerebral cortical temperature was maintained below 27°C for 12 hours, whereas systemic temperature was preserved near normal by convective air mattresses and warm water blankets. Four control animals were maintained at 36°C. Blood pressure, pH, and blood gases were maintained at normal values for both groups. Forty-eight to 72 hours after cerebral artery occlusion, magnetic resonance imaging brain scans were obtained and infarct volume measured. Normothermic baboons had infarction of 35.4±4.4% (mean±SD) of the left cerebral hemisphere compared with 0.5±1% for baboons treated with cerebral hypothermia (P<0.01). In brain-cooled animals, esophageal temperature was maintained greater than 34°C, despite cerebral temperature less than 27°C. Selective brain cooling initiated 2.5 hours after onset of focal ischemia resulted in marked reduction in infarct volume, without cardiovascular derangement.

20886244
New model of reperfused stroke by occlusion of the anterior cerebral artery in baboons.
The understanding of stroke has been greatly enhanced by studies employing nonhuman primate models of focal ischemia. However, devastating neurological disability in previously described stroke models has led to ethical concerns and difficulty achieving prolonged survival for the evaluation of long-term outcome. We determined if reversible occlusion of the anterior cerebral artery in baboons would produce a small infarct with minimal neurological impairment. In six baboons, anesthetized with isoflurane, Guglielmi coils were placed by endovascular technique in the anterior cerebral artery. In two baboons coils were placed for 3 h at the proximal A2 segment. In four baboons coils were placed at the junction of the A2 and A3 segments of the anterior cerebral artery for 1.5 h (n?=?2) or 3 h (n?=?2). The coils were removed and reperfusion confirmed by angiography. Thereafter, the animals were awakened from anesthesia and brain MRI studies were performed at 1 week. Baboons awakened with minimal neurological impairment. Animals subject to occlusion at the proximal A2 segment and animals subject to 1.5 h of occlusion at the junction of A2 and A3 had no infarct. Animals with 3-h occlusion at the junction of A2 and A3 showed infarcts of 3.5% and 2.8% of cerebral hemispheres. This study indicates that reversible anterior cerebral artery occlusion may provide a new humane animal model for small stroke and limited neurological deficit.

20118791
Hypocapnia enhances the pressor effect of phenylephrine during isoflurane anesthesia in monkeys.
Phenylephrine was administered to increase arterial blood pressure in 6 monkeys anesthetized with isoflurane during both normocapnia (arterial partial pressure of CO2 35 to 44 mm Hg) and hypocapnia (arterial partial pressure of CO2 23 to 29 mm Hg). The doses of phenylephrine required to increase mean blood pressure to 33% and 66% above control pressure during hypocapnia [1.7+/-0.9 and 3.1+/-1.7 microg/kg/min (mean+/-SD), respectively] were significantly less than the doses required to achieve the same changes in blood pressure during normocapnia (2.4+/-0.9 and 4.9+/-2.4 microg/kg/min, respectively, P<0.05). In patients with intracranial pathology, for whom hypocapnia is frequently induced, phenylephrine dosage may need to be appropriately reduced.

