21593455
Vascular calcification: harder than it looks.


21168776
Does deleting dendritic cells delete autoimmunity?


19965649
Comparison of gene expression profiles between human and mouse monocyte subsets.
Blood of both humans and mice contains 2 main monocyte subsets. Here, we investigated the extent of their similarity using a microarray approach. Approximately 270 genes in humans and 550 genes in mice were differentially expressed between subsets by 2-fold or more. More than 130 of these gene expression differences were conserved between mouse and human monocyte subsets. We confirmed numerous of these differences at the cell surface protein level. Despite overall conservation, some molecules were conversely expressed between the 2 species' subsets, including CD36, CD9, and TREM-1. Other differences included a prominent peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) signature in mouse monocytes, which is absent in humans, and strikingly opposed patterns of receptors involved in uptake of apoptotic cells and other phagocytic cargo between human and mouse monocyte subsets. Thus, whereas human and mouse monocyte subsets are far more broadly conserved than currently recognized, important differences between the species deserve consideration when models of human disease are studied in mice.

19941125
Methods to study pulmonary dendritic cell migration.
Dendritic cell migration from the airway to the lymph nodes is a key event in the development of airway immunity during infection, allergy, and vaccination. With judicial selection of materials, there are two approaches to study dendritic cell migration to the mediastinal lymph nodes without the induction of inflammation: airway administration of fluorescent OVA and latex beads. Our protocol describes how to label and track pulmonary dendritic cells from the airway and lung to the mediastinal lymph nodes and reveals how to avoid pitfalls and suboptimal assays.

19759373
Regulation of the migration and survival of monocyte subsets by chemokine receptors and its relevance to atherosclerosis.
Monocytes are central mediators in the advance of atherosclerotic plaque, making them a natural therapeutic target for reducing disease burden. Here, we highlight recent advances in our current understanding of monocyte heterogeneity and its relevance to regulation of monocyte accumulation and function within atherosclerotic plaques. Differences that distinguish monocyte subsets include differential expression of chemokine receptors, especially CCR2 and CX3CR1. Ablation of expression of these 2 receptors (or their ligands) in mice has an additive inhibition on monocyte recruitment to atherosclerotic plaques. Moreover, simultaneously interfering with 3 key pathways--CCR2, CX3CR1, and CCR5--essentially abolishes atherosclerosis in mice. Here, we discuss how these chemokine receptors act at multiple points on at least 1 monocyte subset, regulating their mobilization from bone marrow, survival, or recruitment to plaques. Finally, we discuss how this knowledge may be useful clinically, emphasizing that CX3CR1 may in particular be a viable target for therapeutic manipulation of monocyte-derived cell fate in cardiovascular disease.

19733489
Origin of the lamina propria dendritic cell network.
CX(3)CR1(+) and CD103(+) dendritic cells (DCs) in intestinal lamina propria play a key role in mucosal immunity. However, the origin and the developmental pathways that regulate their differentiation in the lamina propria remain unclear. We showed that monocytes gave rise exclusively to CD103(-)CX(3)CR1(+) lamina propria DCs under the control of macrophage-colony-stimulating factor receptor (M-CSFR) and Fms-like thyrosine kinase 3 (Flt3) ligands. In contrast, common DC progenitors (CDP) and pre-DCs, which give rise to lymphoid organ DCs but not to monocytes, differentiated exclusively into CD103(+)CX(3)CR1(-) lamina propria DCs under the control of Flt3 and granulocyte-macrophage-colony-stimulating factor receptor (GM-CSFR) ligands. CD103(+)CX(3)CR1(-) DCs but not CD103(-)CX(3)CR1(+) DCs in the lamina propria constitutively expressed CCR7 and were the first DCs to transport pathogenic Salmonella from the intestinal tract to the mesenteric lymph nodes. Altogether, these results underline the diverse origin of the lamina propria DC network and identify mucosal DCs that arise from pre-DCs as key sentinels of the gut immune system.

19587009
Inflamed lymphatic endothelium suppresses dendritic cell maturation and function via Mac-1/ICAM-1-dependent mechanism.
The lymphatic system is essential for the generation of immune responses by facilitating immune cell trafficking to lymph nodes. Dendritic cells (DCs), the most potent APCs, exit tissues via lymphatic vessels, but the mechanisms of interaction between DCs and the lymphatic endothelium and the potential implications of these interactions for immune responses are poorly understood. In this study, we demonstrate that lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) modulate the maturation and function of DCs. Direct contact of human monocyte-derived DCs with an inflamed, TNF-alpha-stimulated lymphatic endothelium reduced expression of the costimulatory molecule CD86 by DCs and suppressed the ability of DCs to induce T cell proliferation. These effects were dependent on adhesive interactions between DCs and LECs that were mediated by the binding of Mac-1 on DCs to ICAM-1 on LECs. Importantly, the suppressive effects of the lymphatic endothelium on DCs were observed only in the absence of pathogen-derived signals. In vivo, DCs that migrated to the draining lymph nodes upon inflammatory stimuli, but in the absence of a pathogen, showed increased levels of CD86 expression in ICAM-1-deficient mice. Together, these data demonstrate a direct role of LECs in the modulation of immune response and suggest a function of the lymphatic endothelium in preventing undesired immune reactions in inflammatory conditions.

19265143
MHC class I/peptide transfer between dendritic cells overcomes poor cross-presentation by monocyte-derived APCs that engulf dying cells.
In vivo data suggest that monocytes participate critically in cross-presentation, but other data suggest that lymph node resident dendritic cells (DCs) mainly cross-present. Here, we utilized a three-dimensional model of a blood vessel wall that endogenously supports DC development from human monocytes, and we incorporated dying autologous cells in the subendothelial matrix of the model. Flu-infected dying cells promoted monocytes to become mature DCs and cross-present cell-associated Ags for the activation of CTLs. Similar responses were induced by loading the dying cells with the TLR7/8 ligand ssRNA, whereas dying cells loaded with TLR3 ligand were less efficient. Monocyte-derived DCs that developed in this model cross-presented Ag to T cells efficiently regardless of whether they engulfed detectable amounts of labeled dying cells. Unexpectedly, the monocyte-derived cells that directly engulfed dying cells in vitro were not the major APCs stimulating CD8(+) lymphocytes. Instead, bystander DCs acquired more robust capacity to cross-prime through receipt of MHC class I/peptide from the phagocytic, monocyte-derived cells. In mice, lymph node-homing monocyte-derived DCs processed Ags from engulfed cells and then transferred MHC class I/peptide complexes to confer cross-priming capacity to MHC class I-deficient lymph node resident CD8alpha(+) DCs. Thus, natural or synthetic TLR7/8 agonists contained within dying cells promote the conversion of monocytes to DCs with capacity for cross-presentation and for "cross-dressing" other DCs. These data reveal a way in which migratory monocyte-derived DCs and other DCs, like lymph node resident DCs, both mediate cross-presentation.

18981237
Lymph-migrating, tissue-derived dendritic cells are minor constituents within steady-state lymph nodes.
Observations that dendritic cells (DCs) constitutively enter afferent lymphatic vessels in many organs and that DCs in some tissues, such as the lung, turnover rapidly in the steady state have led to the concept that a major fraction of lymph node DCs are derived from migratory DCs that enter the lymph node through upstream afferent lymphatic vessels. We used the lysozyme M-Cre reporter mouse strain to assess the relationship of lymph node and nonlymphoid organ DCs. Our findings challenge the idea that a substantial proportion of lymph node DCs derive from the upstream tissue during homeostasis. Instead, our analysis suggests that nonlymphoid organ DCs comprise a major population of DCs within lymph nodes only after introduction of an inflammatory stimulus.

18769227
Emigration of monocyte-derived cells to lymph nodes during resolution of inflammation and its failure in atherosclerosis.
This review compares the fate of monocyte-derived cells that enter atherosclerotic plaques with those that accumulate at other sites of inflammation. Resolution of inflammatory reactions involves emigration of monocyte-derived cells out of the inflamed site through nearby lymphatic vessels. However, this emigratory process associated with resolution is impaired in atherosclerosis. The mechanism for impeded emigration from plaques in vivo remains to be determined, but multiple factors are likely involved, including specialized properties of artery walls and a negative impact of lipid mediators on monocyte-derived cell migration. Impaired egress would be expected to compound macrophage accumulation within plaques, contribute to build-up of necrotic pools, and explain in part the reticence of many plaques to regress, or resolve. Restoration of the capacity of monocyte-derived cells to leave plaques would, by contrast, be expected to facilitate regression, but it remains to be determined whether restoring egress may sometimes provoke unwanted outcomes as well.

18662693
Optimization of methods to study pulmonary dendritic cell migration reveals distinct capacities of DC subsets to acquire soluble versus particulate antigen.
Dendritic cell migration from the airway to lymph nodes is a key event in the development of airway immunity during infection, allergy, and vaccination. To identify the best approaches to investigate DC migration to lung-draining lymph nodes, we directly compared three methods previously used to track DC migration: airway administration of fluorescent OVA, latex beads, or carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE). We show that two of the methods employed in optimal conditions-administration of fluorescent OVA or latex particles-have broadly relevant utility in studies of pulmonary DC migration, both in the presence and absence of inflammatory mediators. However, CFSE was of limited value because it induced a robust airway inflammatory response upon instillation. Unexpectedly, antigen-loaded tracers with distinct physical properties differently affected the populations that acquired the tracers and the overall T cell response. Specifically, soluble OVA and OVA formulated as a particulate after conjugation to latex beads were acquired in different proportions in vivo by the two characterized subsets of pulmonary DCs: CD11b(hi)CD103(-) and CD11b(lo)CD103(+)langerin(+) DC populations. Consequently, and in line with recent studies that these two subsets of DCs respectively activate CD4(+) and CD8(+) lymphocyte populations, the physical nature of the antigen delivery vehicle strongly influenced the degree of CD4(+) versus CD8(+) OVA-specific T cell activation. This finding suggests that changes in the physical presentation of the same antigen delivered to the airway during natural immune responses or vaccinations may markedly affect the character of the T cell response that ensues.

18292524
Blood monocyte subsets differentially give rise to CD103+ and CD103- pulmonary dendritic cell populations.
There are two major myeloid pulmonary dendritic cell (DC) populations: CD103+ DCs and CD11bhigh DCs. In this study, we investigated in detail the origins of both myeloid DC pools using multiple experimental approaches. We show that, in resting lung, Ly-6ChighCCR2high monocytes repopulated CD103+ DCs using a CCR2-dependent mechanism, and these DCs preferentially retained residual CCR2 in the lung, whereas, conversely, Ly-6ClowCCR2low monocytes repopulated CD11bhigh DCs. CX3CR1 was required to generate normal numbers of pulmonary CD11bhigh DCs, possibly because Ly-6Clow monocytes in the circulation, which normally express high levels of CX3CR1, failed to express bcl-2 and may have diminished survival in the circulation in the absence of CX3CR1. Overall, these data demonstrate that the two circulating subsets of monocytes give rise to distinct tissue DC populations.

18160272
Antigen presentation by monocytes and monocyte-derived cells.
Monocytes are circulating mononuclear phagocytes with a fundamental capacity to differentiate into macrophages. This differentiation can, in the presence of the right environmental cues, be re-directed instead to dendritic cells (DCs). Recent advances have been made in understanding the role of monocytes and their derivatives in presenting antigen to drive immune responses, and we review this topic herein. We briefly discuss the heterogeneity of monocytes in the blood and subsequently raise the possibility that one of the major monocyte phenotypes in the blood corresponds with a population of 'blood DCs' previously proposed to drive T-independent antibody reactions in the spleen. Then we evaluate the role of monocytes in T-dependent immunity, considering their role in acquiring antigens for presentation before exiting the bloodstream and their ability to differentiate into macrophages versus antigen-presenting DCs. Finally, we review recent literature on the role of monocyte-derived cells in cross-presentation and discuss the possibility that monocyte-derived cells participate critically in processing antigen for cross-priming, even if they do not present that antigen to T cells themselves.

18045026
Migration of dendritic cell subsets and their precursors.
The ability of dendritic cells (DCs) to initiate and orchestrate immune responses is a consequence of their localization within tissues and their specialized capacity for mobilization. The migration of a given DC subset is typified by a restricted capacity for recirculation, contrasting markedly with T cells. Routes of DC migration into lymph nodes differ notably for distinct DC subsets. Here, we compare the distinct migratory patterns of plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), CD8alpha(+) DCs, Langerhans cells, and conventional myeloid DCs and discuss how the highly regulated patterns of DC migration in vivo may affect their roles in immunity. Finally, to gain a more molecular appreciation of the specialized migratory properties of DCs, we review the signaling cascades that govern the process of DC migration.

17394405
Inflammation, lymphatic function, and dendritic cell migration.
The lymphatic system is not only essential for maintenance of normal fluid balance, but also for proper immunologic function by providing an extensive network of vessels, important for cell trafficking and antigen delivery, as well as an exclusive environment, the lymph node (LN), where antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and lymphocytes can encounter and interact. Among APCs, dendritic cells (DCs) have a remarkable capacity to traffic from peripheral tissues to the draining LN, which is critical for execution of their functions. To reach the LN, DCs must migrate towards and enter lymphatic vessels. Here, the authors review what is known about the factors that drive this process. They touch particularly on the topic of how DC migration is affected by inflammation and discuss this in the context of lymphatic function. Traditionally, inflammatory mediators are regarded to support DC migration to LNs because they induce molecules on DCs known to guide them to lymphatics. The authors recently showed that inflammatory signals present in a strong vaccine adjuvant induce swelling in LNs accompanied by lymphangiogenesis in the draining LN and radius of peripheral tissue. These increased lymphatics, at least for several days, lead to a more robust migration of DCs. However, the density of lymphatic vessels can become overly extended and/or their function impaired as observed during lymphedema and various chronic inflammatory reactions. Diseases characterized by chronic inflammation often present with impaired DC migration and adaptive immunity. Gaining a better understanding of how lymphatic vessel function may impact adaptive immunity by, for example, altering DC migration will benefit clinical research aiming to manipulate immune responses and manage chronic inflammatory diseases.

17200718
Monocyte subsets differentially employ CCR2, CCR5, and CX3CR1 to accumulate within atherosclerotic plaques.
Monocytes participate critically in atherosclerosis. There are 2 major subsets expressing different chemokine receptor patterns: CCR2(+)CX3CR1(+)Ly-6C(hi) and CCR2(-)CX3CR1(++)Ly-6C(lo) monocytes. Both C-C motif chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) and C-X(3)-C motif chemokine receptor 1 (CX3CR1) are linked to progression of atherosclerotic plaques. Here, we analyzed mouse monocyte subsets in apoE-deficient mice and traced their differentiation and chemokine receptor usage as they accumulated within atherosclerotic plaques. Blood monocyte counts were elevated in apoE(-/-) mice and skewed toward an increased frequency of CCR2(+)Ly-6C(hi) monocytes in apoE(-/-) mice fed a high-fat diet. CCR2(+)Ly-6C(hi) monocytes efficiently accumulated in plaques, whereas CCR2(-)Ly-6C(lo) monocytes entered less frequently but were more prone to developing into plaque cells expressing the dendritic cell-associated marker CD11c, indicating that phagocyte heterogeneity in plaques is linked to distinct types of entering monocytes. CCR2(-) monocytes did not rely on CX3CR1 to enter plaques. Instead, they were partially dependent upon CCR5, which they selectively upregulated in apoE(-/-) mice. By comparison, CCR2(+)Ly-6C(hi) monocytes unexpectedly required CX3CR1 in addition to CCR2 and CCR5 to accumulate within plaques. In many other inflammatory settings, these monocytes utilize CCR2, but not CX3CR1, for trafficking. Thus, antagonizing CX3CR1 may be effective therapeutically in ameliorating CCR2(+) monocyte recruitment to plaques without impairing their CCR2-dependent responses to inflammation overall.

19630762
The fate of monocytes in atherosclerosis.
Monocytes are the primary inflammatory cell type that infiltrates early atherosclerotic plaques. Their recruitment into plaques drives disease progression. Disease interventions that target monocytes could act at several points: alteration in the phenotype of circulating monocyte subpopulations; reduced recruitment of monocytes into plaques; alterations in the survival of monocyte-derived cells in atherosclerosis; and promotion of migratory egress from plaques to bring about resolution of the plaque inflammatory response. All of these points of intervention will be briefly discussed in this article.

