17588632
Effect of inhibition of dynein function and microtubule-altering drugs on AAV2 transduction.
Over the past decade, adeno-associated (AAV) virus has emerged as an important vector for gene therapy. As a result, understanding its basic biology, including intracellular trafficking, has become increasingly important. Here, we describe the effect of inhibiting dynein function or altering the state of microtubule polymerization on rAAV2 transduction. Overexpression of dynamitin, resulting in a functional inhibition of the minus-end-directed microtubule motor protein dynein, did not inhibit transduction. Equally, treatment of cells with nocodazole, or concentrations of vinblastine that result in the disruption of microtubules, had no significant effect on transduction. In contrast, high concentrations of Taxol and vinblastine, resulting in microtubule stabilization and the formation of tubulin paracrystals respectively, reduced rAAV2 transduction in a vector-dose-dependent manner. These results demonstrate that AAV2 can infect HeLa cells independently of dynein function or an intact microtubule network.

20336156
Near-perfect infectivity of wild-type AAV as benchmark for infectivity of recombinant AAV vectors.
Viral vectors derived from adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) are widely used for gene transfer both in vitro and in vivo. The increasing use of AAV as a gene transfer vector, as well as recently shown immunological complications in clinical trials, highlight the necessity to define the specific activity of vector preparations beyond current standards. In this report, we determined the infectious, physical and genome-containing particle titers of several wild-type AAV type 2 (wtAAV2) and recombinant AAV type 2 (rAAV2) preparations that were produced and purified by standard methods. We found that the infectivity of wtAAV2 approaches a physical-to-infectious particle ratio of one. This near-perfect physical-to-infectious particle ratio defines a 'ceiling' for the theoretically achievable quality of recombinant AAV vectors. In comparison, for rAAV2, only approximately 50 out of 100 viral particles contained a genome and, more strikingly, only approximately 1 of the 100 viral particles was infectious. Our findings suggest that current strategies for rAAV vector design, production and/or purification should be amenable to improvements. Ultimately, this could result in the generation of near-perfect vector particles, a prospect with significant implications for gene therapy.

