21320428
Signaling network triggers and membrane physical properties control the actin cytoskeleton-driven isotropic phase of cell spreading.
Cell spreading is regulated by signaling from the integrin receptors that activate intracellular signaling pathways to control actin filament regulatory proteins. We developed a hybrid model of whole-cell spreading in which we modeled the integrin signaling network as ordinary differential equations in multiple compartments, and cell spreading as a three-dimensional stochastic model. The computed activity of the signaling network, represented as time-dependent activity levels of the actin filament regulatory proteins, is used to drive the filament dynamics. We analyzed the hybrid model to understand the role of signaling during the isotropic phase of fibroblasts spreading on fibronectin-coated surfaces. Simulations showed that the isotropic phase of spreading depends on integrin signaling to initiate spreading but not to maintain the spreading dynamics. Simulations predicted that signal flow in the absence of Cdc42 or WASP would reduce the spreading rate but would not affect the shape evolution of the spreading cell. These predictions were verified experimentally. Computational analyses showed that the rate of spreading and the evolution of cell shape are largely controlled by the membrane surface load and membrane bending rigidity, and changing information flow through the integrin signaling network has little effect. Overall, the plasma membrane acts as a damper such that only ?5% of the actin dynamics capability is needed for isotropic spreading. Thus, the biophysical properties of the plasma membrane can condense varying levels of signaling network activities into a single cohesive macroscopic cellular behavior.

21107857
Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate regulates epidermal growth factor receptor activation.
Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate [PI(4,5)P(2) or PIP(2)] is a direct modulator of a diverse array of proteins in eukaryotic cells. The functional integrity of transmembrane proteins, such as ion channels and transporters, is critically dependent on specific interactions with PIP(2) and other phosphoinositides. Here, we report a novel requirement for PIP(2) in the activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Down-regulation of PIP(2) levels either via pharmacological inhibition of PI kinase activity, or via manipulation of the levels of the lipid kinase PIP5K1? and the lipid phosphatase synaptojanin, reduced EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation, whereas up-regulation of PIP(2) levels via overexpression of PIP5K1? had the opposite effect. A cluster of positively charged residues in the juxtamembrane domain (basic JD) of EGFR is likely to mediate binding of EGFR to PIP(2) and PIP(2)-dependent regulation of EGFR activation. A peptide mimicking the EGFR juxtamembrane domain that was assayed by surface plasmon resonance displayed strong binding to PIP(2). Neutralization of positively charged amino acids abolished EGFR/PIP(2) interaction in the context of this peptide and down-regulated epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced EGFR auto-phosphorylation and EGF-induced EGFR signaling to ion channels in the context of the full-length receptor. These results suggest that EGFR activation and downstream signaling depend on interactions of EGFR with PIP(2) and point to the basic JD's critical involvement in these interactions. The addition of this very different class of membrane proteins to ion channels and transporters suggests that PIP(2) may serve as a general modulator of the activity of many diverse eukaryotic transmembrane proteins through their basic JDs.

20803507
Role of systems pharmacology in understanding drug adverse events.
Systems pharmacology involves the application of systems biology approaches, combining large-scale experimental studies with computational analyses, to the study of drugs, drug targets, and drug effects. Many of these initial studies have focused on identifying new drug targets, new uses of known drugs, and systems-level properties of existing drugs. This review focuses on systems pharmacology studies that aim to better understand drug side effects and adverse events. By studying the drugs in the context of cellular networks, these studies provide insights into adverse events caused by off-targets of drugs as well as adverse events-mediated complex network responses. This allows rapid identification of biomarkers for side effect susceptibility. In this way, systems pharmacology will lead to not only newer and more effective therapies, but safer medications with fewer side effects.

20687178
Systems pharmacology.
We examine how physiology and pathophysiology are studied from a systems perspective, using high-throughput experiments and computational analysis of regulatory networks. We describe the integration of these analyses with pharmacology, which leads to new understanding of drug action and enables drug discovery for complex diseases. Network studies of drug-target relationships can serve as an indication on the general trends in the approved drugs and the drug-discovery progress. There is a growing number of targeted therapies approved and in the pipeline, which meets a new set of problems with efficacy and adverse effects. The pitfalls of these mechanistically based drugs are described, along with how a systems view of drug action is increasingly important to uncover intricate signaling mechanisms that play an important part in drug action, resistance mechanisms, and off-target effects. Computational methodologies enable the classification of drugs according to their structures and to which proteins they bind. Recent studies have combined the structural analyses with analysis of regulatory networks to make predictions about the therapeutic effects of drugs for complex diseases and possible off-target effects.

20687176
Drug discovery in academic settings.


20483321
Mechanisms controlling cell size and shape during isotropic cell spreading.
Cell motility is important for many developmental and physiological processes. Motility arises from interactions between physical forces at the cell surface membrane and the biochemical reactions that control the actin cytoskeleton. To computationally analyze how these factors interact, we built a three-dimensional stochastic model of the experimentally observed isotropic spreading phase of mammalian fibroblasts. The multiscale model is composed at the microscopic levels of three actin filament remodeling reactions that occur stochastically in space and time, and these reactions are regulated by the membrane forces due to membrane surface resistance (load) and bending energy. The macroscopic output of the model (isotropic spreading of the whole cell) occurs due to the movement of the leading edge, resulting solely from membrane force-constrained biochemical reactions. Numerical simulations indicate that our model qualitatively captures the experimentally observed isotropic cell-spreading behavior. The model predicts that increasing the capping protein concentration will lead to a proportional decrease in the spread radius of the cell. This prediction was experimentally confirmed with the use of Cytochalasin D, which caps growing actin filaments. Similarly, the predicted effect of actin monomer concentration was experimentally verified by using Latrunculin A. Parameter variation analyses indicate that membrane physical forces control cell shape during spreading, whereas the biochemical reactions underlying actin cytoskeleton dynamics control cell size (i.e., the rate of spreading). Thus, during cell spreading, a balance between the biochemical and biophysical properties determines the cell size and shape. These mechanistic insights can provide a format for understanding how force and chemical signals together modulate cellular regulatory networks to control cell motility.

20443163
Systems approaches to polypharmacology and drug discovery.
Systems biology uses experimental and computational approaches to characterize large sample populations systematically, process large datasets, examine and analyze regulatory networks, and model reactions to determine how components are joined to form functional systems. Systems biology technologies, data and knowledge are particularly useful in understanding disease processes and drug actions. An important area of integration between systems biology and drug discovery is the concept of polypharmacology: the treatment of diseases by modulating more than one target. Polypharmacology for complex diseases is likely to involve multiple drugs acting on distinct targets that are part of a network regulating physiological responses. This review discusses the current state of the systems-level understanding of diseases and both the therapeutic and adverse mechanisms of drug actions. Drug-target networks can be used to identify multiple targets and to determine suitable combinations of drug targets or drugs. Thus, the discovery of new drug therapies for complex diseases may be greatly aided by systems biology.

20407125
Systems pharmacology of arrhythmias.
Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a congenital or drug-induced change in electrical activity of the heart that can lead to fatal arrhythmias. Mutations in 12 genes encoding ion channels and associated proteins are linked with congenital LQTS. With a computational systems biology approach, we found that gene products involved in LQTS formed a distinct functional neighborhood within the human interactome. Other diseases form similarly selective neighborhoods, and comparison of the LQTS neighborhood with other disease-centered neighborhoods suggested a molecular basis for associations between seemingly unrelated diseases that have increased risk of cardiac complications. By combining the LQTS neighborhood with published genome-wide association study data, we identified previously unknown single-nucleotide polymorphisms likely to affect the QT interval. We found that targets of U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drugs that cause LQTS as an adverse event were enriched in the LQTS neighborhood. With the LQTS neighborhood as a classifier, we predicted drugs likely to have risks for QT effects and we validated these predictions with the FDA's Adverse Events Reporting System, illustrating how network analysis can enhance the detection of adverse drug effects associated with drugs in clinical use. Thus, the identification of disease-selective neighborhoods within the human interactome can be useful for predicting new gene variants involved in disease, explaining the complexity underlying adverse drug side effects, and predicting adverse event susceptibility for new drugs.

20080566
Design of versatile biochemical switches that respond to amplitude, duration, and spatial cues.
Cells often mount ultrasensitive (switch-like) responses to stimuli. The design principles underlying many switches are not known. We computationally studied the switching behavior of GTPases, and found that this first-order kinetic system can show ultrasensitivity. Analytical solutions indicate that ultrasensitive first-order reactions can yield switches that respond to signal amplitude or duration. The three-component GTPase system is analogous to the physical fermion gas. This analogy allows for an analytical understanding of the functional capabilities of first-order ultrasensitive systems. Experiments show amplitude- and time-dependent Rap GTPase switching in response to Cannabinoid-1 receptor signal. This first-order switch arises from relative reaction rates and the concentrations ratios of the activator and deactivator of Rap. First-order ultrasensitivity is applicable to many systems where threshold for transition between states is dependent on the duration, amplitude, or location of a distal signal. We conclude that the emergence of ultrasensitivity from coupled first-order reactions provides a versatile mechanism for the design of biochemical switches.

19861414
Cannabinoid 1 receptor and interleukin-6 receptor together induce integration of protein kinase and transcription factor signaling to trigger neurite outgrowth.
Activation of the G(o/i)-coupled cannabinoid 1 receptor (CB1R) has been shown to induce neurite outgrowth in Neuro2A cells through activation of Src kinase and STAT3 transcription factor. Signaling by the interleukin 6 receptor (IL-6R) also activates STAT3 through Jak kinase. We studied if signals from the two pathways could be integrated in a synergistic manner to trigger neurite outgrowth in Neuro2A cells. At low concentrations, when agonist at either receptor by itself has no effect, we found that CB1R and IL-6R stimulation together induced synergistic neurite outgrowth. Signal integration requires activation of transcription factors by Src, Jak, and mitogen-activated protein kinases. Mitogen-activated protein kinase can be activated by both receptors and shows enhanced early activation in the presence of both ligands. CREB and STAT3 transcription factors are required for synergy and show enhanced DNA-binding activity when both receptors are activated. STAT3 plays a critical role in integration of the signals downstream of the two receptors. When both pathways are activated, STAT3 phosphorylation is sustained for 6 h. This prolonged activation of STAT3 requires deactivation of SHP2 phosphatase. Reduction of SHP2 levels by RNA interference results in greater synergy in neurite outgrowth. Simultaneous knockdown of both SHP2 and STAT3 blocks the synergistic triggering of neurite outgrowth, indicating that STAT3 is downstream of SHP2. CB1R and IL-6R co-stimulation enhanced the differentiation of rat cortical neuron primary cultures. These results provide a mechanism where multiple protein kinases and transcription factors interact to integrate signals from G protein-coupled and cytokine receptor to evoke neurite outgrowth in Neuro2A cells.

19648136
Network analyses in systems pharmacology.
Systems pharmacology is an emerging area of pharmacology which utilizes network analysis of drug action as one of its approaches. By considering drug actions and side effects in the context of the regulatory networks within which the drug targets and disease gene products function, network analysis promises to greatly increase our knowledge of the mechanisms underlying the multiple actions of drugs. Systems pharmacology can provide new approaches for drug discovery for complex diseases. The integrated approach used in systems pharmacology can allow for drug action to be considered in the context of the whole genome. Network-based studies are becoming an increasingly important tool in understanding the relationships between drug action and disease susceptibility genes. This review discusses how analysis of biological networks has contributed to the genesis of systems pharmacology and how these studies have improved global understanding of drug targets, suggested new targets and approaches for therapeutics, and provided a deeper understanding of the effects of drugs. Taken together, these types of analyses can lead to new therapeutic options while improving the safety and efficacy of existing medications.

19562802
Systems approach to explore components and interactions in the presynapse.
The application of proteomic techniques to neuroscientific research provides an opportunity for a greater understanding of nervous system structure and function. As increasing amounts of neuroproteomic data become available, it is necessary to formulate methods to integrate these data in a meaningful way to obtain a more comprehensive picture of neuronal subcompartments. Furthermore, computational methods can be used to make biologically relevant predictions from large proteomic data sets. Here, we applied an integrated proteomics and systems biology approach to characterize the presynaptic (PRE) nerve terminal. For this, we carried out proteomic analyses of presynaptically enriched fractions, and generated a PRE literature-based protein-protein interaction network. We combined these with other proteomic analyses to generate a core list of 117 PRE proteins, and used graph theory-inspired algorithms to predict 92 additional components and a PRE complex containing 17 proteins. Some of these predictions were validated experimentally, indicating that the computational analyses can identify novel proteins and complexes in a subcellular compartment. We conclude that the combination of techniques (proteomics, data integration, and computational analyses) used in this study are useful in obtaining a comprehensive understanding of functional components, especially low-abundance entities and/or interactions in the PRE nerve terminal.

19348698
Systems pharmacology and genome medicine: a future perspective.
Genome medicine uses genomic information in the diagnosis of disease and in prescribing treatment. This transdisciplinary field brings together knowledge on the relationships between genetics, pathophysiology and pharmacology. Systems pharmacology aims to understand the actions and adverse effects of drugs by considering targets in the context of the biological networks in which they exist. Genome medicine forms the base on which systems pharmacology can develop. Experimental and computational approaches enable systems pharmacology to obtain holistic, mechanistic information on disease networks and drug responses, and to identify new drug targets and specific drug combinations. Network analyses of interactions involved in pathophysiology and drug response across various scales of organization, from molecular to organismal, will allow the integration of the systems-level understanding of drug action with genome medicine. The interface of the two fields will enable drug discovery for personalized medicine. Here we provide a perspective on the questions and approaches that drive the development of these new interrelated fields.

19348631
Specification of spatial relationships in directed graphs of cell signaling networks.
Graph theory provides a useful and powerful tool for the analysis of cellular signaling networks. Intracellular components such as cytoplasmic signaling proteins, transcription factors, and genes are connected by links, representing various types of chemical interactions that result in functional consequences. However, these graphs lack important information regarding the spatial distribution of cellular components. The ability of two cellular components to interact depends not only on their mutual chemical affinity but also on colocalization to the same subcellular region. Localization of components is often used as a regulatory mechanism to achieve specific effects in response to different receptor signals. Here we describe an approach for incorporating spatial distribution into graphs and for the development of mixed graphs where links are specified by mutual chemical affinity as well as colocalization. We suggest that such mixed graphs will provide more accurate descriptions of functional cellular networks and their regulatory capabilities and aid in the development of large-scale predictive models of cellular behavior.

19155528
Neuro2A differentiation by Galphai/o pathway.
Signaling from G(i/o)-coupled G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), such as the serotonin 1B, cannabinoid 1, and dopamine D2 receptors, inhibits cAMP production by adenylyl cyclases and activates protein kinases, such as Src, mitogen-activated protein kinases 1 and 2, and Akt. Activation of these protein kinases results in stimulation of neurite outgrowth in the central nervous system (CNS) and in neuronal cell lines. This Connections Map traces downstream signaling pathways from G(i/o)-coupled GPCRs to key protein kinases and key transcription factors involved in neuronal differentiation. Components in the Science Signaling Connections Map are linked to Nature Molecule Pages. This interoperability provides ready access to detail that includes information about specific states for the nodes.

19154595
SNAVI: Desktop application for analysis and visualization of large-scale signaling networks.
Studies of cellular signaling indicate that signal transduction pathways combine to form large networks of interactions. Viewing protein-protein and ligand-protein interactions as graphs (networks), where biomolecules are represented as nodes and their interactions are represented as links, is a promising approach for integrating experimental results from different sources to achieve a systematic understanding of the molecular mechanisms driving cell phenotype. The emergence of large-scale signaling networks provides an opportunity for topological statistical analysis while visualization of such networks represents a challenge. SNAVI is Windows-based desktop application that implements standard network analysis methods to compute the clustering, connectivity distribution, and detection of network motifs, as well as provides means to visualize networks and network motifs. SNAVI is capable of generating linked web pages from network datasets loaded in text format. SNAVI can also create networks from lists of gene or protein names. SNAVI is a useful tool for analyzing, visualizing and sharing cell signaling data. SNAVI is open source free software. The installation may be downloaded from: http://snavi.googlecode.com. The source code can be accessed from: http://snavi.googlecode.com/svn/trunk.

19033453
Ordered cyclic motifs contribute to dynamic stability in biological and engineered networks.
Representation and analysis of complex biological and engineered systems as directed networks is useful for understanding their global structure/function organization. Enrichment of network motifs, which are over-represented subgraphs in real networks, can be used for topological analysis. Because counting network motifs is computationally expensive, only characterization of 3- to 5-node motifs has been previously reported. In this study we used a supercomputer to analyze cyclic motifs made of 3-20 nodes for 6 biological and 3 technological networks. Using tools from statistical physics, we developed a theoretical framework for characterizing the ensemble of cyclic motifs in real networks. We have identified a generic property of real complex networks, antiferromagnetic organization, which is characterized by minimal directional coherence of edges along cyclic subgraphs, such that consecutive links tend to have opposing direction. As a consequence, we find that the lack of directional coherence in cyclic motifs leads to depletion in feedback loops, where the number of nodes affected by feedback loops appears to be at a local minimum compared with surrogate shuffled networks. This topology provides more dynamic stability in large networks.

18940805
Models of spatially restricted biochemical reaction systems.
Many reactions within the cell occur only in specific intracellular regions. Such local reaction networks give rise to microdomains of activated signaling components. The dynamics of microdomains can be visualized by live cell imaging. Computational models using partial differential equations provide mechanistic insights into the interacting factors that control microdomain dynamics. The mathematical models show that, for membrane-initiated signaling, the ratio of the surface area of the plasma membrane to the volume of the cytoplasm, the topology of the signaling network, the negative regulators, and kinetic properties of key components together define microdomain dynamics. Thus, patterns of locally restricted signaling reaction systems can be considered an emergent property of the cell.

18940804
Computational biochemistry: systems biology minireview series.


18793125
Modelling cellular signalling systems.
Cell signalling pathways and networks are complex and often non-linear. Signalling pathways can be represented as systems of biochemical reactions that can be modelled using differential equations. Computational modelling of cell signalling pathways is emerging as a tool that facilitates mechanistic understanding of complex biological systems. Mathematical models are also used to generate predictions that may be tested experimentally. In the present chapter, the various steps involved in building models of cell signalling pathways are discussed. Depending on the nature of the process being modelled and the scale of the model, different mathematical formulations, ranging from stochastic representations to ordinary and partial differential equations are discussed. This is followed by a brief summary of some recent modelling successes and the state of future models.

18625721
Retinoic acid utilizes CREB and USF1 in a transcriptional feed-forward loop in order to stimulate MKP1 expression in human immunodeficiency virus-infected podocytes.
Nef-induced podocyte proliferation and dedifferentiation via mitogen-activated protein kinase 1,2 (MAPK1,2) activation plays a role in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nephropathy pathogenesis. All-trans retinoic acid (atRA) reverses the HIV-induced podocyte phenotype by activating cyclic AMP (cAMP)/protein kinase A (PKA) and inhibiting MAPK1,2. Here we show that atRA, through cAMP and PKA, triggers a feed-forward loop involving CREB and USF1 to induce biphasic stimulation of MKP1. atRA stimulated CREB and USF1 binding to the MKP1 gene promoter, as shown by gel shifting and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. CREB directly mediated the early phase of atRA-induced MKP1 stimulation; whereas the later phase was mediated by CREB indirectly through induction of USF1. These findings were confirmed by a reporter gene assay using the MKP1 promoter with mutation of CRE or Ebox binding sites. Consistent with these findings, the biological effects of atRA on podocytes were inhibited by silencing either MKP1, CREB, or USF1 with small interfering RNA. atRA also induced CREB phosphorylation and MKP1 expression and reduced MAPK1,2 phosphorylation in kidneys of HIV type 1-infected transgenic mice. We conclude that atRA induces sustained activation of MKP1 to suppress Nef-induced activation of the Src-MAPK1,2 pathway, thus returning the podocyte to a more differentiated state. The mechanism involves a feed-forward loop where activation of one transcription factor (TF) (CREB) leads to induction of a second TF (USF1).

18508528
Regulation of neurite outgrowth by G(i/o) signaling pathways.
Neurogenesis is a long and winding journey. A neural progenitor cell migrates long distances, differentiates by forming a single axon and multiple dendrites, undergoes maturation, and ultimately survives. The initial formation of neurites during neuronal differentiation, commonly referred to as "neurite outgrowth," can be induced by a large repertoire of signals that stimulate an array of receptors and downstream signaling pathways. The G(i/o) family of heterotrimeric G-proteins are abundantly expressed in the brain and enriched at neuronal growth cones. Recent evidence has uncovered several G(i/o)-coupled receptors that induce neurite outgrowth and has begun to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms. Emerging data suggests that signals from several G(i/o)-coupled receptors converge at the transcription factor STAT3 to regulate neurite outgrowth and at Rac1 and Cdc42 to regulate cytoskeletal reorganization. Physiologically, signaling through G(i/o)-coupled cannabinoid receptors is critical for pro percentral nervous system development. As the mechanisms by which G(i/o)-coupled receptors regulate neurite outgrowth are clarified, it is becoming evident that modulating signals from G(i/o) and their receptors has great potential for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases.

18487186
Design logic of a cannabinoid receptor signaling network that triggers neurite outgrowth.
Cannabinoid receptor 1 (CB1R) regulates neuronal differentiation. To understand the logic underlying decision-making in the signaling network controlling CB1R-induced neurite outgrowth, we profiled the activation of several hundred transcription factors after cell stimulation. We assembled an in silico signaling network by connecting CB1R to 23 activated transcription factors. Statistical analyses of this network predicted a role for the breast cancer 1 protein BRCA1 in neuronal differentiation and a new pathway from CB1R through phosphoinositol 3-kinase to the transcription factor paired box 6 (PAX6). Both predictions were experimentally confirmed. Results of transcription factor activation experiments that used pharmacological inhibitors of kinases revealed a network organization of partial OR gates regulating kinases stacked above AND gates that control transcription factors, which together allow for distributed decision-making in CB1R-induced neurite outgrowth.

18485874
Cell shape and negative links in regulatory motifs together control spatial information flow in signaling networks.
The role of cell size and shape in controlling local intracellular signaling reactions, and how this spatial information originates and is propagated, is not well understood. We have used partial differential equations to model the flow of spatial information from the beta-adrenergic receptor to MAPK1,2 through the cAMP/PKA/B-Raf/MAPK1,2 network in neurons using real geometries. The numerical simulations indicated that cell shape controls the dynamics of local biochemical activity of signal-modulated negative regulators, such as phosphodiesterases and protein phosphatases within regulatory loops to determine the size of microdomains of activated signaling components. The model prediction that negative regulators control the flow of spatial information to downstream components was verified experimentally in rat hippocampal slices. These results suggest a mechanism by which cellular geometry, the presence of regulatory loops with negative regulators, and key reaction rates all together control spatial information transfer and microdomain characteristics within cells.

18443354
HIV-1 upregulates VEGF in podocytes.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is characterized by collapsing FSGS. Because transgenic mice with podocyte-specific overexpression of the vascular endothelial growth factor 164 (VEGF164) isoform also develop collapsing FSGS, we sought to determine whether VEGF plays a role in HIVAN. Compared with controls, immunohistochemistry revealed that kidneys from HIV-1-transgenic mice (Tg26) and from patients with HIVAN had greater expression of both VEGF and its transcriptional regulator, hypoxia-inducible factor 2alpha (HIF-2alpha). Similarly, mRNA and protein levels of VEGF and HIF-2alpha were increased in HIV-infected podocytes in vitro, and this transcriptional upregulation was found to be stimulated by the HIV viral protein Nef in a Src kinase-and Stat3-dependent manner. HIV-1 also upregulated VEGFR2 and its co-receptor neuropilin-1 and suppressed the expression of semaphorin 3a in the podocyte. Exogenous VEGF stimulated proliferation and de-differentiation of podocytes, which are features of collapsing FSGS, and VEGFR2 neutralizing antibodies reversed these features in podocytes infected with HIV-1 or isolated from Tg26 mice. In conclusion, HIV-1 induces VEGF and VEGFR2 expression in podocytes, and this may be a critical step in the pathogenesis of HIVAN.

18407463
Galphao/i-stimulated proteosomal degradation of RGS20: a mechanism for temporal integration of Gs and Gi pathways.
The G(s) and G(i) pathways interact to control the levels of intracellular cAMP. Although coincident signaling through G(s) and G(i)-coupled receptors can attenuate G(s)-stimulated cAMP levels, it is not known if prior activation of the G(i) pathway can affect signaling by G(s)-coupled receptors. We have found that activated Galpha(o/i) interact with RGS20, a GTPase activating protein for members of the Galpha(omicron/i) family. Interaction between Galpha(o/i) and RGS20 results in decreased cellular levels of RGS20. This decrease was induced by activated Galpha(o) and Galpha(i2) but not by Galpha(q), Galpha(i1) or Galpha(i3.) The Galpha(o/i)-induced decrease in RGS20 can be blocked by proteasomal inhibitors lactacystin or MG132. Activated Galpha(o) stimulates the ubiquitination of RGS20. The serotonin-1A receptor that couples to G(o/i) reduces the levels of RGS20 and this effect is blocked by lactacystin, suggesting that G(o/i) promotes the degradation of RGS20. Expression of RGS20 attenuates the inhibition of beta-adrenergic receptor-induced cAMP levels mediated by the serotonin-1A receptor. Prior activation of the serotonin-1A receptor results in loss of the RGS20-mediated attenuation, and the loss of attenuation is blocked when lactacystin is included during the prior treatment. These observations suggest that G(o/i)-coupled receptors, by stimulating the degradation of RGS20, can regulate how subsequent activation of the G(s) and G(i) pathways controls cellular cAMP levels, thus allowing for signal integration.

18323015
Teaching resources. Using web-based discussion forums as a model of the peer-review process and a tool for assessment.
This Teaching Resource describes how to use an online asynchronous discussion as a mechanism to introduce students to the peer-review process, as well as to assess student performance and understanding. This method was applied to a graduate course on signal transduction and the Teaching Resource includes a syllabus, detailed plan for incorporating the online discussion, sample journal club questions, and sample student responses to the discussion forum, faculty responses, and student revisions.

18309063
Inquiry learning. Integrating content detail and critical reasoning by peer review.


18234668
HIV-1 Nef disrupts the podocyte actin cytoskeleton by interacting with diaphanous interacting protein.
The ability of the human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1) protein Nef to induce cytoskeleton changes in infected host cells is a key event in viral replication. In renal podocytes, we found that Nef induced loss of stress fibers and increased lamellipodia, pathological changes leading to proteinuria in HIV-associated nephropathy. These morphological changes were mediated by Nef-induced Rac1 activation and RhoA inhibition. We identified a new interaction between Nef and diaphanous interacting protein (DIP), a recently described regulator of Rho and Rac signaling. We found that the Src homology 3 binding domain of DIP and the Nef PXXP motif were required for this interaction. Nef also interacts with Vav2 in podocytes. DIP and Vav2 both interact directly with Nef in a competitive manner. DIP interacts with p190RhoGAP, and intact DIP was required for Nef-induced phosphorylation of p190RhoGAP. DIP also interacts with Vav2, and although DIP enhanced baseline phosphorylation of Vav2, it was not required for Nef-induced Vav2 activation. In Nef-infected podocytes, Src kinase induces phosphorylation of DIP, p190RhoGAP, and Vav2, leading to RhoA inhibition and Rac1 activation. Inhibition of the Nef-induced signaling pathway by using a dominant negative of either Src or DIP or siRNA for DIP or p190RhoAGAP restored RhoA activity and stress fiber formation in Nef-infected podocytes, whereas siRNA for Vav2 reduced Rac1 activity and formation of lamellipodia. We conclude that in HIV-infected podocytes, Nef, through the recruitment of DIP and p190RhoAGAP to Nef-Src complex, activates p190RhoAGAP and down-regulates RhoA activity.

18178648
Functions of bifans in context of multiple regulatory motifs in signaling networks.
Representation of intracellular signaling networks as directed graphs allows for the identification of regulatory motifs. Regulatory motifs are groups of nodes with the same connectivity structure, capable of processing information. The bifan motif, made of two source nodes directly crossregulating two target nodes, is an overrepresented motif in a mammalian cell signaling network and in transcriptional networks. One example of a bifan is the two MAP-kinases, p38, and JNK that phosphorylate and activate the two transcription factors ATF2 and Elk-1. We have used a system of coupled ordinary differential equations to analyze the regulatory capability of this bifan motif by itself, and when it interacts with other motifs such as positive and negative feedback loops. Our results indicate that bifans provide temporal regulation of signal propagation and act as signal sorters, filters, and synchronizers. Bifans that have OR gate configurations show rapid responses whereas AND gate bifans can introduce delays and allow prolongation of signal outputs. Bifans that have AND gates can filter noisy signal inputs. The p38/JNK-ATF2/Elk-1bifan synchronizes the output of activated transcription factors. Synchronization is a robust property of bifans and is exhibited even when the bifan is adjacent to a positive feedback loop. The presence of the bifan promotes the transcription and translation of the dual specificity protein phosphatase MKP-1 that inhibits p38 and JNK thus enabling a negative feedback loop. These results indicate that bifan motifs in cell signaling networks can contribute to signal processing capability both intrinsically and by enabling the functions of other regulatory motifs.

17855420
AVIS: AJAX viewer of interactive signaling networks.
Increasing complexity of cell signaling network maps requires sophisticated visualization technologies. Simple web-based visualization tools can allow for improved data presentation and collaboration. Researchers studying cell signaling would benefit from having the ability to embed dynamic cell signaling maps in web pages. AVIS is a Google gadget compatible web-based viewer of interactive cell signaling networks. AVIS is an implementation of AJAX (Asynchronous JavaScript with XML) with the usage of the libraries GraphViz, ImageMagic (PerlMagic) and overLib. AVIS provides web-based visualization of text-based signaling networks with dynamical zooming, panning and linking capabilities. AVIS is a cross-platform web-based tool that can be used to visualize network maps as embedded objects in any web page. AVIS was implemented for visualization of PathwayGenerator, a tool that displays over 4000 automatically generated mammalian cell signaling maps; NodeNeighborhood a tool to visualize first and second interacting neighbors of yeast and mammalian proteins; and for Genes2Networks, a tool to connect lists of genes and protein using background protein interaction networks. A demo page of AVIS and links to applications and distributions can be found at http://actin.pharm.mssm.edu/AVIS2. Detailed instructions for using and configuring AVIS can be found in the user manual at http://actin.pharm.mssm.edu/AVIS2/manual.pdf.

17537959
Mitogen-activated protein kinase upregulates the dendritic translation machinery in long-term potentiation by controlling the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway.
Protein synthesis is required for persistent forms of synaptic plasticity, including long-term potentiation (LTP). A key regulator of LTP-related protein synthesis is mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), which is thought to modulate translational capacity by facilitating the synthesis of particular components of the protein synthesis machinery. Recently, extracellularly regulated kinase (ERK) also was shown to mediate plasticity-related translation, an effect that may involve regulation of the mTOR pathway. We studied the interaction between the mTOR and ERK pathways in hippocampal LTP induced at CA3-CA1 synapses by high-frequency synaptic stimulation (HFS). Within minutes after HFS, the expression of multiple translational proteins, the synthesis of which is under the control of mTOR, increased in area CA1 stratum radiatum. This upregulation was detected in pyramidal cell dendrites and was blocked by inhibitors of the ERK pathway. In addition, ERK mediated the stimulation of mTOR by HFS. The possibility that ERK regulates mTOR by acting at a component further upstream in the phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-mTOR pathway was tested by probing the phosphorylation of p90-S6 kinase, phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1), and Akt. ERK inhibitors blocked HFS-induced phosphorylation of all three proteins at sites implicated in the regulation of mTOR. Moreover, a component of basal and HFS-induced ERK activity depended on PI3K, indicating that mTOR-mediated protein synthesis in LTP requires coincident and mutually dependent activity in the PI3K and ERK pathways. The role of ERK in regulating PDK1 and Akt, with their extensive effects on cellular function, has important implications for the coordinated response of the neuron to LTP-inducing stimulation.

17516560
Network analysis of FDA approved drugs and their targets.
The global relationship between drugs that are approved for therapeutic use and the human genome is not known. We employed graph-theory methods to analyze the Federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved drugs and their known molecular targets. We used the FDA Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations 26(th) Edition Electronic Orange Book (EOB) to identify all FDA approved drugs and their active ingredients. We then connected the list of active ingredients extracted from the EOB to those known human protein targets included in the DrugBank database and constructed a bipartite network. We computed network statistics and conducted Gene Ontology analysis on the drug targets and drug categories. We find that drug to drug-target relationship in the bipartite network is scale-free. Several classes of proteins in the human genome appear to be better targets for drugs since they appear to be selectively enriched as drug targets for the currently FDA approved drugs. These initial observations allow for development of an integrated research methodology to identify general principles of the drug discovery process.

17426388
Modelling spatio-temporal interactions within the cell.
Biological phenomena at the cellular level can be represented by various types of mathematical formulations. Such representations allow us to carry out numerical simulations that provide mechanistic insights into complex behaviours of biological systems and also generate hypotheses that can be experimentally tested. Currently, we are particularly interested in spatio-temporal representations of dynamic cellular phenomena and how such models can be used to understand biological specificity in functional responses. This review describes the capability and limitations of the approaches used to study spatio-temporal dynamics of cell signalling components.

17374439
An androgen-IL-6-Stat3 autocrine loop re-routes EGF signal in prostate cancer cells.
Dynamic modulation of information flow within signaling networks allows the cell to respond to micro-environmental changes. This property of the cell, while being essential to survival and eliciting appropriate responses, can also be detrimental to the organism by allowing cancerous cells to evade regulation and proliferate. We determined if changes in expression levels of transcriptional regulators and their interactions could alter routing within signaling networks in prostate cancer cells. Increasing the protein levels of the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) led to Stat3-androgen receptor (AR) complex formation in response to epidermal growth factor (EGF) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) stimulation. Increasing the protein levels of Stat3 increased the EGF induced transcriptional activation of the androgen receptor. Androgen pre-treatment increased Stat3 protein levels in an IL-6 autocrine/paracrine dependent manner in the cells suggesting a feedback loop within cells. Increased Stat3-AR complex leads to a change in the routing of the epidermal growth factor signal allowing the androgen receptor to become activated in a Stat3 dependent manner. Understanding interactions and changes in signal flow within the cell is important to our understanding of signaling networks as well as our ability to identify cellular targets for novel therapies to inhibit cancer progression.

17098795
Compartment-specific feedback loop and regulated trafficking can result in sustained activation of Ras at the Golgi.
Imaging experiments have shown that cell signaling components such as Ras can be activated by growth factors at distinct subcellular locations. Trafficking between these subcellular locations is a regulated dynamic process. The effects of trafficking and the molecular mechanisms underlying compartment-specific Ras activation were studied using numerical simulations of an ordinary differential equation-based multi-compartment model. The simulations show that interplay between two distinct mechanisms, a palmitoylation cycle that controls Ras trafficking and a phospholipase C-epsilon (PLC-epsilon) driven feedback loop, can convert a transient calcium signal into prolonged Ras activation at the Golgi. Detailed analysis of the network identified PLC-epsilon as a key determinant of "compartment switching". Modulation of PLC-epsilon activity switches the location of activated Ras between the plasma membrane and Golgi through a new mechanism termed "kinetic scaffolding". These simulations indicate that multiple biochemical mechanisms, when appropriately coupled, can give rise to an intracellular compartment-specific sustained Ras activation in response to stimulation of growth factor receptors at the plasma membrane.

20562890
Training in systems pharmacology: predoctoral program in pharmacology and systems biology at Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Our recently developed predoctoral training program in pharmacology and systems biology prepares students to become experts in systems-level models of disease that identify therapeutic targets and predict adverse effects or new uses of existing therapeutics. Multiple computational modeling modes are introduced throughout a curriculum that integrates basic cell and molecular sciences with the physiology and pathophysiology of disease states. Problem-based learning exercises enable students from different experimental and computational backgrounds to design experiments and interpret data quantitatively.

18537452
Proximity of intracellular regulatory networks to monotone systems.
Networks that contain only sign-consistent loops, such as positive feedforward and feedback loops, function as monotone systems. Simulated using differential equations, monotone systems display well-ordered behaviour that excludes the possibility for chaotic dynamics. Perturbations of such systems have unambiguous global effects and a predictability characteristic that confers robustness and adaptability. The authors assess whether the topology of biological regulatory networks is similar to the topology of monotone systems. For this, three intracellular regulatory networks are analysed where links are specified for the directionality and the effects of interactions. These networks were assembled from functional studies in the experimental literature. It is found that the three biological networks contain far more positive 'sign-consistent' feedback and feedforward loops than negative loops. Negative loops can be 'eliminated' from the real networks by the removal of fewer links as compared with the corresponding shuffled networks. The abundance of positive feedforward and feedback loops in real networks emerges from the presence of hubs that are enriched with either negative or positive links. These observations suggest that intracellular regulatory networks are 'close-to-monotone', a characteristic that could contribute to the dynamical stability observed in cellular behaviour.

