20855688
Bilateral cavernous sinus involvement by perineural spread of inverted papilloma.


19248937
The evolution of management for inverted papilloma: an analysis of 200 cases.
To assess the evolution of management within one institution with the largest case series and longest clinical follow-up of IP to date in the literature and to compare this management with what has been recently presented in publication. A case series was performed assessing sex, age, presenting symptoms, origin of lesion, staging, primary versus recurrence, radiographic findings, method of treatment, rate of recurrence, and associated malignancy. Two hundred patients (average age, 57) underwent endoscopic or endoscopic-assisted resection of IP. The mean follow-up was 4.3 years (range, 9 months-19 years). Eighty percent of cases over the last decade had prior surgery before presentation. Sixty-three percent were Krouse stage T3, and 25 percent were T4. Combined approaches were used for 57 percent of the most recent 40 cases, including Caldwell-Luc, lateral rhinotomy, medial maxillectomy, trephine, or osteoplastic flap. Inverted papilloma can be addressed endoscopically when possible, with data from this study and the current literature suggesting this is feasible in 43 percent to 66 percent of cases. This decision should be made for each individual case, and variables that will likely affect the decision to use adjuvant external approaches include significant scarring and anatomic distortion from previous surgery, high Krouse stage, and associated malignancy.

18951496
The development and pathologic processes that influence maxillary sinus pneumatization.
The maxillary sinus is universally described as a pyramidal-shaped cavity in the maxilla. Hypoplasia, which can occur unilaterally or bilaterally, is graded by the authors by the degree of failure of descent below the nasal floor in achieving its position adjacent to the posterior dentition in the adult. Unlike early studies using plain X-rays, which considered pneumatization into the zygomatic recess and dental alveolus as criteria, the authors have adopted the above-cited parameters based on computed tomography (CT) imaging, which reveals that even when smaller the sinus retains a pyramidal configuration, although truncated. Rarely, the sinus is excessively pneumatized in the nonpathologic state. Review of the literature failed to reveal a comprehensive study of the conditions that alter maxillary sinus volume and configuration. Based on a retrospective review of 6,000 high resolution CT scans of the paranasal sinuses, the types and relative incidences of these conditions have been determined, and a classification system proposed. The mixed-sex sample group (= 2,540) was comprised of nonpediatric (adolescent and adult) and was of a polyethnic composition. Results showed that enlargement of the sinus is uncommonly encountered, and is produced by air (pneumocele) and mucus (mucocele) entrapment, or by benign tumors which have arisen in the sinus or adjacent maxilla and have grown intracavitarily, with the sinus walls expanding and remodeling to accommodate them. Reduction in size and volume is more frequent. Heredo-familial syndromic conditions reduce sinus size by impaired facial growth centers, or obliteration by dense osteosclerosis. Irradiation for neoplastic disease in the pediatric population similarly, directly effect growth centers, or impairs pituitary function. Another iatrogenic cause, direct surgical intervention (Caldwell-Luc procedure) almost universally alters sinus volume and shape by osteoneogenesis. Midfacial fractures involving the sinus also produce distortion by sclerosis as well as by malpositioning of bone fragments. The principal systemic disorders, sickle cell anemia and osteopetrosis, which diffusely effect medullary bone, do so either through compensatory marrow proliferation or sclerotic new bone formation, thus serving to produce maxillary enlargement and sinus obliteration. The greatest source of maxillary sinus distortion and destruction are neoplasms. Malignant sinonasal and oral cavity tumors produce bony erosion of the sinus walls, whereas benign odontogenic cysts remain external to the sinuses and compress it as they enlarge. Most odontogenic tumors produce external compression and remodeling. Fibro-osseous disorders similarly produce size and shape distortions by external impingement. Although diverse developmental and pathological conditions influence maxillary sinus morphology, there is a limited range of biologic response.

20614323
The role of the human papillomavirus in the pathogenesis of Schneiderian inverted papillomas: an analytic overview of the evidence.
Evidence of an etiological role for human papillomavirus (HPV) in Schneiderian inverted papillomas IP arose in the late 1980's; yet almost three decades later, the association between HPV and IP has yet to be universally accepted. This is probably due to the disparate HPV detection rates in IP reported in the literature. We analyzed the weight of published data in order to address the following questions: why do the HPV detection rates in IP vary so greatly? What is the relationship between low-risk (LR) and high-risk (HR) HPV types and HPV detection rates in IP? Is there a relationship between the presence and type of HPV in IP and recurrence and malignant progression? A search using the Pubmed search engine was performed to identify studies published in English from 01/87 through 12/06 using the MeSH terms ''HPV'' and ''Inverted", "Exophytic", "Oncocytic Schneiderian" or "Fungiform papilloma''. Data was abstracted from publications including histology, HPV target, HPV type, method of detection, etc. HPV results were stratified by histology and other variables. Tests for heterogeneity (between-study variability) were conducted, and weighted prevalence (WP) estimates and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated using a random-effects inverse-variance model stratified on study. The association between HPV IP recurrence was estimated by random-effects inverse-variance weighted odds ratio (OR). Weighted estimates revealed similar detection rates across detection methods, 26.8% (95%CI 16.4-37.2%) by ISH, 25.2% (95%CI 14.7-35.6%) by consensus PCR, and 23.6% (95%CI 12.2-35.0%) by type-specific PCR. A preponderance of HPV 6/11 is found in IP as compared to HPV 16/18; the overall unadjusted ratio of LR to high-risk HR HPV types is 2.8:1 The HPV detection rates significantly increase (Wald t-test P < 0.02) in IPs with high-grade dysplasia (WP 55.8%, 95%CI 30.5-81.0%) and carcinoma (WP 55.1%, 95%CI 37.0-73.2%) as compared to IPs with no dysplasia or mild dysplasia (WP 22.3%, 95%CI 15.9-28.6%). Furthermore, the preponderance of LR HPV in benign IP (ratio LR/HR = 4.8:1) shifts in dysplastic and malignant IP. The LR/HR ratio is 1.1:1 for IPs with high-grade dysplasias, this ratio is inverted to favor HR HPV (1:2.4) for malignant IP. Recurrences developed in 44 of 236 patients; HPV was detected in 27 of 44 IPs (WP 57.9%, 95%CI 31.6-84.2%) that developed recurrences and in 24 of 192 IPs (WP 9.7%, 95%CI 4.4-15.0%) that did not develop recurrence. The presence of HPV was significantly associated with the likelihood of developing recurrence (weighted OR of 10.2, 95%CI 3.2-32.8). We hypothesize that LR HPV may induce IP formation, and then are lost as infected cells are shed, as a "hit and run" phenomenon. HPV detection rates increase in dysplastic IP and SCC-ex-IP with increasing ratio of HR to LR HPV types, compared to nondysplastic IP. We believe that one explanation for the variation in HPV detection rates between different studies may be the actual histologic composition of the cohort. That is, if one series contains a higher frequency of dysplastic and malignant IP, it may have a higher detection rate than another series which contains only nondysplastic IP. We hypothesize that the higher rates of HPV detection in dysplastic and malignant IP may be related to HPV integration. The implication of this is that HPV sub-type testing may identify patients at risk for recurrence, or progression to dysplasia and malignancy, and thus may impact surveillance protocols.

17990684
Correction of caudal deflections of the nasal septum with a modified Goldman septoplasty technique: how we do it.
Correcting deviations of the caudal septum can be challenging because of cartilage memory, the need to provide adequate nasal tip and dorsal septal support, and the longterm effects of healing. The authors describe a minimally invasive, endonasal approach to the correction of caudal septal deviations. The procedure involves a hemitransfixion incision, unilateral flap elevation, and cartilage repositioning by limited dissection and excision.

17202926
Osteonecrosis of the jaw associated with bisphosphonate use: Presentation of seven cases and literature review.
Bisphosphonates, pyrophosphate analogs, are strong osteoclast inhibitors that are used for osteoporosis and in the treatment of solid tumors with bony metastasis. There are growing reports of osteonecrosis associated with the nitrogen containing bisphosphonates, Pamindronate and Zolendronic acid therapy. Theses cases have been most commonly seen and treated by oral surgeons. An untreated maxillary osteonecrosis can lead to pansinusitis, involving the otolaryngologist in these patients' care. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first case series reported in the otolaryngology literature. A retrospective chart review was conducted on patients presenting to the Mount Sinai Hospital Center and at Elmhurst General Hospital between October 2003 and November 2004 with a history of refractory osteomyelitis of the jaws and chronic bisphosphonate therapy. Seven patients were identified with both of these conditions. These patients presented with nonhealing ulcers of the mandible or maxilla. Four of the patients were on bisphosphonate therapy, and the other three had been treated with bisphosphonates. Three of the patients required extensive operations to remove the involved bone. One patient required endoscopic sinus surgery. Increasing reports of bisphosphonate associated osteomyelitis and the difficulty in treating these patients requires further investigation to identify the subset of patients who are at increased risk for this process. The optimal and safe duration of treatment with bisphosphonates needs to be determined.

18768714
Crista galli pneumatization is an extension of the adjacent frontal sinuses.
The crista galli is part of the ethmoid bone and, as such, it could be expected that aeration of the crista would come from ethmoid cells. After observing crista pneumatization from the frontal sinuses in several cases, we undertook this study to establish how often crista galli pneumatization came from the frontal sinuses rather than from the ethmoid complex. Two hundred consecutive CT scans of the paranasal sinuses were studied in adult patients to obtain the incidence of crista galli pneumatization and the cell of origin for this phenomenon. A second group of 132 children, 0-7 years of age, was studied to see if any crista galli pneumatization occurred before frontal sinus development. A third group of 79 children, 7-12 years of age, was also studied to see when crista pneumatization occurred in children whose frontal sinuses had already extended into the squamosal portion of the frontal bone. Of the 200 adult cases, there were 26 patients (13%) with crista galli pneumatization, all from either the left or right frontal sinuses. In the second group of children 0-7 years of age, there were no cases of crista pneumatization. In the third group of children 7-12 years of age, there were 4 cases of crista galli pneumatization, all from well-developed frontal sinuses. Our study indicates that crista galli pneumatization is virtually exclusively from either the left or right frontal sinuses and not from displaced ethmoid complex cells in the frontal recess. This finding may have surgical implications when disease is present in the crista galli.

18467519
Interfrontal sinus septal cell: a cause of obstructing inflammation and mucoceles.
Recent interest in the origin and complications associated with frontal intersinus septal cells prompted us to review our material looking for cases of the uncommon occurrence of a mucocele developing within such a cell. The purpose of this article was to present the imaging findings on 4 cases of mucoceles arising within surgically proven frontal intersinus septal cells. A retrospective review of the case material in our department of otolaryngology since 2000 was made looking for cases of patients with surgically proven frontal intersinus septal cell mucoceles. Institutional review board approval for the review was obtained. Four cases were identified that also had CT and/or MR imaging studies. Examples of 4 additional classic frontal sinus mucoceles and 3 anterior ethmoid mucoceles were also identified for comparison. All 4 of the cases of frontal intersinus septal cell mucoceles had an expanded midline frontal sinus cell, which thinned the posterior and/or anterior frontal sinus tables. The classic frontal sinus mucoceles were either to the left or right side, and any table thinning was off midline. The ethmoid mucoceles were clearly centered below the frontal sinuses. The rare occurrence of a frontal intersinus septal mucocele can be diagnosed on CT and MR imaging studies, because its appearance in the midline is clearly distinct from the more common classic frontal sinus mucoceles that develop within the left or right frontal sinus proper. Distinction is also routinely made from large anterior ethmoid mucoceles.

18388213
The frontal intersinus septal air cell: a new hypothesis of its origin.
Air cells are often seen within the frontal intersinus septum. These cells have traditionally been thought to arise from displaced ethmoid cells from the frontal recess. This study explores the possibility that such cells may actually be diverticula from the frontal sinuses themselves and not of a direct ethmoid origin. A prospective study of 200 consecutive CT scans in the coronal and axial planes was performed on patients without a history of recent trauma. The images were interpreted independently by a radiologist and an otolaryngologist. The CT studies were evaluated for the presence of a central intersinus septal air cell. If such a cell was identified, it was further classified as either being completely isolated from both frontal sinuses by a bony rim or as a communicating diverticulum from one of the frontal sinuses. If a central cell was present, it was also assessed for how much of the height of the intersinus septum it involved (lower one-half or full height). There was a complete concordance of the results between the 2 observers. An intersinus septal air cell was seen in 61 (30.5%) of the 200 cases, and 85.3% of these cells were clearly seen to communicate anteromedially with either one of the frontal sinuses or both frontal sinuses (3 cases). In 9 (4.5%) of the 200 cases, the central cell had no demonstrable connection to either frontal sinus. Of the 61 cases with a central cell, 55 (90.16%) of the cells occupied the full height of the septum, and 6 (9.84%) only involved the lower half of the septum. Contrary to the present convention that frontal intersinus septal cells originate as displaced ethmoid cells from the frontal recess, we found that most such cells are actually diverticula from the frontal sinuses themselves.

17416805
Unique imaging findings in the facial bones of renal osteodystrophy.
Facial skeletal changes associated with hyperparathyroidism assume 3 radiographic patterns: osteitis fibrosa cystica, fibrous dysplasia, and leontiasis ossea. The 3rd pattern is unique to renal osteodystrophy. We report a case of uremic leontiasis ossea with CT images illustrating significant hypertrophy of the jaws with serpiginous tunneling within the bone and poor visualization of the cortical bone.

