19892211
Psychiatric management of HIV/HCV-coinfected patients beginning treatment for hepatitis C virus infection: survey of provider practices.
To determine expert clinical practice in the management of psychiatric status of HIV/hepatitis C virus (HCV)-coinfected patients initiating pegylated interferon/ribavirin for the treatment of hepatitis C. Two hundred thirty-six expert providers were identified and invited by email to complete an online anonymous survey. Ninety-two providers (39%) completed the survey, 24 (26%) of whom are psychiatrists. More than one third of providers indicate that they use or offer the option of antidepressant use prophylactically in HIV-positive patients with no past or current depression beginning HCV treatment, and more than three quarters do so in patients with a history of depression but no current symptoms of depression. The most experienced nonpsychiatrist providers were more likely to use antidepressants prior to the start of treatment in HIV-coinfected patients as compared to in HCV monoinfected patients. There is consensus among providers to leave psychiatric medication unchanged in patients currently treated for unipolar depression. Many expert providers prescribe antidepressants to HIV/HCV-coinfected patients initiating Hepatitis C treatment in the absence of symptoms of depression, despite the lack of data supporting this approach in this population. Research is needed to provide an evidence base to guide the optimal psychiatric management of HIV/HCV-coinfected patients beginning hepatitis C treatment.

19521250
The roles of ethnicity and antiretrovirals in HIV-associated polyneuropathy: a pilot study.
In the pre-highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) era, distal sensory polyneuropathy (DSP) was associated with markers of advanced HIV infection and the use of neurotoxic antiretrovirals (ARVs). As HAART became widespread, and the AIDS epidemic shifted into minority populations, the risk factors for DSP became less clear. We explore the roles of ethnicity and ARV in the development of DSP in an HAART era cohort. Data from 336 HIV-positive adults were obtained from the Manhattan HIV Brain Bank. One hundred four participants had no DSP at entry visit; at least 1 follow-up visit; and a self-identified ethnicity of non-Hispanic white, Hispanic, or African American. Fifty percent of participants developed DSP; of those, 67% were symptomatic. Participants who developed DSP were older (P = 0.02) and had higher CD4 counts (P = 0.001). ARV-DSP was more common in Hispanics (P = 0.02) and intravenous drug users (P = 0.02). There was a trend for higher pain scores in Hispanics with symptomatic DSP (P = 0.08). This study suggests that there are ethnic disparities in the clinical manifestations of HIV-related neuropathies including pain and the susceptibility to ARV-DSP. Further studies of larger cohorts are indicated to explore the etiology of these differences.

19052538
The spectrum of kidney disease in patients with AIDS in the era of antiretroviral therapy.
With prolonged survival and aging of the HIV-infected population in the era of antiretroviral therapy, biopsy series have found a broad spectrum of HIV-related and co-morbid kidney disease in these patients. Our study describes the variety of renal pathology found in a prospective cohort of antiretroviral-experienced patients (the Manhattan HIV Brain Bank) who had consented to postmortem organ donation. Nearly one-third of 89 kidney tissue donors had chronic kidney disease, and evidence of some renal pathology was found in 75. The most common diagnoses were arterionephrosclerosis, HIV-associated nephropathy and glomerulonephritis. Other diagnoses included pyelonephritis, interstitial nephritis, diabetic nephropathy, fungal infection and amyloidosis. Excluding 2 instances of acute tubular necrosis, slightly over one-third of the cases would have been predicted using current diagnostic criteria for chronic kidney disease. Based on semi-quantitative analysis of stored specimens, pre-mortem microalbuminuria testing could have identified an additional 12 cases. Future studies are needed to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of more sensitive methods for defining chronic kidney disease, in order to identify HIV-infected patients with early kidney disease who may benefit from antiretroviral therapy and other interventions known to delay disease progression and prevent complications.

18695060
Motor function and human immunodeficiency virus-associated cognitive impairment in a highly active antiretroviral therapy-era cohort.
Cognitive impairment has long been recognized as a manifestation of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. However, highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has altered the neurologic manifestations of HIV. To develop a measure to quantify the motor abnormalities included in the original descriptions of HIV-associated dementia (HAD); to determine whether motor, affective, and behavioral dysfunction predict cognitive impairment; and to determine whether quantitative motor testing is a helpful adjunct in the diagnosis of HAD in a complex population from the HAART era. Neurologic and neuropsychological data were collected from the Manhattan HIV Brain Bank, a longitudinal cohort study of patients with advanced HIV. The HIV-Dementia Motor Scale (HDMS) was developed and validated and cognitive and affective or behavioral function was quantified using global neuropsychological T scores, the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), and an independent assessment of apathy. Relationships among cognitive, motor, affective, and behavioral performance were examined using correlation, linear regression, and analyses of variance. An urban AIDS research center. A total of 260 HIV-positive, predominantly minority patients. The HDMS scores and global neuropsychological T scores. The HDMS and BDI scores were independent predictors of cognitive impairment. Significant cognitive impairment was found in patients with motor dysfunction. Patients diagnosed as having HAD had a greater degree of motor impairment than those with other neurocognitive diagnoses. Motor, affective, and behavioral abnormalities predict cognitive impairment in HIV-positive patients in this HAART-era cohort. The HDMS may be useful in the assignment of HIV-associated neurocognitive impairment in HIV populations in which normative data or neuropsychological test design is not optimal.

18300072
Clinicopathologic correlates of hepatitis C virus in brain: a pilot study.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) has been detected in the brain tissues of 10 individuals reported to date; it is unclear what clinical factors are associated with this, and with what frequency it occurs. Accordingly, a pilot analysis utilizing reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT- PCR) to detect and sequence HCV in premortem plasma and postmortem brain and liver from 20 human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected and 10 HIV-naive individuals was undertaken. RNA encoding the first 126 amino acids of the HCV E1 envelope protein and the majority of the E1 signal sequence was analyzed in parallel with an 80-base-long segment of the 5' untranslated region (UTR). Liver HCV was detected only in subjects with premortem HCV viremia (10 HIV-infected and 3 HIV-naive). Brain HCV was detected in 6/10 HCV/HIV-coinfected and 1/3 HCV-monoinfected subjects. In the setting of HIV, the magnitude of plasma HCV load did not correlate with the presence of brain HCV. However, coinfected patients with brain HCV were more often off antiretroviral therapy and tended to have higher plasma HIV loads than those with HCV restricted to liver. Furthermore, premortem cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed that HCV/HIV-coinfected patients with brain HCV had detectable CSF HIV, whereas those without brain HCV had undetectable CSF HIV loads (P = .0205). Neuropsychologic tests showed a trend for hierarchical impairment of abstraction/executive functioning in HIV/HCV coinfection, with mean T scores for HIV monoinfected patients 43.2 (7.3), for liver-only HCV 39.5 (9.0), and for those with HCV in brain and liver 33.2 (5.1) (P = .0927). Predominant brain HCV sequences did not match those of the plasma or liver in 4 of the 6 coinfected patients analyzed. We conclude that in the setting of HIV/HCV coinfection, brain HCV is a common phenomenon unrelated to the magnitude of HCV viremia, but related to active HIV disease and detectable CSF HIV. Furthermore, there is sequence evidence of brain compartmentalization. Differences in abstraction/executive function of HCV/HIV coinfected patients compared to HIV monoinfected warrant further studies to determine if neuropsychiatric effects are predicated upon brain infection.

18275278
Molecular and bioinformatic evidence of hepatitis C virus evolution in brain.
Neurocognitive deficits in patients with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection prompted a search for HCV in brain. HCV was present in the brains of 7 (54%) of 13 patients with viremia, as determined by 5' UTR and E1 (envelope 1) gene analysis. Brain HCV RNA consensus sequences differed from those in plasma and liver in 4 (57%) of 7 patients. The quality of HCV RNA from postmortem brain and liver was assessed and demonstrated to be suitable for sequence analysis. Quasispecies analysis revealed that several mutations present in clones from >1 brain region were absent in clones from liver and plasma. Brain-specific mutations defined several families of related sequences. The patterns of brain-specific mutations in these families were consistent with the evolution of HCV RNA from a common ancestor. Single-nucleotide-polymorphism analysis confirmed that a prominent brain-specific mutation constituted approximately 10% of HCV RNA in cerebellum and medulla but that this mutation was undetectable in the liver and plasma of the same patient. This study introduces novel methods for assessing RNA from postmortem samples. It increases the reported cases of HCV in the brain, provides the first E1 sequences from the brain, and contributes to the growing evidence that HCV replicates and evolves within the brain.

19756243
Segmentation of Brain Immunohistochemistry Images Using Clustering of Linear Centroids and Regional Shapes.
A generalized clustering algorithm utilizing the geometrical shapes of clusters for segmentation of colored brain immunohistological images is presented. To simplify the computation, the dimension of vectors composed from the pixel RGB components is reduced from three to two by applying a de-correlation mapping with the orthogonal bases of the eigenvectors of the auto-covariance matrix. Since the brain immunohistochemical images have stretched clusters that appear long and narrow in geometrical shape, we use centroids of straight lines instead of single points to approximate the clusters. An iterative algorithm is developed to optimize the linear centroids by minimizing the approximation mean-squared error. The partitioning of the two-dimensional vector domain into three portions classifies each image pixel into one of the three classes: The microglial cell cytoplasm, the combined hematoxylin stained cell nuclei and the neuropil, and the pale background. Regions of the combined hematoxylin stained cell nuclei and the neuropil are to be separated based on the differences in their regional shapes. The segmentation results of real immunohistochemical images of brain microglia are provided and discussed.

17674313
Mirtazapine in progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy associated with polycythemia vera.
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a usually fatal cerebral white matter disease found in patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection and other immunocompromised states. We present the case of a 63-year-old woman with polycythemia vera who developed a progressive focal neurological deficit with white matter abnormalities on magnetic resonance images of the brain that was proved on biopsy to be PML. She was treated with the serotonin reuptake inhibitor mirtazapine and remains neurologically stable, with resolution of cerebral lesions, >2 years after diagnosis. We propose that mirtazapine should be investigated further for use in PML.

19153378
Inflammatory pseudotumor associated with HIV, JCV, and immune reconstitution syndrome.


