18589344
The association of race and sex with the underuse of stroke prevention measures.
Underuse of effective stroke prevention measures has been demonstrated in the general population. Blacks and Hispanics are at increased risk of recurrent stroke relative to white non-Hispanics. More profound underuse of prevention measures may contribute to this disparity. In this study we attempted to compare the degree of underuse of diagnostic and treatment strategies in patients of these racial/ethnic groups with recent ischemic stroke. At 4 participating urban hospitals, patient charts were reviewed with regard to the completeness of the diagnostic evaluation, discharge treatment regimen, and stroke risk factor and antithrombotic medication use at 6 months postdischarge. Of 501 patients hospitalized with acute ischemic stroke, almost all received electrocardiograms and brain imaging, 75% had carotid artery evaluations, and 70% had serum lipid determinations. Blacks and women were less likely to have complete evaluations. At discharge, 88% of patients received antithrombotic medications and 89% of patients were prescribed antihypertensive medications appropriately, but only 65% were prescribed lipid-lowering medications appropriately, with blacks least likely to receive appropriate prescriptions. At 6 months poststroke, of the 200 patients with data available for evaluation, 72% exhibited underuse of at least one stroke prevention measure. Blacks (81.6%) were more likely to experience underuse than Hispanics (62.5%) or whites (66.7%). Women were more likely to receive incomplete inhospital evaluations and discharge regimens. There is clinically important underuse of effective diagnostic and prevention measures in each of the groups studied, especially among blacks.

18154989
Association between minor and major surgical complications after carotid endarterectomy: results of the New York Carotid Artery Surgery study.
Most studies on outcomes of carotid endarterectomy (CEA) have focused on the major complications of death and stroke. Less is known about minor but more common surgical complications such as hematoma, cranial nerve palsy, and wound infection. This study used data from a large, population-based cohort study to describe the incidence of minor surgical complications after CEA and examine associations between minor and major complications. The New York Carotid Artery Surgery (NYCAS) study examined all Medicare beneficiaries who underwent CEA from January 1998 to June 1999 in NY State. Detailed clinical information on preoperative characteristics and complications < or =30 days of surgery was abstracted from hospital charts. Associations between minor (cranial nerve palsies, hematoma, and wound infection) and major complications (death/stroke) were examined with chi(2) tests and multivariate logistic regression. The NYCAS study had data on 9308 CEAs performed by 482 surgeons in 167 hospitals. Overall, 10% of patients had a minor surgical complication (cranial nerve (CN) palsy, 5.5%; hematoma, 5.0%; and wound infection, 0.2%). Cardiac complications occurred in 3.9% (myocardial 1.1%, unstable angina 0.9%, pulmonary edema 2.1%, and ventricular tachycardia 0.8%). In both unadjusted and adjusted analyses, the occurrence of any minor surgical complication, CN palsy alone, or hematoma alone was associated with 3 to 4-fold greater odds of perioperative stroke or combined risk of death and nonfatal stroke (P < 0.0001). Patients with cardiac complications had 4 to 5-fold increased odds of stroke or combined risk of death and stroke. Minor surgical complications are common after CEA and are associated with much higher risk of death and stroke. Patient factors, process factors, and direct causality are involved in this relationship, but future work will be needed to better understand their relative contributions.

17903949
Coagulation abnormalities following primary intracerebral hemorrhage.
Systemic hemostatic activation following primary intracerebral hemorrhage (PICH) has been described, particularly with intraventricular or subarachnoid extension. Our objective was to study the occurrence of abnormalities of coagulation as measured by partial thromboplastin time, international normalized ratio, and platelet count in patients with PICH and no obvious cause for a pre-existing coagulopathy. Charts of PICH patients admitted between November 1991 and December 2001 were reviewed. We excluded patients with an underlying lesion, cranial trauma, anticoagulation, liver failure or sepsis. All patients had partial thromboplastin time, international normalized ratio, and platelet count measured on admission. An international normalized ratio > 1.4, partial thromboplastin time > 35, and platelet count < 100,000 were considered abnormal based on standardized values for our laboratory. All patients underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan on admission. Repeat CT was obtained for evidence of neurological deterioration. One hundred ninety-two patients with intracerebral hemorrhage were studied. Thirty-seven were excluded because of a possible underlying cause for a pre-existing coagulopathy. Thirteen of one hundred and fifty-five (8.4%) patients were found to have a coagulopathy based on our criteria. Three of thirteen (23%) patients with coagulopathy versus 3/142 (2%) without suffered neurological deterioration with evidence of hematoma enlargement (P = .008). Eleven of sixty-seven (17%) patients with intraventricular/subarachnoid extension versus 2/88 (2%) without had a coagulopathy (P = .002). Eight of thirteen (61%) patients with coagulopathy versus 29/142 (20%) without were dead at 30 days (P = .003). Coagulation abnormalities without an obvious etiology that may be consistent with low grade disseminated intravascular coagulation are seen in 8.4% of patients with PICH and are associated with extension into the subarachnoid and intraventricular compartments, neurological deterioration with hematoma expansion, and mortality at 30 days. This may represent a target for therapeutic intervention.

20699197
Ischemic stroke in an adult with glycogen storage disease type I.
Glycogen Storage Disease Type I (GSD-I) is a metabolic disorder characterized by deficiency of glucose-6-phosphatase resulting in ineffective glycogen metabolism to glucose. These patients frequently have hyperlipidemia, among many other metabolic derangements. There is no consensus regarding the risk of developing atherosclerosis. We report an adult male with GSD-I who presented with cerebral infarction and a history of prior ischemic stroke and multiple coronary stent placements. We suggest that patients with GSD-I do have an increased risk of atherosclerosis and its complications and predict that these complications will be seen more frequently since patients with GSD-I are living longer as a result of better treatment.

18277331
Stroke risk factors.
Despite advances in the treatment of acute cerebral infarction, the most effective method of reducing stroke morbidity and mortality is the identification and modification of stroke risk factors. Modifiable stroke risk factors include hypertension, atrial fibrillation, hypercholesterolemia, cigarette smoking, hyperhomocystinemia, and carotid stenosis. Improved identification of individuals at increased stroke risk due to these factors can reduce individual risk and the cost to society of the consequences of stroke.

17903840
Delayed signal detection by diffusion-weighted imaging in brainstem infarction.
Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DW MRI) is a sensitive and specific technique for imaging acute hemispheric infarction. Its utility in the diagnosis of acute brainstem infarction has not been well studied. We present 3 cases of brainstem infarction in which DW MRI performed 5 to 15 hours after symptom onset failed to reveal any abnormality. Repeat diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) 2 to 5 days later did demonstrate an abnormality in the clinically appropriate region in each instance. This suggests that the time course to the development of abnormalities detectable by DWI may be longer in brainstem than in hemispheric infarctions. Therefore, repeat studies after initially negative DWI might be useful in the diagnosis of brainstem infarctions.

17903795
Clinical improvement related to thrombolysis of third ventricular blood clot in a patient with thalamic hemorrhage.
Intraventricular extension of hemorrhage after intraparenchymal hemorrhage is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Clinical improvement is reported in a patient with thalamic hemorrhage with intraventricular extension after third and fourth ventricular blood clot resolution with instillation of urokinase intraventricularly. A 49-year-old man with hypertension collapsed while at work. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head revealed a left thalamic hemorrhage with extension into the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles and associated hydrocephalus. A left frontal intraventricular catheter (IVC) was placed and intraventricular urokinase was administered at a dose of 25,000 U every 12 hours. The CT scan revealed resolution of the lateral ventricular dilatation and blood clot but no decrease in third or fourth ventricular hemorrhage. No clinical improvement was noted. The IVC was reinserted on the right side with the catheter tip placed through the foramen of Monroe into the third ventricle. Twelve hours after receiving the first dose of urokinase through the new catheter, the patient's condition improved. The CT scan showed a reduction in the volume of blood of the third and fourth ventricles. This case report shows that treatment of hydrocephalus with an IVC was not sufficient to provide a therapeutic effect. Substantial clinical improvement occurred only after the blood clot was cleared from the third and fourth ventricles.

17224571
Has evidence changed practice?: appropriateness of carotid endarterectomy after the clinical trials.
To assess how appropriateness of and indications for carotid endarterectomy (CEA) have changed following the publication of several large international randomized controlled trials (RCTs) designed to rationalize use of CEA. The New York Carotid Artery Surgery Study (NYCAS) is a population-based cohort study of all CEAs performed on elderly patients from January 1998 through June 1999 in New York State. Detailed clinical data were abstracted from medical charts to assess indications for and appropriateness of surgery using a list of 1,557 indications for CEA developed by national experts using RAND appropriateness methods. Deaths and strokes within 30 days of surgery were ascertained and confirmed by two physicians. Among the 9,588 patients, the mean age was 74.6 years and 93.6% had 70 to 99% carotid stenosis. Nearly three-quarters of patients (72.3%) underwent CEA for asymptomatic stenosis, 18.6% for TIA, and 9.1% for stroke. Overall, 87.1% of operations were done for appropriate reasons, 4.3% for uncertain reasons, and 8.6% for inappropriate reasons (vs 32% inappropriate before the RCTs, p < 0.0001). Among procedures judged inappropriate, the most common reasons were high comorbidity in asymptomatic patients (62.2%), operating after a major stroke (14.2%), or for minimal stenosis (10.5%). Among asymptomatic patients, those with high comorbidity had over twice the risk of death or stroke compared to those without high comorbidity (7.13% vs 2.69%, p < 0.0001). Since publication of the randomized controlled trials, there has been a reduction in the proportion of patients undergoing carotid endarterectomy (CEA) for inappropriate reasons. The shift toward many asymptomatic patients undergoing CEA is concerning because the net benefit from surgery for these patients is low and is reduced further for patients with high comorbidity.

17895030
Transesophageal echocardiography: diagnostic and clinical applications in the evaluation of the stroke patient.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is superior to transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) in diagnosing cardiac abnormalities that may result in cerebral embolism. The clinical importance of these abnormalities is unclear. We classified 96 consecutive stroke patients into high- or low-risk groups for cardioembolism based on historical criteria. The presence of left atrial thrombus, atrial smoke, patent foramen ovale, atrial septal aneurysm, and plaque in the ascending aorta was assessed with TEE. Stroke type and other possible stroke mechanisms were evaluated. Left atrial thrombus occurred only in the high-risk group. Patent foramen ovale, atrial septal aneurysm, and most cases of left atrial smoke occurred in the presence of another embolic source or were associated with a stroke related to hypertensive small vessel disease. Protruding atherosclerotic plaque in the ascending aorta and aortic arch was the most significant cause of stroke diagnosed by TEE because it frequently occurred in those without other risk factors for stroke. TEE identified aortic plaque in one and left atrial smoke in two patients with lacunar infarction without risk factors for small vessel disease. TEE should be considered in both lacunar and nonlacunar stroke that occur in the absence of stroke risk factors, although optimal management of most TEE findings is yet to be determined.

