21281623
Six1 regulates Grem1 expression in the metanephric mesenchyme to initiate branching morphogenesis.
Urinary tract morphogenesis requires subdivision of the ureteric bud (UB) into the intra-renal collecting system and the extra-renal ureter, by responding to signals in its surrounding mesenchyme. BMP4 is a mesenchymal regulator promoting ureter development, while GREM1 is necessary to negatively regulate BMP4 activity to induce UB branching. However, the mechanisms that regulate the GREM1-BMP4 signaling are unknown. Previous studies have shown that Six1-deficient mice lack kidneys, but form ureters. Here, we show that the tip cells of Six1(-/-) UB fail to form an ampulla for branching. Instead, the UB elongates within Tbx18- and Bmp4-expressing mesenchyme. We find that the expression of Grem1 in the metanephric mesenchyme (MM) is Six1-dependent. Treatment of Six1(-/-) kidney rudiments with GREM1 protein restores ampulla formation and branching morphogenesis. Furthermore, we demonstrate that genetic reduction of BMP4 levels in Six1(-/-) (Six1(-/-); Bmp4(+/-)) embryos restores urinary tract morphogenesis and kidney formation. This study uncovers an essential function for Six1 in the MM as an upstream regulator of Grem1 in initiating branching morphogenesis.

20110314
SIX1 acts synergistically with TBX18 in mediating ureteral smooth muscle formation.
Dysfunction of the ureter often leads to urine flow impairment from the kidney to the bladder, causing dilation of the ureter and/or renal pelvis. Six1 is a crucial regulator of renal development: mutations in human SIX1 cause branchio-oto-renal (BOR) syndrome and Six1(-/-) mice exhibit renal agenesis, although the ureter is present. It remains unclear whether Six1 plays a role in regulating ureter morphogenesis. We demonstrate here that Six1 is differentially expressed during ureter morphogenesis. It was expressed in undifferentiated smooth muscle (SM) progenitors, but was downregulated in differentiating SM cells (SMCs) and had disappeared by E18.5. In Six1(-/-) mice, the ureteral mesenchymal precursors failed to condense and differentiate into normal SMCs and showed increased cell death, indicating that Six1 is required for the maintenance and normal differentiation of SM progenitors. A delay in SMC differentiation was observed in Six1(-/-) ureters. A lack of Six1 in the ureter led to hydroureter and hydronephrosis without anatomical obstruction when kidney formation was rescued in Six1(-/-) embryos by specifically expressing Six1 in the metanephric mesenchyme, but not the ureter, under control of the Eya1 promoter. We show that Six1 and Tbx18 genetically interact to synergistically regulate SMC development and ureter function and that their gene products form a complex in cultured cells and in the developing ureter. Two missense mutations in SIX1 from BOR patients reduced or abolished SIX1-TBX18 complex formation. These findings uncover an essential role for Six1 in establishing a functionally normal ureter and provide new insights into the molecular basis of urinary tract malformations in BOR patients.

