20942586
Lack of motor symptoms progression in Parkinson's disease patients with long-term bilateral subthalamic deep brain stimulation.
To evaluate the long-term progression of motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients treated with subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation (STN-DBS), we retrospectively analyzed data from 50 PD patients with bilateral STN-DBS. Clinical records at baseline and at several yearly intervals were reviewed. The Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating scale (UPDRS) was performed preoperatively after withholding medications for at least 12 hr (OFF) and after taking the usual dose of levodopa. Postoperative evaluations were completed in four clinical states: OFF medications—stimulators OFF (OFF/OFF); OFF medications—stimulators ON; ON medications—stimulators OFF; and ON medications—stimulators ON. The UPDRS motor scores OFF/OFF were virtually unmodified up to 5 years when compared with preoperative OFF scores. There was no significant difference between OFF/OFF score variations from baseline in patients with shorter (<11 years) and longer PD duration at the time of surgery. No consistent deterioration from untreated baseline was noted for each UPDRS motor subscore (tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, and axial). Untreated PD motor scores did not worsen over time in patients undergoing STN-DBS, suggesting that there is no progression of motor severity. These results could be explained either by a natural stabilization of PD motor symptoms after many years or neuroprotective properties of STN-DBS.

20489530
Successful implantation of a deep brain stimulator for essential tremor in a patient with a preexisting cochlear implant: surgical technique: technical case report.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has become routine for the treatment of Parkinson's disease and essential tremor. Because both of these disorders are common in patients older than the age of 60, neurosurgeons are likely to encounter increasing numbers of patients who require DBS surgery but who already have another electronic medical implant such as a cardiac pacemaker/defibrillator or intrathecal infusion pump, raising the concern that one device might interfere with the performance of the other. Herein we report a modification of surgical technique resulting in the successful use of thalamic DBS to treat disabling essential tremor in a man with a previously implanted cochlear implant. INTERVENTION AND TECHNIQUE: The presence of the cochlear implant necessitated a number of modifications to our standard surgical technique including surgical removal of the subgaleal magnet that holds the receiver to the scalp and the use of computed tomography instead of magnetic resonance imaging to target the thalamus. More than a year after surgery, the patient is enjoying continued tremor suppression and an enhanced quality of life. The presence of the DBS device has not interfered with the proper functioning of his cochlear implant. DBS can be used successfully in patients with a previously implanted cochlear implant. The operating neurosurgeon should be aware of the limitations of intraoperative imaging and the need to coordinate with an otologic surgeon for maximum patient benefit.

18704979
Neurostimulatory therapeutics in management of treatment-resistant depression with focus on deep brain stimulation.
Treatment-resistant depression continues to pose a major medical challenge, as up to one-third of patients with major depressive disorder fail to have an adequate response to standard pharmacotherapies. An improved understanding of the complex circuitry underlying depressive disorders has fostered an explosion in the development of new, nonpharmacological approaches. Each of these treatments seeks to restore normal brain activity via electrical or magnetic stimulation. In this article, the authors discuss the ongoing evolution of neurostimulatory treatments for treatment-resistant depression, reviewing the methods, efficacy, and current research on electroconvulsive therapy, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation, magnetic seizure therapy, focal electrically administered stimulated seizure therapy, transcranial direct current stimulation, chronic epidural cortical stimulation, and vagus nerve stimulation. Special attention is given to deep brain stimulation, the most focally targeted approach. The history, purported mechanisms of action, and current research are outlined in detail. Although deep brain stimulation is the most invasive of the neurostimulatory treatments developed to date, it may hold significant promise in alleviating symptoms and improving the quality of life for patients with the most severe and disabling mood disorders.

