21071023
Parental karyotype may reveal the source of a pregnancy loss even in the presence of a reportedly euploid fetal karyotype.
To present a case of a fetal loss in which a normal fetal karyotype was obtained by banding studies. Identification of an abnormal maternal karyotype prompted subsequent reanalysis using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Case report. University-affiliated IVF center. A 32-year-old woman, G1 P0, underwent a fetal loss at 8 weeks, and a suction curettage was performed. The patient had a previous first-trimester loss. The fetal tissue was evaluated by banding studies and found to be normal. Parental karyotyping was performed, and the fetal tissue was reanalyzed by FISH. Analysis of fetal karyotype by targeted FISH. Maternal karyotype demonstrated a translocation [46,XX, t(8;10)(q24.3:q25.2)]. The fetal tissue was reanalyzed by FISH, and a segment of chromosome 10 was found on chromosome 8. A normal fetal karyotype, as measured by banding, does not exclude a genetic etiology for pregnancy loss. In this case, maternal translocation prompted the genetics laboratory to search for a small segment of translocated extra chromosomal material. This demonstrated that despite the finding of a normal fetal karyotype, in some cases parental karyotyping may have value.

17880948
Redefining in vitro fertilization success: should triplets be considered failures?
To evaluate how the ranking of IVF programs changes if high-order multiple pregnancies (HOMPs) are considered negative outcomes. Retrospective analysis. The 2004 Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology Clinic Outcome Reporting System. Two hundred seven programs that performed >50 IVF cycles were analyzed, and only patients <or=35 years of age were included. Program size, success rate, and number of embryos transferred were recorded for each program. All programs were ranked in accordance to these variables. The programs were re-ranked after considering HOMPs as negative, rather than as positive, outcomes. High-order multiple pregnancies were more abundant as the number of embryos replaced increased. The live birth rate, after excluding HOMPs, significantly decreased as the number of embryos transferred increased. The lowest ranked programs performed transfers with the greatest number of embryos (2.4-4.5). After HOMP exclusion, the rank of programs that transferred >2.4 embryos decreased, as opposed to the programs that transferred fewer embryos (1.8-2.4). Reclassifying HOMPs as failed cycles will result in a reduced rank in programs that maintain high embryo replacements. Redefining success as a singleton or twin birth significantly changes the ranking order of programs and, potentially, how programs are perceived.

17207802
Moderately elevated levels of basal follicle-stimulating hormone in young patients predict low ovarian response, but should not be used to disqualify patients from attempting in vitro fertilization.
To evaluate and compare IVF outcomes of patients within different age categories who had a normal basal FSH level with outcomes of patients with an elevated day 3 FSH level. Retrospective analysis. Large, private IVF center. We analyzed 2,708 patients. Of these, 2,477 had normal basal FSH levels, and 231 had elevated basal FSH levels (> or =13.03 IU/L). Patients were segregated into various age groups. Follow-up. Outcomes of IVF overall, including cancellation rates, oocyte yield, and fertilization, implantation, and clinical pregnancy rates (PRs). Cancellation rates were significantly higher in patients with elevated day 3 FSH levels compared with patients with normal FSH levels in all age groups. A significantly lower oocyte yield was observed in patients with elevated basal FSH. Fertilization rates were not affected by FSH levels. A significant decrease in the number of embryos available for transfer in patients > or =38 with an elevated day 3 FSH level was found. Implantation and clinical PRs were lower in patients >40 years of age who had an elevated day 3 FSH level when compared to same age patients with a normal day 3 FSH level. Loss rates were not significantly different. Young women with an elevated basal FSH level should be counseled differently than older women, and should be given adequate counseling and granted the opportunity to undergo an IVF cycle.

