21465110
Recurrent pancreatic carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma: (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT).
Although the current literature is limited, available data suggest that (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) imaging improves the evaluation of patients with recurrent pancreatic carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma. There is evidence that PET/CT is particularly useful in the setting of elevated tumor markers and negative or equivocal CT findings. This article reviews the nature of these carcinomas in the post-therapy setting and describes the strengths and limitations of PET/CT when used for monitoring recurrence.

21410022
Surgical resection for advanced gallbladder carcinoma. The Mount Sinai experience.
Advanced gallbladder cancer (GC) carries dismal prognosis, due to its extent at diagnosis and the low R0 resection performance rate. Thirty-two GC patients referred to our Department with an intention to treat between 1993 and 2005. All patients had advanced T stage (> or = T3). Pathological findings, surgical procedures and survival data were analyzed. Seventeen radical procedures (16 hepatectomies and 1 cholecystectomy with common bile duct resection), 4 palliative procedures (12.5%) and 11 surgical explorations (34.4%) were performed (53.1%, resectability rate). Hepatectomies were performed with 0% mortality, 11.8% morbidity and 94.1% resectability rate. The respective 1-, 3- and 5- year survival rates were 71.4%, 28.6% and 14.3%. Radical lymph node dissection (p = 0.03), absence of perineural tumor invasion (p = 0.03) and patients' age <70 years (p < 0.01) were non-independently associated with favorable prognosis in the hepatectomy-treated group of GC patients. GC patients with stage > or = IIA should be treated with hepatectomy combined with radical lymphadenectomy in order to achieve better staging and disease control. Incorporating the caudate lobe, more than 4 liver segments, or part of the extrahepatic biliary tree in the resection specimen in selected patients, might help eliminate perineural metastatic spread and achieve improved overall survival.

21147184
Second hepatic resection for recurrent hepatocellular cancer: A Western experience.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Recurrence of hepatocellular cancer after resection is a significant problem. The optimal treatment of patients with intrahepatic recurrence after resection and well-preserved liver function is not clear. We analyzed the outcomes of patients undergoing a second hepatic resection for recurrent hepatocellular cancer at a single Western center. METHODS: The records of all patients undergoing primary hepatic resection for hepatocellular cancer between January 1994 and January 2009 were reviewed. Patients with a single intrahepatic recurrence, Child's A liver function, and platelet count>100,000/?l underwent a second hepatic resection. Clinical data was recorded and analyzed. RESULTS: Of the 487 patients undergoing primary resection, 221 developed recurrence, and 35 underwent a second hepatic resection. There were no perioperative mortalities. There were 10 deaths during the study period; 5-year overall survival was 67% from second resection. Time to recurrence from primary resection<1year and gross vascular invasion at second resection were predictors of survival and recurrence. Patients with recurrence>1year from primary resection and without gross vascular invasion had a 5-year survival of 81%. There were 17 recurrences with a 3-year recurrence rate of 55%. CONCLUSIONS: Second hepatic resection for recurrent hepatocellular cancer is applicable in about 15% of patient with recurrence. The procedure is safe and can achieve excellent results in well-selected patients. Recurrence continues to be a significant problem.

20616595
Liver functional reserve estimation: state of the art and relevance to local treatments.
More than 90% of cases of hepatocellular carcinoma develop as a consequence of underlying liver disease (most commonly viral hepatitis), often resulting in impaired liver function. In such cases, transplantation is an appealing alternative as it can potentially treat both the malignancy and the underlying disease. When a transplant is not readily available due to organ scarcity, borderline cases must be considered for resection. The function of the underlying liver can be assessed by the Child-Pugh score or by quantitative tests such as indocyanine green clearance, lidocaine metabolism, and arterial body ketone ratio; liver biopsy pathology scoring and the platelet count can serve as indicators of fibrosis and portal hypertension. Another important factor to be considered is the risk of tumor recurrence, either because of unrecognized metastasis or due to de novo tumor formation. Both factors must be considered in weighing resection against nonsurgical alternatives. Preoperative portal vein embolization is a strategy that can evoke 'regeneration' in anticipation of surgery, serving as a 'stress test' of the liver's regenerative capacity.

19936599
Liver functional reserve estimation: state of the art and relevance for local treatments: the Western perspective.
More than 90% of cases of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) develop as a consequence of underlying liver disease (most commonly viral hepatitis), often resulting in impaired liver function. In such cases, transplantation is an appealing alternative as it can potentially cure both the malignancy and the underlying disease. When transplant is not readily available due to organ scarcity, borderline cases must be considered for resection. The function of the underlying liver can be assessed by the Child Pugh score or by quantitative tests such as indocyanine green (ICG) clearance, metabolism of lidocaine to the metabolite MEG-X, and the arterial body ketone ratio (AKBR); liver biopsy pathology scoring and the platelet count can serve as indicators of fibrosis and portal hypertension. Another important factor to be considered is the risk of tumor recurrence, either because of unrecognized metastasis or due to de-novo tumor formation. Both factors must be considered in weighing resection against nonsurgical alternatives. Preoperative portal vein embolization is a strategy that can evoke regeneration in anticipation of surgery, serving as a "stress test" of the liver's regenerative capacity.

19665249
Ras pathway activation in hepatocellular carcinoma and anti-tumoral effect of combined sorafenib and rapamycin in vivo.
The success of sorafenib in the treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has focused interest on the role of Ras signaling in this malignancy. We investigated the molecular alterations of the Ras pathway in HCC and the antineoplastic effects of sorafenib in combination with rapamycin, an inhibitor of mTOR pathway, in experimental models. Gene expression (qRT-PCR, oligonucleotide microarray), DNA copy number changes (SNP-array), methylation of tumor suppressor genes (methylation-specific PCR) and protein activation (immunohistochemistry) were analysed in 351 samples. Anti-tumoral effects of combined therapy targeting the Ras and mTOR pathways were evaluated in cell lines and HCC xenografts. Different mechanisms accounted for Ras pathway activation in HCC. H-ras was up-regulated during different steps of hepatocarcinogenesis. B-raf was overexpressed in advanced tumors and its expression was associated with genomic amplification. Partial methylation of RASSF1A and NORE1A was detected in 89% and 44% of tumors respectively, and complete methylation was found in 11 and 4% of HCCs. Activation of the pathway (pERK immunostaining) was identified in 10.3% of HCC. Blockade of Ras and mTOR pathways with sorafenib and rapamycin reduced cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in cell lines. In vivo, the combination of both compounds enhanced tumor necrosis and ulceration when compared with sorafenib alone. Ras activation results from several molecular alterations, such as methylation of tumor suppressors and amplification of oncogenes (B-raf). Sorafenib blocks signaling and synergizes with rapamycin in vivo, preventing tumor progression. These data provide the rationale for testing this combination in clinical studies.

19524573
A system of classifying microvascular invasion to predict outcome after resection in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) recurs in approximately 70% of cases after resection. Vascular invasion by tumor cells can be classified as gross or microscopic (microvascular invasion [mVI]) and is a risk factor for recurrence. We examined a large cohort of patients with HCC who were treated by resection to identify features of mVI that correlated with recurrence and survival. We reviewed the records of all HCC resections performed at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine between January 1990 and March 2006 to identify those with mVI, established by histologic analysis. The numbers and sizes of vessels invaded, invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall, distance from the tumor, and satellite nodules were recorded. Of the 384 patients who underwent resection for HCC, 131 (34.1%) met the entry criteria. The median follow-up period was 28.9 months. There were 68 recurrences and 54 deaths. In multivariate analysis, invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall predicted recurrence (hazard ratio, 1.8; P = .02), and invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall (hazard ratio, 2.2; P = .018) and invasion of a vessel that was more than 1 cm from the tumor (hazard ratio, 2.1; P = .015) predicted survival. A risk score that assigned points for the presence of each variable correlated with recurrence (P = .028) and survival (P < .0001). A novel classification system that includes invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall and invasion of a vessel that is more than 1 cm from the tumor can accurately predict risk of recurrence and survival of patients with mVI after resection of HCC.

18929564
Pivotal role of mTOR signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma.
The advent of targeted therapies in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has underscored the importance of pathway characterization to identify novel molecular targets for treatment. We evaluated mTOR signaling in human HCC, as well as the antitumoral effect of a dual-level blockade of the mTOR pathway. The mTOR pathway was assessed using integrated data from mutation analysis (direct sequencing), DNA copy number changes (SNP-array), messenger RNA levels (quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction and gene expression microarray), and protein activation (immunostaining) in 351 human samples [HCC (n = 314) and nontumoral tissue (n = 37)]. Effects of dual blockade of mTOR signaling using a rapamycin analogue (everolimus) and an epidermal/vascular endothelial growth factor receptor inhibitor (AEE788) were evaluated in liver cancer cell lines and in a xenograft model. Aberrant mTOR signaling (p-RPS6) was present in half of the cases, associated with insulin-like growth factor pathway activation, epidermal growth factor up-regulation, and PTEN dysregulation. PTEN and PI3KCA-B mutations were rare events. Chromosomal gains in RICTOR (25% of patients) and positive p-RPS6 staining correlated with recurrence. RICTOR-specific siRNA down-regulation reduced tumor cell viability in vitro. Blockage of mTOR signaling with everolimus in vitro and in a xenograft model decelerated tumor growth and increased survival. This effect was enhanced in vivo after epidermal growth factor blockade. MTOR signaling has a critical role in the pathogenesis of HCC, with evidence for the role of RICTOR in hepato-oncogenesis. MTOR blockade with everolimus is effective in vivo. These findings establish a rationale for targeting the mTOR pathway in clinical trials in HCC.

18293282
Multifocal hepatocellular carcinoma and precancerous lesions in a patient with autoimmune hepatitis-related cirrhosis.
A 44-year-old woman with a 29-year history of autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) received a living donor liver transplant for multifocal hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and cirrhosis in 2007. Her initial laboratory workup at our institution in 1996 revealed a positive antismooth muscle antibody with a titer of 1:640. Serum electrophoresis showed a monoclonal gamma globulin spike with elevated IgG, IgA, and IgM. The patient was negative for hepatitis B and hepatitis C (HCV) by serology and serum polymerase chain reaction. She was treated with corticosteroids and azathioprine, but her disease progressed. In 1997, a liver needle biopsy revealed cirrhosis and a focus of small cell change. In 2004, a 2-cm exophytic mass was detected on magnetic resonance imaging. Follow-up imaging in 2005 and 2006 showed growth of the exophytic mass and development of new tumors. The exophytic mass was treated with ethanol ablation and she received a transplant. Examination of the explant revealed multiple high-grade dysplastic nodules and four moderately differentiated HCCs, one of which is arising in a high-grade dysplastic nodule. We believe this to be the first case in the English literature documenting the presence of preneoplastic lesions in an HCV-negative patient with AIH who developed HCC.

18291258
Fifteen-year, single-center experience with the surgical management of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: operative results and long-term outcome.
Limited data exist regarding the role of extended liver resection for the management of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC), most of which derive from small single-center or larger multicenter series. In the current report, we present our experience with the surgical management of ICC, analyze operative results, and investigate prognostic factors in resected patients. A total of 72 patients underwent operative exploration for ICC between 1991 and 2005; 54 patients were resected, and 18 patients were deemed unresectable based on intraoperative findings. Demographics, pathology, anatomic characteristics, operative results, and survival were analyzed. The resectability rate was 71%, with negative margins achieved in 78% of the resected patients. Extended liver resections were performed in 24 (44%) of the 72 patients. Perioperative mortality after resection was 7%, with 11% morbidity. The 1-, 3- and 5-year survival rates after resection were 80%, 49% and 25%, respectively, and were significantly greater than for patients with unresectable disease (P < .001). R1 liver resections conferred increased 5-year survival compared with patients deemed unresectable (P = .03). None of the factors evaluated proved to be independent prognostic factors on multivariate analysis. R0 resection of ICC provides the best chance for prolonged survival, whereas R1 resection appears to be superior to nonoperative treatment. Declining operative mortality as a result of improved intraoperative and perioperative care justifies the performance of extended liver resections in these patients, although benefit has to be evaluated with respect to nodal involvement.

18030049
FDG PET/CT imaging to rule out extrahepatic metastases before liver transplantation.
FDG PET/CT, an established imaging modality for staging and restaging workup of malignancies, also demonstrates increased uptake in infectious or inflammatory conditions, including both infectious and noninfectious granulomatous processes. A 65-year-old man with a history of hepatocellular carcinoma status post-wedge resection and chemoembolization of the primary tumor referred for evaluation of extrahepatic metastases for determining the surgical eligibility for a liver transplantation. The patient underwent FDG PET/CT imaging associated with a separately acquired contrast enhanced CT (CECT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. FDG PET/CT imaging revealed multiple FDG-avid pulmonary nodules that were subsequently confirmed to represent Mycobacterium avium intracellular infection on histology.

17597707
Strategies for the management of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) generally develops as a consequence of underlying liver disease, most commonly viral hepatitis. The development of HCC follows an orderly progression from cirrhosis to dysplastic nodules to early cancer development, which can be reliably cured if discovered before the development of vascular invasion (typically occurring at a tumor diameter of approximately 2 cm). The identifiable population at risk makes screening a realistic possibility, and liver imaging is recommended every 6 months for patients with cirrhosis. For patients with preserved liver function and no portal hypertension who develop HCC that is confined to one region of the liver, resection is the preferred treatment. If resection is not possible because of poor liver function, and the HCC is within the Milan criteria (1 nodule > or =5 cm, 2-3 nodules > or =3 cm), liver transplantation is the treatment of choice. To prevent tumor progression while waiting, nonsurgical treatments including percutaneous ethanol injection, radiofrequency ablation, and transarterial chemoembolization are employed, but drop-out from the waiting list remains a problem. Living donor transplantation is an alternative that can eliminate drop-out and enable liver transplantation for patients with HCC whose disease does not fall within the Milan criteria. There is a need for more effective adjuvant therapies after resection and liver transplantation; newer antiangiogenic agents offer hope for improved outcomes in the future.

17429765
The role of fibrin sealants in hepatic surgery.
The repair of all tissue disruption begins with hemostasis and tissue sealing. Fibrin sealant is a concentrated mix of the factors required for the body to initiate this process. By applying this mixture directly to the site of injury, clotting and wound healing can be facilitated. Studies have demonstrated that fibrin sealant is effective in controlling bleeding and inducing tissue sealing in many organs. It is particularly useful in hepatobiliary surgery due to the soft nature of liver parenchyma and its propensity to bleed and leak bile. This chapter will discuss the basic science foundation of fibrin sealants and their applications in hepatic surgery.

17393520
Genome-wide molecular profiles of HCV-induced dysplasia and hepatocellular carcinoma.
Although HCC is the third-leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide, there is only an elemental understanding of its molecular pathogenesis. In western countries, HCV infection is the main etiology underlying this cancer's accelerating incidence. To characterize the molecular events of the hepatocarcinogenic process, and to identify new biomarkers for early HCC, the gene expression profiles of 75 tissue samples were analyzed representing the stepwise carcinogenic process from preneoplastic lesions (cirrhosis and dysplasia) to HCC, including 4 neoplastic stages (very early HCC to metastatic tumors) from patients with HCV infection. We identified gene signatures that accurately reflect the pathological progression of disease at each stage. Eight genes distinguish between control and cirrhosis, 24 between cirrhosis and dysplasia, 93 between dysplasia and early HCC, and 9 between early and advanced HCC. Using quantitative real-time reverse-transcription PCR, we validated several novel molecular tissue markers for early HCC diagnosis, specifically induction of abnormal spindle-like, microcephaly-associated protein, hyaluronan-mediated motility receptor, primase 1, erythropoietin, and neuregulin 1. In addition, pathway analysis revealed dysregulation of the Notch and Toll-like receptor pathways in cirrhosis, followed by deregulation of several components of the Jak/STAT pathway in early carcinogenesis, then upregulation of genes involved in DNA replication and repair and cell cycle in late cancerous stages. CONCLUSION: These findings provide a comprehensive molecular portrait of genomic changes in progressive HCV-related HCC.

17292454
Renal artery thrombosis following secondary cytoreduction in a patient with ovarian cancer.
In order to successfully perform aggressive cytoreductive surgery for patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer, resection of retroperitoneal disease in close proximity to major vessels is often required. We describe a case of a 44-year-old female patient with a history of Stage IV carcinoma of the ovary, who underwent a successful secondary debulking procedure. To remove the left para-aortic tumor implant she required complete mobilization of the left kidney, with skeletonization of the left renal artery and vein. Postoperatively, the patient developed left renal artery thrombosis necessitating a unilateral nephrectomy. This is, to our knowledge, the first reported case of renal artery thrombosis following a debulking procedure. Gynecologic oncologists should be aware of this possibility and be familiar with the diagnosis and management of this condition.

16967310
De novo hepatocellular carcinoma occurring in a transplanted liver: case report and review of the literature.


18589189
The Mount Sinai experience with orthotopic liver transplantation for benign tumors: brief report and literature review: case reports.
Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) is performed for benign hepatic lesions that are symptomatic, too large to be resected, have a malignant transformation potential, cause debilitating/life-threatening manifestations, or in patients experiencing posthepatectomy acute liver failure. Among benign tumors, polycystic liver disease (PLD) is the most common indication for OLT alone, or combined liver-kidney transplantation. Our 10-year experience with OLT for benign tumors includes two patients with PLD and one with a benign giant fibrous tumor. In this report, we present our experience with OLT for benign liver tumors, commenting on relevant published studies.

18589139
Effect of ischemia-reperfusion on the incidence of acute cellular rejection and timing of histologic hepatitis C virus recurrence after liver transplantation.
Because of a critical shortage of deceased donor (DD) livers, more extended criteria allografts are being utilized; these allografts are at increased risk for ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI). We assessed whether, in a large cohort of patients transplanted for hepatitis C virus (HCV) either via a DD or live donor (LD), there was a relationship between the degree of IRI and the frequency and timing of acute cellular rejection (ACR) and histologic HCV recurrence. During an 8-year study, patients were separated into four groups based on peak alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels and three groups based on severity of IRI on postreperfusion liver biopsy. The mean follow-up time of 433 DD and 44 LD recipients was 1212 days. We noted a strong correlation in DD between peak ALT and the histologic degree of IRI (P = .01). There was no difference in the incidence or grade of ACR among the four groups. There was no correlation between the severity of IRI and the incidence or time to histologic recurrence of HCV. The magnitude of peak ALT correlated with the severity of IRI on postreperfusion liver biopsy. Among this large HCV cohort, there was no correlation between the severity of IRI and the incidence or timing of histologic HCV recurrence or incidence of ACR.

17532747
Treatment of HCC in patients awaiting liver transplantation.
Liver transplantation (LT) is the treatment of choice for many patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but long waiting time due to the shortage of donor organs can result in tumor progression and drop-out from LT candidacy. Furthermore, even in candidates meeting the restrictive Milan criteria there is risk of HCC recurrence; this risk rises significantly when patients with more advanced HCC are included. In an effort to address these issues, treatment of HCC in patients awaiting LT has become widespread practice. In this review the various modalities employed in the pre-LT setting are presented, and the evidence for benefit with regard to (1) improvement of post-LT survival, (2) down-staging of advanced HCC to within Milan criteria and (3) preventing waiting list drop-out is considered. Chemoembolization, radiofrequency ablation and ethanol injection all have well-documented antitumor activity; however, there is no high level evidence that waiting list HCC treatment with these modalities is effective in achieving any of the three above-mentioned aims. Nevertheless, particularly in the United States, where continued waiting list priority depends on maintaining HCC within Milan criteria, use of nonsurgical HCC treatment will likely continue in an effort to forestall tumor progression and waiting list drop-out.

