19387159
Minimally invasive correction of inverted nipples: a safe and simple technique for reliable, sustainable projection.
Numerous techniques have been described for the correction of inverted nipples; their diversity supports the lack of a consistently reliable method. Dermoglandular flaps, open suture, and suction techniques have all been described to combat the "corrected" nipple's propensity to collapse. We present a minimally invasive parenchymal release and percutaneous suture technique that provides sustainable long-term correction of inverted nipples. Thirty-one patients with 58 inverted nipples were treated. The technique, performed under local anesthesia, employs lysis of the foreshortened subareolar fibro-ductal tissue to achieve resting eversion of the nipple using an 18-gauge needle. Through the same needle-access site, a purse-string suture is then placed, exiting the areolar skin and re-entering through the same stitch point every 3 to 5 mm around the circumference of the new nipple-base. An absorbable suture closes the access site over the knot, and 2 crossed absorbable mattress sutures are placed beneath the nipple to complete the correction. Of 27 patients with bilateral and 4 with unilateral, nipple inversion, durable correction was achieved in 1 procedure in 45 of 58 nipples (78%). There were 13 recurrences, of which 11 (19%) were successfully treated under local anesthesia with a second purse-string suture, and 2 (3%) required a third procedure under local anesthesia. There were no late reinversions. There were no cases of infection, nipple ischemia, or other complications. Occasional recurrences are corrected very simply under local anesthesia. Percutaneous release of nipple inversion followed by purse-string suture support performed through "needle-only" access points is a simple, safe, and reliable technique, and should be considered for the correction of inverted nipples.

18379979
Brachial vein transposition arteriovenous fistula: is it an acceptable option for chronic dialysis vascular access?
The aim of this study was to evaluate the midterm performance of brachial vein arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs) and to compare this performance with arteriovenous grafts (AVGs) and basilic vein transposition AVFs. A retrospective analysis was performed. Between December 2002 and October 2006, 149 AV access procedures consisting of brachial vein transposition AVFs (11 one-stage and 2 two-stage procedures), basilic vein transposition AVFs (n=42), and AVGs (n=94) were performed in 141 patients. 73% of one-stage brachial vein AVF patients experienced at least one complication during follow-up vs. 52% of the basilic vein transposition AVF group and 55% of the AVG group. The primary patency rates at 12 months for one-stage brachial vein AVFs, basilic vein AVFs, and AVGs were 24, 45 and 50%, respectively. The assisted primary patency rates were 45, 74 and 63%, and the secondary patency rates were 45, 74 and 78%, respectively. A significant difference in the overall secondary patency rates between one-stage brachial vein AVF and AVGs (p=0.015) was detected. Significance was approached between one-stage brachial vein AVFs and basilic vein AVFs overall assisted primary patency (p=0.055) and secondary patency (p=0.055) rates. The brachial vein transposition, when done as a one-stage procedure, is associated with inferior patency rates when compared to the basilic vein transposition AVF and AVG. Therefore, in the setting of inadequate cephalic and basilic vein, a prosthetic graft is superior to a brachial vein transposition. A two-stage procedure, as suggested by others, may improve the results of this technique.

