20147631
Neisseria gonorrhoeae enhances HIV-1 infection of primary resting CD4+ T cells through TLR2 activation.
Sexually transmitted infections increase the likelihood of HIV-1 transmission. We investigated the effect of Neisseria gonorrheae (gonococcus [GC]) exposure on HIV replication in primary resting CD4(+) T cells, a major HIV target cell during the early stage of sexual transmission of HIV. GC and TLR2 agonists, such as peptidylglycan (PGN), Pam(3)CSK(4), and Pam(3)C-Lip, a GC-derived synthetic lipopeptide, but not TLR4 agonists including LPS or GC lipooligosaccharide enhanced HIV-1 infection of primary resting CD4(+) T cells after viral entry. Pretreatment of CD4(+) cells with PGN also promoted HIV infection. Anti-TLR2 Abs abolished the HIV enhancing effect of GC and Pam(3)C-Lip, indicating that GC-mediated enhancement of HIV infection of resting CD4(+) T cells was through TLR2. IL-2 was required for TLR2-mediated HIV enhancement. PGN and GC induced cell surface expression of T cell activation markers and HIV coreceptors, CCR5 and CXCR4. The maximal postentry HIV enhancing effect was achieved when PGN was added immediately after viral exposure. Kinetic studies and analysis of HIV DNA products indicated that GC exposure and TLR2 activation enhanced HIV infection at the step of nuclear import. We conclude that GC enhanced HIV infection of primary resting CD4(+) T cells through TLR2 activation, which both increased the susceptibility of primary CD4(+) T cells to HIV infection as well as enhanced HIV-infected CD4(+) T cells at the early stage of HIV life cycle after entry. This study provides a molecular mechanism by which nonulcerative sexually transmitted infections mediate enhancement of HIV infection and has implication for HIV prevention and therapeutics.

20065862
Human peritoneal macrophages from ascitic fluid can be infected by a broad range of HIV-1 isolates.
Macrophages are major HIV target cells. They support both productive and latent HIV-1 infection. Susceptibility of primary macrophages to HIV depends on the anatomical location and activation state of the cells. We demonstrate that peritoneal macrophages (PMs) are abundant in ascitic fluid of patients with liver cirrhosis and are susceptible to HIV-1 infection. PMs expressed CD68, a differentiation marker, exhibited phagocytic activity, and survived in culture for 2 months without additional growth factors. Freshly isolated PMs were susceptible to HIV-1 R5 strains but not to X4-T-cell line-adapted strains. Interestingly, after 7 days in culture, PMs acquired susceptibility to X4-T-cell line-adapted strains. HIV entry inhibitors, TAK779 and AMD3100, blocked HIV infection of PMs, indicating that infection by R5 and X4 strains was mediated by CCR5 and CXCR4, respectively. Although PMs did not express detectable cell surface levels of CXCR4 and CCR5, they did express mRNAs of these HIV coreceptors and responded to stimulation by their natural ligands, SDF-1alpha and RANTES. PMs were susceptible to HIV-1 X4, R5, and X4R5 primary isolates. PMs after 7 days in culture produced greater amounts of X4 and X4R5 HIV than freshly isolated PMs. The day-7 PMs were more susceptible to R5 infection in a single-cycle infection assay, but there was no increase in viral production in a multiple-round infection assay. The level of CXCR4 mRNA and production of CC-chemokines (MIP-1alpha, MIP-1beta, and RANTES) increased significantly during 7 days in culture. Our results indicate that PMs are susceptible to receptor-mediated infection by a broad range of HIV strains. These primary macrophages could provide a valuable system for investigating the role of primary macrophages in HIV pathogenesis.

20375599
Defensins in viral infections.
Defensins are antimicrobial peptides important to innate host defense. In addition to their direct antimicrobial effect, defensins modulate immune responses. Increasing evidence indicates that defensins exhibit complex functions by positively or negatively modulating infections of both enveloped and non-enveloped viruses. The effects of defensins on viral infections appear to be specific to the defensin, virus and target cell. Regulation of viral infection by defensins is achieved by multiple mechanisms. This review focuses on the interplay between defensins and viral infections, the mechanisms of action of defensins and the in vivo studies of the role of defensins in viral infections.

18424739
Neisseria gonorrhoeae-induced human defensins 5 and 6 increase HIV infectivity: role in enhanced transmission.
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) increase the likelihood of HIV transmission. Defensins are part of the innate mucosal immune response to STIs and therefore we investigated their role in HIV infection. We found that human defensins 5 and 6 (HD5 and HD6) promoted HIV infection, and this effect was primarily during viral entry. Enhancement was seen with primary viral isolates in primary CD4(+) T cells and the effect was more pronounced with R5 virus compared with X4 virus. HD5 and HD6 promoted HIV reporter viruses pseudotyped with vesicular stomatitis virus and murine leukemia virus envelopes, indicating that defensin-mediated enhancement was not dependent on CD4 and coreceptors. Enhancement of HIV by HD5 and HD6 was influenced by the structure of the peptides, as loss of the intramolecular cysteine bonds was associated with loss of the HIV-enhancing effect. Pro-HD5, the precursor and intracellular form of HD5, also exhibited HIV-enhancing effect. Using a cervicovaginal tissue culture system, we found that expression of HD5 and HD6 was induced in response to Neisseria gonorrhoeae (GC, for gonococcus) infection and that conditioned medium from GC-exposed cervicovaginal epithelial cells with elevated levels of HD5 also enhanced HIV infection. Introduction of small interfering RNAs for HD5 or HD6 abolished the HIV-enhancing effect mediated by GC. Thus, the induction of these defensins in the mucosa in the setting of GC infection could facilitate HIV infection. Furthermore, this study demonstrates the complexity of defensins as innate immune mediators in HIV transmission and warrants further investigation of the mechanism by which defensins modulate HIV infection.

17825297
SAMMA, a mandelic acid condensation polymer, inhibits dendritic cell-mediated HIV transmission.
SAMMA, a mandelic acid condensation polymer, exhibits a broad antimicrobial activity against several sexually transmitted pathogens including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Here we demonstrated that SAMMA suppressed HIV transmission by dendritic cells (DCs), one of the first target cells for primary infection. The greatest inhibitory effect was achieved when SAMMA was present during the co-culture with target cells. The inhibitory effect of SAMMA on DC-mediated HIV transmission was not due to cytotoxicity. Analysis of the level of DC-associated HIV p24 antigen revealed that SAMMA prevented HIV internalization by DCs when the virus was pre-incubated with the compound. In contrast, pre-incubation of DCs with SAMMA followed by wash-off did not affect the amount of cell-associated HIV p24 antigen. In addition, SAMMA blocked HIV glycoprotein-mediated cell-cell fusion. This study suggests that SAMMA prevents HIV infection through multiple mechanisms.

