20479248
Prothymosin-alpha inhibits HIV-1 via Toll-like receptor 4-mediated type I interferon induction.
Induction of type I interferons (IFN) is a central feature of innate immune responses to microbial pathogens and is mediated via Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent and -independent pathways. Prothymosin-alpha (ProTalpha), a small acidic protein produced and released by CD8(+) T cells, inhibits HIV-1, although the mechanism for its antiviral activity was not known. We demonstrate that exogenous ProTalpha acts as a ligand for TLR4 and stimulates type I IFN production to potently suppress HIV-1 after entry into cells. These activities are induced by native and recombinant ProTalpha, retained by an acidic peptide derived from ProTalpha, and lost in the absence of TLR4. Furthermore, we demonstrate that ProTalpha accounts for some of the soluble postintegration HIV-1 inhibitory activity long ascribed to CD8(+) cells. Thus, a protein produced by CD8(+) T cells of the adaptive immune system can exert potent viral suppressive activity through an innate immune response. Understanding the mechanism of IFN induction by ProTalpha may provide therapeutic leads for IFN-sensitive viruses.

17600282
Influence of prothymosin-alpha on HIV-1 target cells.
The important role of CD8(+) T cells in controlling HIV-1 infection through the innate as well as the adaptive immune system is well established. In addition to the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-dependent cytotoxic activity of CD8(+) T cells, they produce soluble factors that suppress HIV-1 replication in an MHC-independent manner. Several of those factors have been identified, including beta-chemokines, Rantes, MIP-1alpha, MIP-1beta, and MDC. We previously identified that prothymosin alpha (ProTalpha) in the conditioned medium of HVS transformed CD8(+) T cells was a potent inhibitor of HIV-1 replication following proviral integration. In this report we further characterize the anti-HIV-1 activity of ProTalpha by demonstrating its target-cell specificity, distinction from additional inhibitors of HIV-1 transcription in CD8(+) T cell supernatants, as well as the differential regulation of host cell antiviral genes that could impact HIV-1 replication. These genes include a number of transcription factors as well IFN-alpha-inducible genes including PKR, IRF1, and Rantes, in the absence of induction of IFN-alpha. These data suggest that the anti-HIV-1 activity of ProTalpha is mediated through the modulation of a number of genes that have been reported to suppress HIV-1 replication including the dysregulation of transcription factors and the induction of PKR and Rantes mRNA.

