21316508
Incidence, epidemiology, and prognosis of residual pulmonary hypertension after mitral valve repair for degenerative mitral regurgitation.
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a common sequela of degenerative mitral valve disease, but the regression of PH after mitral surgery is often incomplete. We sought to identify the preoperative risk factors for residual PH after mitral valve repair and its effect on the clinical outcome. The outcomes in 71 patients with preoperative PH (mean pulmonary arterial pressure ?25 mm Hg) were compared according to the presence or absence of residual PH 24 hours after mitral valve surgery. Of 71 patients, 33 (46%) had residual PH. The remainder experienced significant reductions in the mean pulmonary arterial pressure without changes in pulmonary vascular resistance. Patients with residual PH had significantly elevated postoperative pulmonary vascular resistance (despite a significant decrease from the preoperative baseline) compared to those without residual PH. Residual PH was an independent risk factor for postoperative morbidity, mortality, and a prolonged intensive care unit stay (odds ratio 4.0, 95% confidence interval 1.2 to 13.1, p = 0.02), independent of the preoperative mean pulmonary arterial pressure. A decreased left ventricular ejection fraction (odds ratio 0.9, 95% confidence interval 0.8 to 1.0, p = 0.007) and fibroelastic deficiency (odds ratio 3.6, 95% confidence interval 1.1 to 11.8, p = 0.03) were independent predictors of residual PH. In conclusion, residual PH is a clinically important entity common after mitral valve repair for degenerative disease and is associated with clinical variables that aid in the preoperative prediction of at-risk patients.

19808320
An atypical presentation of endomyocardial fibrosis diagnosed by cardiac MRI.


19642155
The management of stage D heart failure.


20620559
Disseminated intravascular coagulation complicating Epstein-Barr virus infection in a cardiac transplant recipient: a case report.
Viral infections are particularly common after cardiac transplantation. Herein we have presented a case of Epstein-Barr infection that presented as a viral syndrome with respiratory symptoms, but was complicated by multiorgan failure and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Transplant physicians should be aware of this unique complication of an otherwise self-limited infection.

