21613252
The multifunctional role of EKLF/KLF1 during erythropoiesis.
The cellular events that lead to terminal erythroid differentiation rely on the controlled interplay of extra- and intra-cellular regulatory factors. Their downstream effects are highly coordinated and result in the structural/morphologic and metabolic changes that uniquely characterize a maturing red blood cell. EKLF (Erythroid Krüppel-like factor; KLF1) is one of a very small number of intrinsic transcription factors that play a major role in regulating these events. This review covers three major aspects of erythropoiesis in which EKLF plays crucial functions. First, at the MEP (megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor) stage, where EKLF is involved in erythroid lineage commitment; second, during the global expansion of erythroid gene expression in primitive and definitive lineages, where it plays a direct role in globin switching; and third, during the terminal maturation of red cells where it helps control exit from the cell cycle. We finish by describing recent studies of mammalian EKLF/KLF1 mutations that lead to altered red cell phenotypes and disease.

20696915
Severe anemia in the Nan mutant mouse caused by sequence-selective disruption of erythroid Kruppel-like factor.
Studies of mouse models of anemia have long provided fundamental insights into red blood cell formation and function. Here we show that the semidominant mouse mutation Nan ("neonatal anemia") carries a single amino acid change (E339D) within the second zinc finger of the erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF), a critical erythroid regulatory transcription factor. The mutation alters the DNA-binding specificity of EKLF so that it no longer binds promoters of a subset of its DNA targets. Remarkably, even when mutant Nan and wild-type EKLF alleles are expressed at equivalent levels, the mutant form selectively interferes with expression of EKLF target genes whose promoter elements it no longer binds. This interference yields a distorted genetic output and selective protein deficiencies that differ from those seen in EKLF-heterozygous and EKLF-null red blood cells and presents a unique and unexpected mechanism of inherited disease.

20368355
EKLF directly activates the p21WAF1/CIP1 gene by proximal promoter and novel intronic regulatory regions during erythroid differentiation.
The switch from proliferation to differentiation during the terminal stages of erythropoiesis is a tightly controlled process that relies in part on transcription factor-mediated activation of cell cycle components. EKLF is a key transcription factor that is necessary for the initial establishment of the red cell phenotype. Here, we find that EKLF also plays a role during the subsequent differentiation process, as it induces p21(WAF1/CIP1) expression independent of p53 to regulate the changes in the cell cycle underlying erythroid maturation. EKLF activates p21 not only by directly binding to an EKLF site within a previously characterized GC-rich region in the p21 proximal promoter but also by occupancy at a novel, phylogenetically conserved region that contains consensus CACCC core motifs located downstream from the p21 TATA box. Our findings demonstrate that EKLF, likely in coordination with other transcription factors, directly contributes to the complex set of events that occur at the final erythroid cell divisions and accentuates terminal differentiation directly by activation of CDK inhibitors such as p21.

17938210
Sumoylation of EKLF promotes transcriptional repression and is involved in inhibition of megakaryopoiesis.
Erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF [KLF1]) is a transcriptional regulator that plays a critical role within a specific subset of hematopoietic cells, particularly in the erythroid lineage and its immediate precursor, the megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor (MEP). We find that EKLF is posttranslationally modified by sumoylation at a single site near its amino terminus and that PIAS1 plays a critical role in this process. Mutation of this site has little effect on EKLF's ability to function as a transcriptional activator; however, it has a dramatic effect on its repressive abilities. The mechanism of repression likely involves a novel small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO)-dependent EKLF interaction with the Mi-2beta component of the NuRD repression complex. Mutated EKLF is attenuated in its ability to repress megakaryocyte differentiation, implicating EKLF sumoylation status in differentiative decisions emanating from the MEP. These studies demonstrate a novel mechanism by which transcription factor sumoylation can alter protein-protein interactions and bipotential lineage decisions.

