21335514
Virological synapses allow HIV-1 uptake and gene expression in renal tubular epithelial cells.
In animal models of HIV-associated nephropathy, the expression of HIV regulatory genes in epithelial cells is sufficient to cause disease, but how the CD4-negative epithelial cells come to express HIV genes is unknown. Here, we co-cultured T cells infected with fluorescently tagged HIV with renal tubular epithelial cells and observed efficient virus transfer between these cells. The quantity of HIV transferred was much greater than that achieved by exposure to large amounts of cell-free virus and occurred without a requirement for CD4 or Env. The transfer required stable cell-cell adhesion, which could be blocked by sulfated polysaccharides or poly-anionic compounds. We found that the internalization of virus could lead to de novo synthesis of viral protein from incoming viral RNAs even in the presence of a reverse transcriptase inhibitor. These results illustrate an interaction between infected T cells and nonimmune cells, supporting the presence of virological synapses between HIV-harboring T cells and renal tubular epithelial cells, allowing viral uptake and gene expression in epithelial cells.

20683959
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 infects human hepatic stellate cells and promotes collagen I and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 expression: implications for the pathogenesis of HIV/hepatitis C virus-induced liver fibrosis.
Patients coinfected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) develop more rapid fibrosis than those infected with HCV only. In HIV/HCV-coinfected patients, fibrosis progression correlates with HIV RNA levels, suggesting a direct role of HIV in liver fibrogenesis. Chemokine (C-C motif) receptor 5 (CCR5) and cysteine-X-cysteine receptor 4 (CXCR4), the two major coreceptors required for HIV entry into cells, are expressed on activated hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), the principle fibrogenic cell type in the liver. We therefore examined whether HIV can infect HSCs, explored the potential mechanisms of viral entry, and assessed the impact of infection as reflected by the ability of HSCs to transfer virus to T lymphocytes and elicit a proinflammatory and profibrogenic response. We report that the laboratory-adapted viruses HIV-IIIB (CXCR4-tropic or X4) and HIV-BaL (CCR5-tropic or R5) and primary HIV isolates can infect both a human stellate cell line, LX-2, and primary human HSCs. HIV entry and gene expression in HSCs was confirmed using HIV-green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression viral constructs in the presence or absence of the reverse-transcriptase inhibitor azidothymidine. CD4 expression on a subset of primary HSCs was demonstrated using fluorescence-activated cell sorting and immunofluorescence staining. Blocking experiments in the presence of anti-CD4, anti-CXCR4, and anti-CCR5 revealed that HIV entry into HSCs is predominantly CD4/chemokine coreceptor-independent. HIV infection promoted HSC collagen I expression and secretion of the proinflammatory cytokine monocyte chemoattractant protein-1. Furthermore, infected LX-2 cells were capable of transferring GFP-expressing virus to T lymphocytes in a coculture system. Conclusion: Taken together, our results suggest a potential role of HIV in liver fibrosis/inflammation mediated through effects on HSCs. The role of early highly active antiretroviral therapy initiation in patients with HIV/HCV coinfection warrants further investigation.

20479248
Prothymosin-alpha inhibits HIV-1 via Toll-like receptor 4-mediated type I interferon induction.
Induction of type I interferons (IFN) is a central feature of innate immune responses to microbial pathogens and is mediated via Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent and -independent pathways. Prothymosin-alpha (ProTalpha), a small acidic protein produced and released by CD8(+) T cells, inhibits HIV-1, although the mechanism for its antiviral activity was not known. We demonstrate that exogenous ProTalpha acts as a ligand for TLR4 and stimulates type I IFN production to potently suppress HIV-1 after entry into cells. These activities are induced by native and recombinant ProTalpha, retained by an acidic peptide derived from ProTalpha, and lost in the absence of TLR4. Furthermore, we demonstrate that ProTalpha accounts for some of the soluble postintegration HIV-1 inhibitory activity long ascribed to CD8(+) cells. Thus, a protein produced by CD8(+) T cells of the adaptive immune system can exert potent viral suppressive activity through an innate immune response. Understanding the mechanism of IFN induction by ProTalpha may provide therapeutic leads for IFN-sensitive viruses.

20404718
HIV-1 viral protein r induces ERK and caspase-8-dependent apoptosis in renal tubular epithelial cells.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is the most common cause of end-stage renal disease in persons with HIV/AIDS and is characterized by focal glomerulosclerosis and dysregulated renal tubular epithelial cell (RTEC) proliferation and apoptosis. HIV-1 viral protein r (Vpr) has been implicated in HIV-induced RTEC apoptosis but the mechanisms of Vpr-induced RTEC apoptosis are unknown. The aim of this study was therefore to determine the mechanisms of Vpr-induced apoptosis in RTEC. Apoptosis and caspase activation were analyzed in human RTEC (HK2) after transduction with Vpr-expressing and control lentiviral vectors. Bax and BID were inhibited with lentiviral shRNA, and ERK activation was blocked with the MEK1,2 inhibitor, U0126. Vpr induced apoptosis as indicated by caspase 3/7 activation, PARP-1 cleavage and mitochondrial injury. Vpr activated both caspases-8 and 9. Inhibition of Bax reduced Vpr-induced apoptosis, as reported in other cell types. Additionally, Vpr-induced cleavage of BID to tBID and suppression of BID expression prevented Vpr-induced apoptosis. Since sustained ERK activation can activate caspase-8 in some cell types, we studied the role of ERK in Vpr-induced caspase-8 activation. Vpr induced sustained ERK activation in HK2 cells and incubation with U0126 reduced Vpr-induced caspase-8 activation, BID cleavage and apoptosis. We detected phosphorylated ERK in RTEC in HIVAN biopsy specimens by immunohistochemistry. These studies delineate a novel pathway of Vpr-induced apoptosis in RTEC, which is mediated by sustained ERK activation, resulting in caspase 8-mediated cleavage of BID to tBID, thereby facilitating Bax-mediated mitochondrial injury and apoptosis.

20147631
Neisseria gonorrhoeae enhances HIV-1 infection of primary resting CD4+ T cells through TLR2 activation.
Sexually transmitted infections increase the likelihood of HIV-1 transmission. We investigated the effect of Neisseria gonorrheae (gonococcus [GC]) exposure on HIV replication in primary resting CD4(+) T cells, a major HIV target cell during the early stage of sexual transmission of HIV. GC and TLR2 agonists, such as peptidylglycan (PGN), Pam(3)CSK(4), and Pam(3)C-Lip, a GC-derived synthetic lipopeptide, but not TLR4 agonists including LPS or GC lipooligosaccharide enhanced HIV-1 infection of primary resting CD4(+) T cells after viral entry. Pretreatment of CD4(+) cells with PGN also promoted HIV infection. Anti-TLR2 Abs abolished the HIV enhancing effect of GC and Pam(3)C-Lip, indicating that GC-mediated enhancement of HIV infection of resting CD4(+) T cells was through TLR2. IL-2 was required for TLR2-mediated HIV enhancement. PGN and GC induced cell surface expression of T cell activation markers and HIV coreceptors, CCR5 and CXCR4. The maximal postentry HIV enhancing effect was achieved when PGN was added immediately after viral exposure. Kinetic studies and analysis of HIV DNA products indicated that GC exposure and TLR2 activation enhanced HIV infection at the step of nuclear import. We conclude that GC enhanced HIV infection of primary resting CD4(+) T cells through TLR2 activation, which both increased the susceptibility of primary CD4(+) T cells to HIV infection as well as enhanced HIV-infected CD4(+) T cells at the early stage of HIV life cycle after entry. This study provides a molecular mechanism by which nonulcerative sexually transmitted infections mediate enhancement of HIV infection and has implication for HIV prevention and therapeutics.

19787651
Zoonotic infections: an emerging threat to human health.


19726511
FAT10: a novel mediator of Vpr-induced apoptosis in human immunodeficiency virus-associated nephropathy.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated nephropathy is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in HIV-infected persons. Vpr-induced cell cycle dysregulation and apoptosis of renal tubular epithelial cells are important components of the pathogenesis of HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN). FAT10 is a ubiquitin-like protein that is upregulated in renal tubular epithelial cells in HIVAN. In these studies, we report that Vpr induces increased expression of FAT10 in tubular cells and that inhibition of FAT10 expression prevents Vpr-induced apoptosis in human and murine tubular cells. Moreover, we found that Vpr interacts with FAT10 and that these proteins colocalize at mitochondria. These studies establish FAT10 as a novel mediator of Vpr-induced cell death.

19657269
HIV-1 Vpr activates the DNA damage response in renal tubule epithelial cells.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is a major cause of HIV-related morbidity and mortality. Pathogenesis involves direct infection of the glomerular and tubular epithelial cells leading to characteristic disorder. Recently, we have shown that HIV-1 Vpr causes hypertrophy, hyperploidy, and apoptosis. Here, we report that Vpr activates the DNA damage response resulting in the observed renal phenotype. Renal sections from the HIVAN transgenic mouse model and human biopsies both show an abundant DNA damage response.

19349871
The differential binding and activity of PRO 2000 against diverse HIV-1 envelopes.
PRO 2000 is a polyanionic microbicide that binds directly to the glycoprotein 120 (gp120) envelope protein to inhibit HIV-1 entry. We studied the breadth of PRO 2000 activity against HIV-1 derived from recently transmitted R5 viruses. We also investigated the interaction of this compound with X4 and R5 HIV-1 envelope glycoproteins using an epitope-mapping strategy. The anti-HIV activity of PRO 2000 against subtype B and C Env-pseudotyped viruses was assessed in saline and cervicovaginal lavage fluid. Competitive binding assays were performed with X4 and R5 monomeric and virus-associated gp120. PRO 2000 was found to be active against recently transmitted subtype B and C viruses tested in vitro, however, at 1 microg/mL in saline, activity against subtype C was decreased compared with subtype B. Epitope mapping using anti-V3 region antibodies showed that PRO 2000 binds to the V3 region of monomeric and virus-associated X4 gp120 with a higher affinity than to V3 of R5 gp120. In contrast, the interaction of PRO 2000 with the CD4-binding site was similar for both X4 and R5 monomeric and virus-associated gp120. PRO 2000 has significant activity against recently transmitted viruses, although some activity is lost at low concentrations. Epitope binding studies suggest that this broad activity is due to direct and indirect interactions with multiple gp120 sites rather than V3 binding alone.

19052538
The spectrum of kidney disease in patients with AIDS in the era of antiretroviral therapy.
With prolonged survival and aging of the HIV-infected population in the era of antiretroviral therapy, biopsy series have found a broad spectrum of HIV-related and co-morbid kidney disease in these patients. Our study describes the variety of renal pathology found in a prospective cohort of antiretroviral-experienced patients (the Manhattan HIV Brain Bank) who had consented to postmortem organ donation. Nearly one-third of 89 kidney tissue donors had chronic kidney disease, and evidence of some renal pathology was found in 75. The most common diagnoses were arterionephrosclerosis, HIV-associated nephropathy and glomerulonephritis. Other diagnoses included pyelonephritis, interstitial nephritis, diabetic nephropathy, fungal infection and amyloidosis. Excluding 2 instances of acute tubular necrosis, slightly over one-third of the cases would have been predicted using current diagnostic criteria for chronic kidney disease. Based on semi-quantitative analysis of stored specimens, pre-mortem microalbuminuria testing could have identified an additional 12 cases. Future studies are needed to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of more sensitive methods for defining chronic kidney disease, in order to identify HIV-infected patients with early kidney disease who may benefit from antiretroviral therapy and other interventions known to delay disease progression and prevent complications.

18614999
HIV-1 Vpr inhibits cytokinesis in human proximal tubule cells.
Transgenic mouse models of HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) show that expression of HIV-1 genes in kidney cells produces collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and microcystic tubular disease typical of the human disease. HIV-1 vpr plays an important role in the glomerulosclerosis of HIVAN, especially when it is associated with nef expression in podocytes. Further, Vpr is reported to exacerbate tubular pathology. Here we determined effects of vpr expression on renal tubular epithelial cell function by transducing them with a pseudotyped lentivirus vector carrying HIV-1 vpr and control genes. Vpr expression in the cultured cells impaired cytokinesis causing cell enlargement and multinucleation. This profound in vitro phenotype caused us to reexamine the HIVAN mouse model and human HIVAN biopsies to see if similar changes occur in vivo. Both showed abundant hypertrophic tubule cells similar to the in vitro finding that represents a previously unappreciated aspect of the human disease. Additionally, multinucleated tubular cells were identified in the murine HIVAN model and increased chromosome number was detected in tubular cells of human HIVAN biopsies. Our study provides evidence of a new clinical phenotype in HIVAN that may result from the ability of Vpr to impair cytokinesis.

18424739
Neisseria gonorrhoeae-induced human defensins 5 and 6 increase HIV infectivity: role in enhanced transmission.
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) increase the likelihood of HIV transmission. Defensins are part of the innate mucosal immune response to STIs and therefore we investigated their role in HIV infection. We found that human defensins 5 and 6 (HD5 and HD6) promoted HIV infection, and this effect was primarily during viral entry. Enhancement was seen with primary viral isolates in primary CD4(+) T cells and the effect was more pronounced with R5 virus compared with X4 virus. HD5 and HD6 promoted HIV reporter viruses pseudotyped with vesicular stomatitis virus and murine leukemia virus envelopes, indicating that defensin-mediated enhancement was not dependent on CD4 and coreceptors. Enhancement of HIV by HD5 and HD6 was influenced by the structure of the peptides, as loss of the intramolecular cysteine bonds was associated with loss of the HIV-enhancing effect. Pro-HD5, the precursor and intracellular form of HD5, also exhibited HIV-enhancing effect. Using a cervicovaginal tissue culture system, we found that expression of HD5 and HD6 was induced in response to Neisseria gonorrhoeae (GC, for gonococcus) infection and that conditioned medium from GC-exposed cervicovaginal epithelial cells with elevated levels of HD5 also enhanced HIV infection. Introduction of small interfering RNAs for HD5 or HD6 abolished the HIV-enhancing effect mediated by GC. Thus, the induction of these defensins in the mucosa in the setting of GC infection could facilitate HIV infection. Furthermore, this study demonstrates the complexity of defensins as innate immune mediators in HIV transmission and warrants further investigation of the mechanism by which defensins modulate HIV infection.

17885301
Chronic kidney disease in HIV infection: an urban epidemic.
Kidney disease is an important complication of HIV, particularly in minority populations. We describe the burden of chronic kidney disease among 1239 adults followed at an urban AIDS center, with an estimated prevalence of 15.5% (n = 192). Independent predictors of kidney disease included older age, black race, hepatitis C virus exposure, and lower CD4 cell count. These data suggest that chronic kidney disease remains a common complication of HIV infection in the era of antiretroviral therapy.

17825297
SAMMA, a mandelic acid condensation polymer, inhibits dendritic cell-mediated HIV transmission.
SAMMA, a mandelic acid condensation polymer, exhibits a broad antimicrobial activity against several sexually transmitted pathogens including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Here we demonstrated that SAMMA suppressed HIV transmission by dendritic cells (DCs), one of the first target cells for primary infection. The greatest inhibitory effect was achieved when SAMMA was present during the co-culture with target cells. The inhibitory effect of SAMMA on DC-mediated HIV transmission was not due to cytotoxicity. Analysis of the level of DC-associated HIV p24 antigen revealed that SAMMA prevented HIV internalization by DCs when the virus was pre-incubated with the compound. In contrast, pre-incubation of DCs with SAMMA followed by wash-off did not affect the amount of cell-associated HIV p24 antigen. In addition, SAMMA blocked HIV glycoprotein-mediated cell-cell fusion. This study suggests that SAMMA prevents HIV infection through multiple mechanisms.

17703413
alpha-Defensin inhibits influenza virus replication by cell-mediated mechanism(s).
The innate immune system mounts the first host response to pathogens. Because alpha-defensins, which are cationic antimicrobial peptides of polymorphonuclear neutrophils and other leukocytes, are important effectors of the innate immune system, we studied the antiviral activity of human alpha-defensin-1 (also known as "human neutrophil peptide-1" [HNP-1]) against influenza virus in vitro. Treatment of cell cultures with HNP-1 soon after infection resulted in marked inhibition of influenza virus replication and viral protein synthesis. This effect was not due to cytotoxicity or to a direct effect on the virus. Treatment of cells with HNP-1 followed by its removal before infection also inhibited viral replication, suggesting that the inhibition was due to the modulation of cellular pathways. HNP-1 treatment inhibited protein kinase C (PKC) activation in infected cells, suggesting the involvement of the PKC pathway. Our data expand the previously known activity of alpha -defensins against influenza virus. Characterizing the mechanism of action of alpha -defensins may lead to the identification of new strategies for prevention and therapy.

19372794
Kidney and central nervous system as reservoirs of HIV infection.
To summarize recent investigations into the establishment and maintenance of the kidney and central nervous system as reservoirs of HIV infection and the resultant pathogenesis of HIV infection in these organs. Significant progress has been made in understanding the pathogenesis of HIV-associated nephropathy with the demonstration that HIV gene expression within podocytes was sufficient to recapitulate HIV-associated nephropathy -like renal disease in mouse models. Little progress has been made, however, in understanding how the HIV reservoir in the kidney is established and maintained. Studies of the central nervous system reservoir have further characterized the compartmentalization of HIV between the central nervous system and lymphoid organs and within brain regions. The relationship between HIV in the cerebrospinal fluid and in the brain and the utility of cerebrospinal fluid as a surrogate for the brain have been reevaluated in patients receiving antiretroviral medication and in patients at different stages of HIV infection and neurologic impairment. Finally, nonproductive infection of astrocytes in vivo has been demonstrated and mechanisms to explain viral entry and the block to productive infection of these cells have been described. Although much progress has been made in the understanding of the pathogenesis of HIV-associated nephropathy, much work remains to be done to better understand the establishment and maintenance of the HIV reservoir in both the kidney and the brain, and in particular, the mechanisms of neurologic dysfunction resulting from HIV infection of the brain.

18647620
Conditionally replicating lentiviral-hybrid episomal vectors for suicide gene therapy.
Lentiviral vectors have been shown to be good candidates for gene transfer protocols; however, prevention of insertional mutagenesis remains problematic. Here we report on the design of a conditionally replicating integrase (IN)-defective lentiviral-hybrid episomal vector in which the insertion of the SV40 promoter/origin of replication provides long-term persistence of the extrachromosomal DNA in the presence of the corresponding trans-acting T antigen (Tag) for targeted suicide gene therapy. SV40-driven GFP expression from the IN-defective lentiviral-hybrid vector was sustained only in the Tag positive 293T cell line, while expression was transient in the parental Tag deficient cell line 293. Quantitative PCR for the 2-LTR circular forms indicated that the unintegrated forms remained stable in 293T for up to 56 days post-transduction, while they were undetectable in the cell line 293 after day 14. Transduction of 293T cells with the IN-defective lentiviral-hybrid episomal vector containing the thymidine kinase (TK) gene rendered the Tag expressing cells highly susceptible to ganciclovir (GCV) treatment, as opposed to the cells infected with the control vector or in Tag negative cells. These data suggest that conditionally replicating IN-defective lentiviral-hybrid episomal vectors could prove useful as vehicles for suicide gene therapy, in particular in cells transformed by SV40.

