19005013
Successful split liver-kidney transplant for factor H associated hemolytic uremic syndrome.
A male infant with a family history of thrombotic microangiopathy developed atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS). Case report. Genetic analysis demonstrated a heterozygous mutation (S1191L) of CFH, the gene coding complement factor H (CFH). The child suffered many episodes of HUS, each treated with plasma exchange. In time, despite initiation of a prophylactic regimen of plasma exchange, his renal function declined significantly. At the age of 4 yr he received a (split liver) combined liver-kidney transplant (LKT) with preoperative plasma exchange and enoxaparin anticoagulation. Initial function of both grafts was excellent and is maintained for nearly 2 yr. This report adds to the small but growing number of individuals in whom LKT has provided a favorable outcome for aHUS associated with CFH mutation, expands the technique of using a split liver graft, and describes the unique histologic features of subclinical liver disease in HUS.

17932253
Intravenous immunoglobulins reverse acute vaso-occlusive crises in sickle cell mice through rapid inhibition of neutrophil adhesion.
Previous studies using intravital microscopy in a sickle cell disease (SCD) mouse model suggest that adherent white blood cells (WBCs) play a key role in vaso-occlusion by capturing circulating red blood cells (RBCs) in venules. Commercial intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) given before the inflammatory stimuli increased microcirculatory blood flow and survival. To mimic the clinical situation in which SCD patients seek medical attention after the onset of symptoms, we developed an in vivo model in which the therapeutic intervention (eg, IVIG) was administered after in the inflammatory challenge. In this setting, IVIG rapidly (<10 minutes) reduced adherent leukocyte numbers and dramatically inhibited interactions between RBCs and WBCs, resulting in improved microcirculatory blood flow and survival of sickle cell "Berkeley" mice. Longer survival correlated positively with blood flow (P=.001) and negatively with the number of adherent leukocytes (P=.001) and RBC-WBC interactions (P=.002). Using multichannel digital fluorescence videomicroscopy, we found that IVIG affected specifically the recruitment of neutrophils. Moreover, further analyses of leukocyte behavior revealed that IVIG significantly increased rolling velocities, indicating that it alters adhesion pathways involved in slow rolling. These data suggest that the potential therapeutic benefits of IVIG in SCD crises should be evaluated in a clinical trial.

