18323015
Teaching resources. Using web-based discussion forums as a model of the peer-review process and a tool for assessment.
This Teaching Resource describes how to use an online asynchronous discussion as a mechanism to introduce students to the peer-review process, as well as to assess student performance and understanding. This method was applied to a graduate course on signal transduction and the Teaching Resource includes a syllabus, detailed plan for incorporating the online discussion, sample journal club questions, and sample student responses to the discussion forum, faculty responses, and student revisions.

18309063
Inquiry learning. Integrating content detail and critical reasoning by peer review.


17565999
Regulation of PTEN activity by its carboxyl-terminal autoinhibitory domain.
The regulation of PTEN intrinsic biochemical properties has not been fully elucidated. In this report, we investigated the role of the PTEN carboxyl-terminal tail domain in regulating its membrane targeting and catalytic functions. Characterization of a panel of PTEN phosphorylation site mutants revealed that mutating Ser-385 to alanine (S385A) promoted membrane localization in vivo and phosphatase activity in vitro. Furthermore, S385A mutation was associated with a substantial reduction in the phosphorylation of the Ser-380/Thr-382/Thr-383 cluster. Therefore, Ser-385 could prime additional dephosphorylation events to regulate PTEN catalytic activity. Moreover, substituting Ser-380/Thr-382/Thr-383 to phosphomimic residues reversed the phosphatase activity of the S385A mutation. Next, we further defined the underlying mechanisms responsible for the COOH-terminal tail region in modulating PTEN biological activity. We have identified an interaction between the 71-amino acid carboxyl-terminal tail region and the CBRIII motif of the C2 domain, which has been implicated in membrane binding. In addition, a synthetic phosphomimic peptide encompassing the phosphorylation site cluster between amino acids 368 and 390 within the tail region mediated the suppression of PTEN catalytic activity in vitro. This same peptide when expressed in cultured cells also impeded PTEN membrane localization and enhanced phospho-Akt levels. Thus, our data suggest that the COOH-terminal tail can act as an autoinhibitory domain to control both PTEN membrane recruitment and phosphatase activity.

17514651
Functional inactivation of the KLF6 tumor suppressor gene by loss of heterozygosity and increased alternative splicing in glioblastoma.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary brain tumor and possesses a high incidence of 10p loss. The KLF6 (Kruppel-like transcription factor) tumor suppressor gene on 10p15 is inactivated by loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and/or somatic mutation in a number of human cancers and forced expression of KLF6 in GBM lines inhibits their growth and transformation. In addition, increased expression of its alternatively spliced, cytoplasmic isoform KLF6-SV1 has now been shown to play a role in cancer pathogenesis. On the basis of these findings we examined the role of KLF6 and KLF6-SV1 in the development and progression of GBM. LOH analysis of 17 primary GBM patient samples using KLF6-specific microsatellite markers revealed that 88.2% (15/17) had LOH of the KLF6 locus. Interestingly, no KLF6 somatic mutations were identified. RNA analysis revealed concomitant decreases in all primary GBM tumors (n = 11) by approximately 80% in KLF6 expression (p < 0.001) coupled with increased KLF6-SV1 expression (p < 0.001) when compared to normal astrocytes. To determine the biological relevance of these findings, we examined the effect of KLF6 expression and KLF6-SV1 knockdown in A235 and CRL2020 cell lines. Reconstitution of KLF6 decreased cell proliferation by almost 50%, whereas targeted KLF6 reduction increased cell proliferation 2.5-4.5 fold. Conversely, targeted KLF6-SV1 reduction decreased cell proliferation by 50%. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that KLF6 allelic imbalance and decreased KLF6 and increased KLF6-SV1 expression are common findings in primary GBM tumors, and these changes have antagonistic effects on the regulation of cellular proliferation in GBM cell lines.

