19590656
Surgical portosystemic shunts and the Rex bypass in children: a single-centre experience.
This study aimed to illustrate the indications for, and types and outcomes of surgical portosystemic shunt (PSS) and/or Rex bypass in a single centre. Data were collected from children with a PSS and/or Rex bypass between 1992 and 2006 at Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York. Median age at surgery was 10.7 years (range 0.3-22.0 years). Indications included: (i) refractory gastrointestinal bleeding in portal hypertension associated with (a) compensated cirrhosis (n= 12), (b) portal vein thrombosis (n= 10), (c) hepatoportal sclerosis (n= 3); (ii) refractory ascites secondary to Budd-Chiari syndrome (n= 3), and (iii) familial hypercholesterolaemia (n= 4). There were 20 distal splenorenal, four portacaval, three Rex bypass, two mesocaval, two mesoatrial and one proximal splenorenal shunts. At the last follow-up (median 2.9 years, range 0.1-14.1 years), one shunt (Rex bypass) was thrombosed. Two patients had died and two had required a liver transplant. These had a patent shunt at last imaging prior to death or transplant. Portosystemic shunts and Rex bypass have been used to manage portal hypertension with excellent outcomes. In selected children with compensated liver disease, PSS may act as a bridge to liver transplantation or represent an attractive alternative.

18674734
Regression of hepatic fibrosis after intestinal transplantation in total parenteral nutrition liver disease.
Hepatic fibrosis may occur in patients with intestinal failure requiring total parenteral nutrition, leading to liver dysfunction necessitating combined intestinal and liver transplantation. The decision to perform combined transplantation as opposed to an isolated intestinal transplant is based on the presence of hyperbilirubinemia, portal hypertension, and advanced hepatic fibrosis. We identified 4 patients who underwent isolated intestinal transplantation having significant liver fibrosis. A novel image analysis technique was applied to serial liver biopsies to more precisely quantitate posttransplantation fibrosis regression separately within both portal and centrilobular areas. All patients were found to have significant portal and centrilobular fibrosis regression, which occurred more rapidly in the former. Two patients had improvement in fibrosis despite infections and continuation of total parenteral nutrition, suggesting that hepatic fibrosis associated with intestinal failure may in part be related to adequate anatomic and functional bowel length. Significant hepatic fibrosis and liver dysfunction may regress after intestinal transplantation and fibrosis regresses more rapidly in portal areas. This suggests that some patients with intestinal failure and associated liver disease may safely undergo isolated intestinal transplant without the need for concurrent liver transplantation and its attendant higher morbidity and mortality.

17077945
Common hepatic artery arising from the left gastric artery: a rare anatomic variation identified on a cadaveric liver donor.
Anatomical variations of the arterial supply of the liver are not uncommon. The typical normal "textbook" anatomy of the hepatic artery is found only in approximately half of the cases. Some of the variations such as the presence of a right or left hepatic branch are more common, but other ones are extremely rare. We describe here a rare case in which the common hepatic artery arose from the left gastric artery, found during a cadaveric liver donor harvesting and confirmed with imaging studies. Cases like this one highlight the importance of knowing the hepatic arterial anatomy and the possibility of its numerous variations by the transplant and hepatobiliary surgeon.

