21464937
Prevalence of kidney disease in HIV-infected and uninfected Rwandan women.
In the United States, HIV-related kidney disease disproportionately affects individuals of African descent; however, there are few estimates of kidney disease prevalence in Africa. We evaluated the prevalence of kidney disease among HIV-infected and uninfected Rwandan women. The Rwandan Women's Interassociation Study and Assessment prospectively enrolled 936 women. Associations with estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)<60 mL/min/1.73 m(2) and proteinuria were assessed in separate logistic regression models. Among 891 non-pregnant women with available data, 2.4% had an eGFR<60 mL/min/1.73 m(2) (calculated by the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease equation, MDRD eGFR) and 8.7% had proteinuria ?1+. The prevalence of decreased eGFR varied markedly depending on the estimating method used, with the highest prevalence by Cockcroft-Gault. Regardless of the method used to estimate GFR, the proportion with decreased eGFR or proteinuria did not differ significantly between HIV-infected and -uninfected women in unadjusted analysis. After adjusting for age and blood pressure, HIV infection was associated with significantly higher odds of decreased MDRD eGFR but not proteinuria. In a well-characterized cohort of Rwandan women, HIV infection was associated with decreased MDRD eGFR. The prevalence of decreased eGFR among HIV-infected women in our study was lower than that previously reported in African-Americans and in other Central and East African HIV populations, although there was substantial variability depending on the equation used to estimate GFR. Future studies are needed to optimize GFR estimates and to determine the impact of antiretroviral therapy on kidney disease in this population.

20672993
Short communication: Inadequate vitamin D exacerbates parathyroid hormone elevations in tenofovir users.
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) elevations are associated with reduced bone mineral density and adverse health outcomes and have been reported in patients with HIV infection. We aimed to examine the impact of vitamin D status and tenofovir (TDF) use on PTH levels among HIV-infected patients receiving combination antiretroviral therapy (cART). Demographics, medication and supplement use, and clinical data, including 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] and PTH, were collected on 45 HIV-infected men on ART. Suboptimal vitamin D status was defined as 25(OH)D < 30 ng/ml. The relationship between antiretroviral agents, suboptimal 25(OH)D, and PTH levels was examined. Among subjects with suboptimal vitamin D status, PTH values greater than or equal to the ULN (87 pg/ml) were more common among TDF users than nonusers: 41% versus 0% (p = 0.018); and median PTH was higher in TDF users: 80 pg/ml versus 55 pg/ml (p = 0.02). Among TDF users, PTH was higher in the group with suboptimal 25(OH)D (p = 0.045). Multivariable linear regression showed that PTH was independently and directly related to TDF use (p = 0.017) and inversely related to 25(OH)D (p = 0.017). PTH was not related to the estimated glomerular filtration rate (p = 0.9). In this cross-sectional study of HIV-infected men on ART, the use of TDF and the level of 25(OH)D were independently associated with PTH levels. Because TDF is a potent and widely used antiretroviral drug, information about cofactors that may exacerbate its side effects is of significant clinical value.

20098331
Microalbuminuria is associated with all-cause and AIDS mortality in women with HIV infection.
Prevalence of microalbuminuria is increased in patients with HIV. Microalbuminuria is associated with increased mortality in other populations, including diabetics, for whom microalbuminuria testing is standard of care. We investigated whether microalbuminuria is associated with mortality in HIV-infected women not receiving antiretroviral therapy. Urinalysis for proteinuria and semiquantitative testing for microalbuminuria were performed in specimens from 2 consecutive visits in 1547 HIV-infected women enrolled in the Women's Interagency HIV Study in 1994-1995. Time to death was modeled using proportional hazards analysis. Compared with women without albuminuria, the hazard ratio (HR) for all-cause mortality was increased in women with 1 (HR: 3.4; 95% CI: 2.2 to 5.2) or 2 specimens positive for either proteinuria or microalbuminuria (HR: 3.9; 95% CI: 2.1 to 7.0). The highest risk was observed in women with both specimens positive for proteinuria (HR: 5.8; 95% CI: 3.4 to 9.8). The association between albuminuria and all-cause mortality risk remained significant after adjustment for demographics, HIV disease severity, and related comorbidities. Similar results were obtained for AIDS death. We identified a graded relationship between albuminuria and the risk of all-cause and AIDS mortality.

20005491
Antiretroviral medications: adverse effects on the kidney.
The widespread introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in the mid-1990s dramatically altered the course of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, with improvements in survival and reductions in the incidence of AIDS-defining illnesses. Although antiretroviral therapy has been shown to reduce the incidence of both AIDS-defining and non-AIDS conditions, long-term exposure to HAART may also be associated with significant toxicity. This article reviews the potential nephrotoxicity of specific antiretroviral agents and the impact of antiretroviral therapy on related metabolic disorders. The antiretroviral agents most strongly associated with direct nephrotoxicity include the nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor, tenofovir, and the protease inhibitor indinavir, although other agents have been implicated less frequently. Tenofovir and related nucleotide analogs have primarily been associated with proximal tubular dysfunction and acute kidney injury, whereas indinavir is known to cause nephrolithiasis, obstructive nephropathy, and interstitial nephritis. Kidney damage related to antiretroviral therapy is typically reversible with early recognition and timely discontinuation of the offending agent, and nephrologists should be familiar with the potential toxicity of these agents to avoid delays in diagnosis.

19052538
The spectrum of kidney disease in patients with AIDS in the era of antiretroviral therapy.
With prolonged survival and aging of the HIV-infected population in the era of antiretroviral therapy, biopsy series have found a broad spectrum of HIV-related and co-morbid kidney disease in these patients. Our study describes the variety of renal pathology found in a prospective cohort of antiretroviral-experienced patients (the Manhattan HIV Brain Bank) who had consented to postmortem organ donation. Nearly one-third of 89 kidney tissue donors had chronic kidney disease, and evidence of some renal pathology was found in 75. The most common diagnoses were arterionephrosclerosis, HIV-associated nephropathy and glomerulonephritis. Other diagnoses included pyelonephritis, interstitial nephritis, diabetic nephropathy, fungal infection and amyloidosis. Excluding 2 instances of acute tubular necrosis, slightly over one-third of the cases would have been predicted using current diagnostic criteria for chronic kidney disease. Based on semi-quantitative analysis of stored specimens, pre-mortem microalbuminuria testing could have identified an additional 12 cases. Future studies are needed to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of more sensitive methods for defining chronic kidney disease, in order to identify HIV-infected patients with early kidney disease who may benefit from antiretroviral therapy and other interventions known to delay disease progression and prevent complications.

19013326
Acute kidney injury in HIV-infected patients.
Acute kidney injury is common in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients, and has been associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Before the introduction of effective antiretroviral therapy, acute kidney injury in HIV-positive patients was most commonly the result of volume depletion, septicemia, or nephrotoxic medications. Acute kidney injury remains a significant problem in the antiretroviral era, and still commonly is attributed to infection or nephrotoxic medications. Less common causes such as direct infectious insults, immune restoration inflammatory syndrome, rhabdomyolysis, and obstruction should be considered when the underlying process is not obvious. In addition to advanced HIV disease, several other patient characteristics have emerged as potential risk factors for acute kidney injury in the antiretroviral era, including older age, diabetes, pre-existing chronic kidney disease, and hepatitis co-infection or liver disease.

19013322
HIV-associated nephropathy: clinical presentation, pathology, and epidemiology in the era of antiretroviral therapy.
The classic kidney disease of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, HIV-associated nephropathy, is characterized by progressive acute renal failure, often accompanied by proteinuria and ultrasound findings of enlarged, echogenic kidneys. Definitive diagnosis requires kidney biopsy, which shows collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis with associated microcystic tubular dilatation and interstitial inflammation. Podocyte proliferation is a hallmark of HIV-associated nephropathy, although this classic pathology is observed less frequently in antiretroviral-treated patients. The pathogenesis of HIV-associated nephropathy involves direct HIV infection of renal epithelial cells, and the widespread introduction of combination antiretroviral therapy has had a significant impact on the natural history and epidemiology of this unique disease. These observations have established antiretroviral therapy as the cornerstone of treatment for HIV-associated nephropathy in the absence of prospective clinical trials. Adjunctive therapy for HIV-associated nephropathy includes angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor blockers, as well as corticosteroids in selected patients with significant interstitial inflammation or rapid progression.

19013321
Kidney disease in HIV infection: introduction.


18753863
The impact of hepatitis C virus coinfection on HIV-related kidney disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
In the era of antiretroviral therapy, non-AIDS complications such as kidney disease are important contributors to morbidity and mortality. To estimate the impact of hepatitis C coinfection on the risk of kidney disease in HIV patients. Two investigators identified English-language citations in MEDLINE and Web of Science from 1989 through 1 July 2007. References of selected articles were reviewed. Observational studies and clinical trials of HIV-related kidney disease and antiretroviral nephrotoxicity were eligible if they included at least 50 subjects and reported hepatitis C status. Data on study characteristics, population, and kidney disease outcomes were abstracted by two independent reviewers. After screening 2516 articles, 27 studies were eligible and 24 authors confirmed or provided data. Separate meta-analyses were performed for chronic kidney disease outcomes (n = 10), proteinuria (n = 4), acute renal failure (n = 2), and indinavir toxicity (n = 5). The pooled incidence of chronic kidney disease was higher in patients with hepatitis C coinfection [6.2 versus 4.0%; relative risk 1.49, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.08-2.06]. In meta-regression, prevalence of black race and the proportion of patients with documented hepatitis C status were independently associated with the risk of chronic kidney disease. The relative risk associated with hepatitis C coinfection was significantly increased for proteinuria (1.15; 95% CI 1.02-1.30) and acute renal failure (1.64; 95% CI 1.21-2.23), with no significant statistical heterogeneity. The relative risk of indinavir toxicity was 1.59 (95% CI 0.99-2.54) with hepatitis C coinfection. Hepatitis C coinfection is associated with a significant increase in the risk of HIV-related kidney disease.

18721054
Acceptance of rapid HIV testing among medical inpatients in New York City.
Early diagnosis of HIV infection is important for both individual and public health. This study examined patient acceptability of routine, voluntary HIV testing in a New York City hospital serving East Harlem, a diverse community with an HIV seroprevalence of 2.6%. Consecutive admissions to the general medicine service were screened for enrollment between October 27 and November 22, 2005, and March 13 and May 9, 2006. Participants completed a self-administered printed survey and underwent rapid HIV testing. Of the 420 patients approached, 100 patients participated. The most common reason for declining participation was, "I feel too sick to participate." Participants were more likely to be men (odds ratio [OR] 1.71, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.05, 2.77) and to be in a younger age group (20-49 years; OR 2.70, 95% CI 1.64, 4.45). Participants who reported one or more HIV risk factors were not more likely to answer "Yes" when responding to the statement, "I have risk factors for HIV" compared to patients who did not report any specific clinical or behavioral HIV risk factors (OR = 1.16, 95% CI 0.38,3.53). In addition, patients who reported one or more specific clinical and/or behavioral HIV risk factors were not more likely to have received prior HIV testing (OR = 1.58, 95% CI 0.58, 4.32). Three individuals were newly diagnosed with HIV/AIDS. Risk-based testing may be inadequate, as patients do not accurately assess risk and do not seek or accept testing based on risk. Routine, voluntary HIV testing is able to identify patients missed in the risk-based model of HIV testing, expanding the opportunities for timely diagnosis and intervention. In order to fully implement the new Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommendations for routine, voluntary testing, the optimal timing to offer HIV testing to acutely ill inpatients warrants further investigation.

18391591
HIV-associated nephropathy.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is a unique form of collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis that typically occurs in patients with advanced HIV disease. The pathogenesis of HIVAN involves direct HIV infection and gene expression in tubular and glomerular epithelial cells; in effect, HIVAN can be considered a natural illustration of gene delivery to the kidney. HIV infection or expression of HIV genes results in dysregulation of tubular and glomerular epithelial cells and induction of local inflammatory cascades. Specific HIV genes, in particular Nef and Vpr, play prominent and synergistic roles in the pathogenesis of HIVAN, while other viral genes are not required for the development of HIVAN. The disproportionate burden of HIVAN and HIV-related end-stage renal disease in blacks suggests that host genetic factors are also important in the pathogenesis of HIVAN. Preliminary genetic studies in the mouse model have identified a potential genetic susceptibility locus, and a number of host genes are differentially expressed in the setting of HIVAN or HIV infection. The current management of HIVAN couples antiretroviral therapy with adjunctive agents that target downstream effects of HIV gene expression in the kidney. Future therapies could also target different steps in the pathogenesis of HIVAN, including viral replication, epithelial cell entry and viral gene expression, and downstream cellular pathways.

17885301
Chronic kidney disease in HIV infection: an urban epidemic.
Kidney disease is an important complication of HIV, particularly in minority populations. We describe the burden of chronic kidney disease among 1239 adults followed at an urban AIDS center, with an estimated prevalence of 15.5% (n = 192). Independent predictors of kidney disease included older age, black race, hepatitis C virus exposure, and lower CD4 cell count. These data suggest that chronic kidney disease remains a common complication of HIV infection in the era of antiretroviral therapy.

17699507
HIV-1 and HIV-Associated Nephropathy 25 Years Later.
Twenty-five years after the first published description of AIDS, HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) remains an important cause of kidney disease in HIV-infected patients. The pathogenesis of HIVAN involves direct HIV infection of the kidney, with both viral and host genetic factors playing an important role. The widespread use of antiretroviral therapy has influenced the epidemiology of HIV-related kidney disease, and the nephrology community should support efforts to improve access to therapy and limit HIV transmission in susceptible minority populations. This article reviews the history of HIV and HIVAN, focusing on advances in the understanding of pathogenesis, epidemiology, and treatment.

17524746
HIV-associated nephropathy in the era of antiretroviral therapy.
With improved survival in the era of antiretroviral therapy, kidney disease has emerged as an important complication of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection and antiretroviral therapy. The classic kidney disease of HIV infection, HIV-associated nephropathy, occurs almost exclusively in patients of African descent. HIV-associated nephropathy is characterized by collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis with associated tubular dilatation and interstitial inflammation, although the histology may be more subtle in patients receiving antiretroviral therapy. Renal epithelial cells are infected by HIV-1, which results in epithelial cell proliferation and induction of local inflammatory pathways. Even with appropriate therapy, the kidney is a reservoir for HIV-1. Although the widespread introduction of antiretroviral therapy has had a beneficial impact on the epidemiology of HIV-associated nephropathy, the burden of kidney disease is likely to increase as a result of antiretroviral toxicity, reduction in competing mortality risks, and the increasing prevalence of HIV-1 infection in patients at risk for kidney disease.

19459817
Factors associated with failure to list HIV-positive kidney transplant candidates.
With improved survival in the antiretroviral era, data from ongoing studies suggest that HIV patients can be safely transplanted. The disproportionate burden of HIV-related end-stage renal disease in minority populations may impose additional obstacles to successful completion of the transplant evaluation. We retrospectively reviewed 309 potentially eligible HIV patients evaluated for kidney transplant at our institution since 2000. Only 20% of HIV patients have been listed, compared to 73% of HIV-negative patients evaluated over the same period (p < 0.00001). Failure to provide documentation of CD4 and viral load (36% of candidates) was the most common reason for failure to progress beyond initial evaluation. Other factors independently associated with failure to complete the evaluation included CD4 < 200 at initial evaluation (OR 15.17; 95% CI 1.94-118.83), black race (OR 2.33; 95% CI 1.07-5.06), and history of drug use (OR 2.56; 95% CI 1.22-5.37). More efficient medical record sharing and an awareness of factors associated with failure to list HIV-positive transplant candidates may enable transplant centers to more effectively advocate for these patients.

