19282293
Endosalpingiosis of the urinary bladder: a case of probable implantative origin with characterization of benign Fallopian tube immunohistochemistry.
Müllerianosis of the bladder is an infrequently described lesion consisting of multiple Müllerian-type tissues within the urinary bladder. Few previous cases of pure endosalpingiosis have been described. Here we present a 54-year-old post-menopausal female with a history of prior pelvic surgery with traumatic bladder injury, who was found to have a cystic lesion in the posterior wall of the bladder. Routine histology demonstrated cyst epithelium characteristic of endosalpingiosis. Three benign Fallopian tube specimens were obtained and stained with the relevant immunohistochemical markers for comparison. Results showed an identical immunohistochemical profile between the bladder cyst lining and the normal Fallopian tube controls. This case represents a rare instance of pure endosalpingiosis of the urinary bladder, with a likely implantative origin. This form of bladder Müllerianosis should therefore be considered within the differential diagnosis of cystic lesions of the bladder.

19116100
Clinical update on the management of adrenal hemorrhage.
Adrenal hemorrhage is a rare yet potentially life-threatening event that occurs both in traumatic conditions and in a variety of nontraumatic conditions. Clinical manifestations of adrenal hemorrhage can vary widely depending on the degree and rate of hemorrhage, as well as the amount of adrenal cortex compromised by hemorrhage. Although an isolated focal unilateral adrenal hemorrhage may present subclinically, massive bilateral adrenal hemorrhage may lead to rapid cardiovascular collapse and ultimately death if not diagnosed appropriately and treated quickly. Diagnosis of adrenal hemorrhage is often complicated by its nonspecific presentation and tendency to occur in the setting of acute illness and other complicating medical conditions. This article outlines the variety of clinical situations in which adrenal hemorrhage can occur, summarizes the appropriate diagnostic tests available, and reviews the appropriate management of adrenal hemorrhage.

18707739
Robotic dismembered pyeloplasty: a 6-year, multi-institutional experience.
The introduction of the da Vinci Surgical System to perform complex reconstructive procedures, such as repair of ureteropelvic junction obstruction, has helped to overcome some of the technical challenges associated with laparoscopy. We review our large multi-institutional experience with long-term followup of robotic dismembered pyeloplasty. A total of 140 patients from 3 university medical centers underwent robotic dismembered pyeloplasty. An institutional review board approved retrospective chart review was performed to collect demographic, preoperative, operative and postoperative data. Patients were analyzed as an entire cohort and then divided into various subgroups. Of the cases 117 (84.6%) were primary repairs and 23 (16.4%) were secondary repairs. There were 13 (9.3%) patients who underwent concomitant stone extraction and 5 (3.6%) procedures were performed on patients with solitary kidneys. A crossing vessel was found in 77 (55%) patients. Mean operative time was 217 minutes (range 80 to 510), estimated blood loss was 59.4 ml (range 10 to 600), mean length of hospital stay 2.1 days (range 0.75 to 7) and mean followup was 29 months (range 3 to 63). Radiographic resolution of obstruction on first postoperative diuretic renal scan or excretory urogram was noted in 134 patients (95.7%). There was a 7.1% major complication rate and a 2.9% minor complication rate. No statistically significant differences were found in any parameters among patients from the various cohorts. To our knowledge this review represents the largest multi-institutional experience of robotic dismembered pyeloplasty with long-term followup. Robotic pyeloplasty appears to be safe, durable and efficacious for primary and secondary ureteropelvic junction obstruction with or without concomitant stone extraction, and for patients with a solitary kidney.

18366979
Noninvasive adrenal imaging in hyperaldosteronism.
Proper management of primary aldosteronism requires localization of excess aldosterone production. Partial or radical adrenalectomy may cure cases of aldosterone-producing adenomas; however, pharmacologic management is indicated in cases of bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. Differentiating among the causes of primary aldosteronism can be a diagnostic challenge. Adrenal vein sampling, the gold standard for diagnosing subtypes of primary aldosteronism, is an invasive and often difficult procedure. Advancements in CT and MRI have improved their adrenal-imaging capabilities, but accuracy in identifying aldosterone-producing adenomas remains inferior to adrenal vein sampling. Radionuclide scintigraphy has been used for many years and can also provide functional information for diagnosis. No diagnostic test, however, distinguishes with complete accuracy aldosterone-producing adenomas from bilateral adrenal hyperplasia in primary aldosteronism. Therefore, a combination of diagnostic techniques may most effectively guide medical management.

17239321
Extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma: diagnosis and management.
Extra-adrenal pheochromocytomas (EAPs) may arise in any portion of the paraganglion system, though they most commonly occur below the diaphragm, frequently in the organ of Zuckerkandl. EAPs probably represent at least 15% of adult and 30% of childhood pheochromocytomas, as opposed to the traditional teaching that 10% of all pheochromocytomas are at extra-adrenal sites. They may be malignant in up to 40% of the cases, though conflicting data add to the uncertainty of this point. Patients with EAPs may present with headache, palpitations, sweating, or hypertension. A small percent of patients may also be asymptomatic at presentation due to nonfunctional tumors. The diagnosis is confirmed by demonstrating elevated blood and urine levels of catecholamines and their metabolites. Imaging studies to evaluate for EAPs include CT, MRI, and (131)I-labelled metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy. Preoperative pharmacologic preparation, attentive intraoperative monitoring, and aggressive surgical therapy have important roles in achieving successful outcomes. Recent reports suggest that a laparoscopic approach, along with intraoperative ultrasound, can safely remove these tumors. EAPs recur and metastasize more often than their adrenal counterparts, making lifelong follow-up essential.

