21336499
Small bowel adenocarcinoma in Crohn's disease.
An association between small bowel adenocarcinoma and Crohn's disease (CD) is well-established. We present our recent experience with this entity in order to further elucidate its clinicopathological features and update our series from 1991. A retrospective review was undertaken of all surgical patients with small bowel adenocarcinoma and CD seen at our institution between 1993 and 2009. Follow-up was assessed until time of death or by interview with survivors. Survival was calculated based on TNM (tumor extent, lymph node status, metastases staging) staging and comparing between our current and previous series. Twenty-nine patients (ten females and 19 males) were identified and followed for a median of 2 years. The median age at onset of CD symptoms was 25, and the median age at cancer diagnosis was 55.4, for a mean interval of 25.3 years. Twenty-two cancers were ileal and five were jejunal. There were no cancers in excluded intestinal loops. Significant differences in 2-year survival were determined for: node-negative (79.3%, 95%CI 58.3-100%) versus node-positive cancers (49% %, 95%CI 20.0-78.0%), and for localized (92.3%, 95%CI 77.8-100%) versus metastatic disease (33.3%, 95%CI 6.6-60%). Overall 36-month survival was 69.3% (95%CI 51.5-87.1%) compared to 40% among those without excluded loops in our series from 1991. Sixteen patients had long periods of quiescent disease before diagnosis (7-45 years), and 16 required surgery for bowel obstruction that was refractory to medical management. Adequate information was not retrievable for three patients. A comparison to our previous series reveals similar clinical characteristics and a high rate of node-positive cancer at diagnosis. Our findings also confirm two important clinical indicators of malignancy: recrudescent symptoms after long periods of relative quiescence and small bowel obstruction that is refractory to medical therapy.

21308408
Interpersonal influences on patients' surgical decision making: the role of close others.
Patients make medical decisions in consultation with their partner, family, and friends. However, little is known about the ways in which these close others influence their decisions, particularly with respect to discrete decisions such as those related to medical treatments. This cross-sectional study investigated their influence on the surgical decisions of inflammatory bowel disease patients referred for surgery to remove their colon (N = 91). Guided by research on social control and classic research on power and influence in close relationships, we identified four types of close other decision influence: persuasion, assistance with understanding, indirect influence, and negative influence. Linear logistic and regression analyses showed that patients were more likely to have surgery when their close other used persuasion, and they reported lower decisional conflict when their close other helped them understand the decision. Patients were less likely to have surgery and reported greater decisional conflict when their close other used negative influence tactics. Findings demonstrate the importance of considering social context when investigating patient decision making.

20978843
Computer-assisted brush-biopsy analysis for the detection of dysplasia in a high-risk Barrett's esophagus surveillance population.
Barrett's epithelial dysplasia, the direct precursor to esophageal adenocarcinoma, is often unapparent and frequently missed during surveillance of Barrett's esophagus with four-quadrant forceps biopsy protocol. To determine whether the detection of dysplasia is improved by adding computer-assisted brush biopsy (EndoCDx©) to four-quadrant biopsy protocol. Patients with a history of Barrett's esophagus with dysplasia scheduled for endoscopic surveillance were recruited from four academic medical centers. Patients underwent brush biopsy followed by four-quadrant biopsy every 1-2 cm. The results from brush and forceps biopsy were reviewed independently by pathologists blinded to the other's results. Among 151 patients enrolled (124 men, 27 women; mean age: 65), 117 (77.5%) had forceps and brush-biopsy specimens adequate for interpretation. The mean number of forceps biopsies was 11.9 (median 10, range 2-40) and brush biopsies was 2.0 (median 2, range 1-4). The overall yield of forceps alone was 25.2% (n = 38). Brush biopsy added an additional 16 positive cases increasing the yield of dysplasia detection by 42% (95% CI: 20.7-72.7). The number needed to test (NNT) to detect one additional case of dysplasia was 9.4 (95% CI: 6.4-17.7). There were no significant differences in results among different centers, between standard versus jumbo forceps, or between forceps biopsies taken every 1 cm versus every 2 cm. These data suggest that computer-assisted brush biopsy is a useful adjunct to standard endoscopic surveillance regimens for the identification of dysplasia in Barrett's esophagus.

20978345
The cytomegalovirus-encoded chemokine receptor US28 promotes intestinal neoplasia in transgenic mice.
US28 is a constitutively active chemokine receptor encoded by CMV (also referred to as human herpesvirus 5), a highly prevalent human virus that infects a broad spectrum of cells, including intestinal epithelial cells (IECs). To study the role of US28 in vivo, we created transgenic mice (VS28 mice) in which US28 expression was targeted to IECs. Expression of US28 was detected in all IECs of the small and large intestine, including in cells expressing leucine rich repeat containing GPCR5 (Lgr5), a marker gene of intestinal epithelial stem cells. US28 expression in IECs inhibited glycogen synthase 3? (GSK-3?) function, promoted accumulation of ?-catenin protein, and increased expression of Wnt target genes involved in the control of the cell proliferation. VS28 mice showed a hyperplastic intestinal epithelium and, strikingly, developed adenomas and adenocarcinomas by 40 weeks of age. When exposed to an inflammation-driven tumor model (azoxymethane/dextran sodium sulfate), VS28 mice developed a significantly higher tumor burden than control littermates. Transgenic coexpression of the US28 ligand CCL2 (an inflammatory chemokine) increased IEC proliferation as well as tumor burden, suggesting that the oncogenic activity of US28 can be modulated by inflammatory factors. Together, these results indicate that expression of US28 promotes development of intestinal dysplasia and cancer in transgenic mice and suggest that CMV infection may facilitate development of intestinal neoplasia in humans.

20956091
High levels of Crohn's disease-associated anti-microbial antibodies are present and independent of colitis in chronic granulomatous disease.
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) have overlapping gastrointestinal manifestations. Serum antibodies to intestinal microbial antigens in IBD are thought to reflect a loss of tolerance in the setting of genetically encoded innate immune defects. CGD subjects studied here, with or without colitis, had considerably higher levels of ASCA IgA, ASCA IgG, anti-OmpC, anti-I2, and anti-CBir1, but absent to low pANCA, compared to IBD-predictive cutoffs. Higher antibody levels were not associated with a history of colitis. Except for higher ASCA IgG in subjects <18 years, antibody levels were not age-dependent. In comparison, 7 HIES subjects expressed negative to low antibody levels to all of these antigens; none had colitis. Our results suggest that markedly elevated levels of antimicrobial antibodies in CGD do not correlate with a history of colitis but may reflect a specific defect in innate immunity in the face of chronic antigenic stimulation.

20717045
Is gastroduodenal biopsy safe in patients receiving aspirin and clopidogrel?: a prospective, randomized study involving 630 biopsies.
To assess prospectively the bleeding risk attributable to gastroduodenal biopsy in subjects taking antiplatelet medications. No prospective data exist regarding the bleeding risk attributable to endoscopic biopsy in patients taking antiplatelet agents. A majority of Western endoscopists withdraw antiplatelet agents before upper endoscopy, despite expert guidelines to the contrary. We performed a prospective, single-blind, randomized study in healthy volunteers participating in a larger study regarding the effect of antiplatelet agents on gastroduodenal mucosal healing. Multiple gastroduodenal biopsies were performed during 2 esophagogastroduodenoscopy in subjects dosed with aspirin enteric-coated 81 mg once daily or clopidogrel 75 mg once daily. Data for endoscopic bleeding, clinical bleeding, blood vessel size, and depth of biopsy in histology specimens were collected. Four hundred and five antral biopsies and 225 duodenal biopsies were performed during 90 esophagogastroduodenoscopy in 45 subjects receiving aspirin or clopidogrel. Median maximum blood vessel diameter per biopsy was 31.9 ? (range: 9.2 to 133.8). About 50.8% of biopsy specimens breached the muscularis mucosa. In the clopidogrel group, no bleeding events were noted after 350 biopsies [upper confidence limit (UCL) for probability of bleeding=0.0085]. In the aspirin group, there were no clinical events (UCL=0.0106) and one minor endoscopic bleeding event (UCL=0.0169). Consistent with expert guidelines, the absolute risk attributable to gastroduodenal biopsy in adults taking antiplatelet agents seems to be low. Half of routine biopsies enter submucosa. The largest blood vessels avulsed during biopsy correspond to midsized and large arterioles and venules.

20629103
Characterization of immunologic defects in patients with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) with intestinal disease.
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is a heterogeneous disorder commonly presenting with recurrent sinopulmonary infections. In all, 6%-10% of CVID patients develop an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)-like disorder, making these patients a unique population to investigate immune-mediated gastrointestinal disease. This study examined whether defects in peripheral and/or intestinal lymphocytes are involved in disruption of the intestinal mucosa in CVID patients with inflammatory intestinal diseases. Peripheral blood (PB) T cells from healthy controls; CD or UC; CVID; and CVID with IBD were stimulated for 48 hours with anti-CD3+CD28 or phytohemagglutinin (PHA) + phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA); cytokine production was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Cytokine expression from unstimulated lamina propria lymphocytes (LPLs) was compared by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Immunohistochemistry of mucosal biopsies was performed. Cell populations were quantified by morphometry. CVID/IBD PB T cells stimulated by anti-CD3+CD28 had trends for reduced IL-2, IL-10, IFN-?, and TNF-? compared to controls. These differences were not apparent following stimulation by PHA/PMA. Constitutive production of inflammatory cytokines by LPLs was not detected. Histologically, CVID patients had reduced/absent plasma cells with reductions in intestinal IgM and IgA. CVID patients with and without gastrointestinal (GI) disease exhibited increased CD3+ T cells, specifically CD8+, in the colon compared to normal and IBD controls, suggesting immune dysregulation. Intestinal inflammation in CVID patients with IBD-like disease may be mediated by abnormal cytokine production through a T-cell receptor-mediated pathway. However, the variability observed suggests multiple, rather than singular, mechanisms are involved. Histologic features such as reduced intestinal plasma cells and lack of intestinal immunoglobulins may be useful markers in diagnosing CVID in a patient with GI disease refractory to conventional therapies.

20524866
Colorectal dysplasia in chronic inflammatory bowel disease: pathology, clinical implications, and pathogenesis.
Colorectal cancer, the most lethal long-term complication of chronic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), is the culmination of a complex sequence of molecular and histologic derangements of the intestinal epithelium that are initiated and at least partially sustained by chronic inflammation. Dysplasia, the earliest histologic manifestation of this process, plays an important role in cancer prevention by providing the first clinical alert that this sequence is underway and serving as an endpoint in colonoscopic surveillance of patients at high risk for colorectal cancer. To review the histology, nomenclature, clinical implications, and molecular pathogenesis of dysplasia in IBD. Literature review and illustrations from case material. The diagnosis and grading of dysplasia in endoscopic surveillance biopsies play a decisive role in the management of patients with IBD. Although interpathologist variation, endoscopic sampling problems, and incomplete information regarding the natural history of dysplastic lesions are important limiting factors, indirect evidence that surveillance may be an effective means of reducing cancer-related mortality in the population with IBD has helped validate the histologic criteria, nomenclature, and clinical recommendations that are the basis of current practice among pathologists and clinicians. Emerging technologic advances in endoscopy may permit more effective surveillance, but ultimately the greatest promise for cancer prevention in IBD lies in expanding our thus far limited understanding of the molecular pathogenetic relationships between neoplasia and chronic inflammation.

20198431
Gastroduodenal ulceration associated with radioembolization for the treatment of hepatic tumors: an institutional experience and review of the literature.
Microsphere radioembolization is a method of delivering radiation therapy directly to tumors, thereby minimizing toxicity to adjacent structures. Despite the relatively high precision of this modality, numerous adverse effects have been recognized. One particularly untoward complication is the development of severe gastroduodenal ulceration. In order to further characterize gastroduodenal ulceration associated with radioembolization, our institutional experience as well as the reported literature were reviewed. The current evidence suggests that radioembolization-associated gastroduodenal ulceration results from inadvertent delivery of microspheres to the microvasculature of the gastrointestinal tract, leading to direct radiation toxicity. The reported incidence of this entity ranges between 2.9% and 4.8%. Most patients with this complication present with abdominal pain, often associated with nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. Symptoms can arise from hours to months after radioembolization treatment; diagnosis is made by endoscopic biopsy and histopathologic evaluation of the ulcer specimen. Radiation-induced ulcers have proven to be extremely difficult to treat. Current therapy based on acid suppression has had limited success, and the evidence for the addition of antioxidants and anti-inflammatory agents is still sparse. The increasing utilization of radioembolization will lead to adverse events including gastroduodenal ulceration. This entity must be considered in any patient treated with radioactive microspheres presenting with symptoms of dyspepsia. Accurate diagnosis and aggressive treatment are necessary to improve patient outcomes.

19177428
Colorectal carcinoma in indeterminate colitis.
For all the interest in the natural history of colorectal cancer (CRC) in ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD), surprisingly few data have been published regarding CRC in indeterminate colitis (IC). We present our experience with 15 cases of IC-associated CRC in order to assess their clinicopathological features and to determine their survival rates. We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of patients with IC admitted to the Mount Sinai Hospital between 1994 and 2007 and who developed CRC. All patients were operated on and follow-up was complete for all patients to the closing date of study or to the time of death. A total of 19 adenocarcinomas were present in this series. There were 3 patients with multiple cancers; all cancers occurred in segments of colitis. The mean age at onset of IC was 28 years and the average time progression from the IC diagnosis to CRC was 19 years. Dysplasia was detected in 10 of the cases; 3 patients had mucinous tumors. Five patients had stage I tumors; 5 stage II; 4 stage III; 1 stage IV. There were 4 deaths due to CRC. The overall 5-year survival was 42%. CRC in IC shares most of the clinical and pathologic features as well as survival outcomes with CRC that occurs in the most prevalent forms of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), UC and CD. Surveillance regimens currently used in the other forms of IBD seem applicable to IC patients as well.

19067409
Adenocarcinoma following ileal pouch-anal anastomosis for ulcerative colitis: review of 26 cases.
The occurrence of adenocarcinoma following ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA) for ulcerative colitis (UC) is an infrequent and but potentially lethal complication. We have seen 1 such case among 520 IPAAs performed in our group practice between 1978 and February 2008. We have added this case to a review of 25 previously reported cases of adenocarcinoma of the pouch or outflow tract following IPAA for UC. Our conclusions are 1) that post-IPAA cancer can occur following either mucosectomy or stapled anastomosis; 2) that this malignancy can occur after IPAA performed for UC either with or without neoplasia; and 3) that this complication is seen whether or not the initial cancer or dysplasia had involved the rectum.

18989894
Appendiceal mucinous cystadenoma is a neoplastic complication of IBD: case-control study of primary appendiceal neoplasms.
IBD is a risk factor for development of colorectal neoplasia. Although IBD frequently involves the appendix microscopically, it is uncertain whether it also predisposes to appendiceal neoplasia. We performed a retrospective case-control study of incidental appendiceal neoplasms in colectomy specimens of adults with and without IBD (cases and controls, respectively) based on surgical pathology records spanning 54 months. To minimize referral bias, patients were excluded if they had preoperative clinical evidence or a principal pathologic diagnosis of appendiceal disease. The pathologic diagnoses were confirmed retrospectively. Eleven appendiceal cystadenomas and 6 appendiceal carcinoid tumors were identified among 705 IBD cases (377 ulcerative colitis, 317 Crohn's disease, 11 indeterminate colitis) and 498 non-IBD controls meeting our inclusion criteria. There was no significant difference in prevalence of cyst adenomas between the cases and controls (9/705 [1.3%] versus 2/498 [0.4%], respectively, OR 3.2 [95% CI 0.7-14.9]). However, cyst adenomas were 15-fold more prevalent among cases with synchronous colorectal neoplasia compared with controls (4/69 [5.8%] versus 2/498 [0.4%], OR 15.3 [95% CI 2.7-85]) and 8-fold higher compared with cases without synchronous neoplasia (4/69 [5.8%] versus 5/636 [0.8%], OR 7.8 [95% CI 2.0-29.6]). Appendiceal carcinoids were equally prevalent in cases and controls (4/705 [0.6%] versus 2/498 [0.4%], OR 1.4 [95% CI 0.3-7.8]), cases with synchronous neoplasia and controls (1/69 [1.4%] versus 2/498 [0.4%], OR 3.6 [95% CI 0.3-40.8]), and cases with and without synchronous colorectal neoplasia (1/69 [1.4%] versus 3/636 [0.5%], OR 3.1 [95% CI 0.3-30.2]). IBD with synchronous colorectal dysplasia or cancer is a risk factor for development of appendiceal cystadenomas, implicating this tumor as a neoplastic complication of IBD. IBD does not predispose to the development of appendiceal carcinoids.

18848502
Progression to colorectal neoplasia in ulcerative colitis: effect of mesalamine.
Some studies have suggested that mesalamine can prevent the development of colorectal cancer in patients with ulcerative colitis (UC). The aim of this study was to compare rates of progression with advanced neoplasia in patient cohorts with UC taking low and high doses of mesalamine and to determine where in the process of neoplastic progression mesalamine might act. Three cohorts of UC patients were identified from an institutional database: 311 patients with no dysplasia (NoD), 56 with indefinite dysplasia (IND), and 26 with flat low-grade dysplasia (fLGD). The impact of mesalamine exposure on the subsequent development of advanced neoplasia (high-grade dysplasia or colorectal cancer) was assessed using life-table methods. Seventeen of 311 patients with NoD progressed to advanced neoplasia (5-year rate, 1.1%). This rate was lower than the 5-year rate for the IND (9%; P = .02 vs NoD) and fLGD (45%; P < .001 vs NoD and P = .001 vs IND) cohorts. Among the NoD cohort, the hazard ratio for mesalamine users versus nonusers was 0.70 (95% confidence interval, 0.20-2.44), and for each 1 g/d increase in dose, the hazard ratio was 0.92 (95% confidence interval, 0.58-1.47). For patients with IND, no patients on greater than 2 g/d progressed versus 13.8% on low-dose mesalamine (P = .11). For fLGD, 62.5% on high dose progressed, versus 27.8% on low dose (P = .054). In long-standing UC, patients with fLGD have a higher rate of progression to advanced neoplasia than those with NoD or IND. However, at none of these stages of disease did mesalamine use show definitive chemopreventive activity.

18844620
Chromoendoscopy-targeted biopsies are superior to standard colonoscopic surveillance for detecting dysplasia in inflammatory bowel disease patients: a prospective endoscopic trial.
Patients with extensive, longstanding chronic ulcerative or Crohn's colitis face greater risks of developing colorectal cancer. Current standard surveillance relies on detecting dysplasia using random sampling at colonoscopy but may fail to detect dysplasia in many patients. Dye spraying techniques have been reported to aid in detecting otherwise subtle mucosal abnormalities in the setting of colitis. We prospectively compared dye-spray technique using methylene blue to standard colonoscopic surveillance in detecting dysplasia. One hundred fifteen patients were referred to the Chromoendoscopy Study Group and prospectively screened for the study. One hundred two (64 M, 38 F) (79 UC 23 CC) patients meeting the inclusion criteria were enrolled. Following a standard bowel preparation, each patient was examined using standard office endoscopic equipment by three methods: (a) standard surveillance colonoscopy with four random biopsies every 10 cm (for a total of at least 32 samples); (b) a targeted biopsy protocol; and finally (c) methylene blue (0.01%) dye spray was segmentally applied throughout the colon and any pit-pattern abnormality or lesion rendered visible by the dye spray was targeted and biopsied. Each patient had a single examination, which included two passes of the colonoscope. Specimens were reviewed in a blinded fashion by a single gastrointestinal pathologist. The three methods were then compared with each patient serving as his or her own control. Targeted biopsies with dye spray revealed significantly more dysplasia (16 patients with low grade and 1 patient with high grade) than random biopsies (3 patients with low-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.001) and more than targeted nondye spray (8 patients with low-grade and 1 patient with high-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.057). Targeted biopsies with and without dye spray detected dysplasia in 20 patients compared with 3 using Method (a) (P= 0.0002, two-tailed exact McNemar's Test). There were no adverse events. Colonoscopic surveillance of chronic colitis patients using methylene blue dye-spray targeted biopsies results in improved dysplasia yield compared to conventional random and targeted biopsy methods. Accordingly, this technique warrants incorporation into clinical practice in this setting and consideration as a standard of care for these patients. The value of multiple random biopsies as a surveillance technique should be revisited.

18325476
Calcifying fibrous tumor of small intestine.
Calcifying fibrous tumor (CFT) is a rare benign tumor with a predilection for children and young adults that usually arises in the subcutaneous and deep soft tissues, pleura, or peritoneum. It presents histologically as a well-circumscribed mass consisting of hyalinized, hypocellular lamellar collagen, bland spindle cells, chronic inflammatory cell infiltrates, and psammomatous or dystrophic calcifications. Calcifying fibrous tumor of the gastrointestinal tract is exceedingly rare and therefore prone to confusion with other spindle cell lesions more commonly encountered in this location. We describe 4 cases of calcifying fibrous tumor arising in the terminal ileum, one of which caused the heretofore unreported complication of intestinal intussusception, and discuss the differential diagnosis with other common and uncommon spindle cell lesions.

18054559
Toll-like receptor-4 promotes the development of colitis-associated colorectal tumors.
Chronic inflammation is a risk factor for colon cancer in patients with ulcerative colitis (UC). The molecular mechanisms linking inflammation and colon carcinogenesis are incompletely understood. We tested the hypothesis that Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) is involved in tumorigenesis in the setting of chronic inflammation. Tissues from UC patients with cancer were examined for TLR4 expression. Colitis-associated neoplasia was induced using azoxymethane injection followed by dextran sodium sulfate treatment in TLR4-deficient or wild-type mice. Inflammation, polyps, and microscopic dysplasia were scored. Cyclooxygenase (Cox)-2 and prostaglandin E(2) production were analyzed by real-time polymerase chain reaction, immunohistochemistry, or enzyme immunoassay. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) phosphorylation and amphiregulin production were examined by Western blot analysis and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, respectively. We show that TLR4 is overexpressed in human and murine inflammation-associated colorectal neoplasia. TLR4-deficient mice were protected markedly from colon carcinogenesis. Mechanistically, we show that TLR4 is responsible for induction of Cox-2, increased prostaglandin E(2) production, and activation of EGFR signaling in chronic colitis. Amphiregulin, an EGFR ligand, was induced in a TLR4, Cox-2-dependent fashion and contributes to activation of EGFR phosphorylation in colonic epithelial cells. TLR4 signaling is critical for colon carcinogenesis in chronic colitis. TLR4 activation appears to promote the development of colitis-associated cancer by mechanisms including enhanced Cox-2 expression and increased EGFR signaling. Inhibiting TLR4 signaling may be useful in the prevention or treatment of colitis-associated cancer.

17996797
Neoplastic precursor lesions related to the development of cancer in inflammatory bowel disease.
Dysplasia is an intermediate stage in the progression from inflammation to cancer in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Clinically, dysplasia is used to define appropriate endpoints for colectomy in high-risk patients undergoing endoscopic surveillance. Surveillance is currently the only credible alternative to prophylactic colectomy for high-risk patients. The success of surveillance can be maximized by adherence of gastroenterologists to recommended procedural guidelines, adherence of pathologists to standardized histological criteria and nomenclature, and a joint commitment to close clinical-pathological communication. Technical enhancements to conventional endoscopy hold promise of improved efficiency and accuracy. Molecular-based testing may have a future role for risk stratification and early detection of neoplasia in inflammatory bowel disease.

20664576
Attenuation of TNF-driven murine ileitis by intestinal expression of the viral immunomodulator CrmD.
Tumor necrosis factor ? (TNF?) is a key pathogenic factor in Crohn's disease and rheumatoid arthritis. TNF(?ARE) mice express high levels of TNF? and present Crohn's-like ileitis and arthritis. Alterations in the chemokine network could underline the TNF-driven ileitis. The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of TNF and chemokines in ileitis using ectromelia virus cytokine response modifier D (CrmD), a protein that binds TNF? and a limited number of chemokines. We generated transgenic mice expressing CrmD in intestinal epithelial cells (vCrmD mice) and crossed them with the TNF(?ARE) mice to test whether CrmD could affect TNF-driven inflammatory processes. During homeostasis, only the number of B cells in the lamina propria was reduced by CrmD expression. Interestingly, CrmD expression in the intestine markedly attenuated the inflammatory infiltrates in the ileum of TNF(?ARE) mice, but did not affect development of arthritis. Our results suggest that CrmD affects development of ileitis by locally affecting both TNF and chemokine function in the ileum.

18662238
Adenocarcinoma complicating restorative proctocolectomy for ulcerative colitis with mucosectomy performed by Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator.
This is a report of adenocarcinoma arising in an ileal pouch after restorative proctocolectomy (RPC) with rectal mucosal stripping performed by Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator (CUSA) for ulcerative colitis. The CUSA was introduced to simplify and optimize ileal pouch-anal anastomosis with mucosectomy and has been shown to shorten the operative time and reduce blood loss. Its use however, may increase the number of pathology specimens made uninterpretable on account of tissue ablation. In the present case, even though preoperative colonoscopy had clearly shown dysplasia, the surgical pathology report could not detect any neoplasia in the specimen; hence, the patient was not surveyed for pouch cancer. Six years later, the patient presented with intestinal obstruction caused by cancer. While protocols for universal pouch surveillance remain somewhat controversial, we conclude on the basis of this case and a review of the literature that in RPC with mucosectomy performed by CUSA, pouch cancer surveillance is particularly important because remnants of rectal epithelium may have been left behind and tissue ablation may have made the surgical pathology report uninterpretable.

