20844004
Neutral antibodies to the TSH receptor are present in Graves' disease and regulate selective signaling cascades.
TSH receptor (TSHR) antibodies (Abs) may be stimulating, blocking, or neutral in their functional influences and are found in patients with autoimmune thyroid disease, especially Graves' disease (GD). Stimulators are known to activate the thyroid epithelial cells via both Gs- and Gq-coupled signaling pathways, whereas blockers inhibit the action of TSH and may act as weak agonists. However, TSHR neutral Abs do not block TSH binding and are unable to induce cAMP via Gs?. The importance of such neutral Abs in GD remains unclear because their functional consequence has been assumed to be zero. We hypothesized that: 1) neutral TSHR Abs are more common to GD than generally recognized; 2) they may induce distinct signaling imprints at the TSHR not seen with TSH itself; and 3) these signaling events may alter cellular function. To evaluate these hypotheses, we first confirmed the presence of neutral TSHR Abs in sera from patients with GD and then, using mouse and hamster neutral TSHR monoclonal Abs (N-mAbs) performed detailed signaling studies, including a proteomic Ab array, with rat thyrocytes (FRTL-5) as targets. This allowed us to examine a battery of signaling cascades and their downstream effectors. Neutral TSHR Abs were indeed frequently present in sera from patients with GD. Sixteen of 27 patients (59%) had detectable neutral TSHR Abs by competition assay with N-mAbs. On examining signaling cascades, we found that N-mAbs induced signal transduction, primarily via the protein kinase A II cascade. In addition to the activation of phosphatidylinositol 3K/Akt, N-mAbs, unlike TSH, had the ability to exclusively activate the mammalian target of rapamycin/p70 S6K, nuclear factor-?B, and MAPK-ERK1/2/p38? signaling cascades and their downstream effectors p90 ribosomal kinase/MAPK-interacting kinase-1/mitogen and stress-activated kinase-1 and N-mAbs activated all forms of protein kinase C isozymes. To define the downstream effector mechanisms produced by these signaling cascades, cytokine production, proliferation, and apoptosis in thyrocytes were investigated. Although N-mAbs produced less cytokines and proliferation compared with TSH, they had the distinction of inducing thyroid cell apoptosis under the experimental conditions used. When dissecting out possible mechanisms of apoptosis, we found that activation of multiple oxidative stress markers was the primary mechanism orchestrating the death signals. Therefore, using oxidative stress-induced apoptosis, N-mAbs may be capable of exacerbating the autoimmune response in GD via apoptotic cells inducing antigen-driven mechanisms. This may help explain the inflammatory nature of this common disorder.

20195479
A tyrosine residue on the TSH receptor stabilizes multimer formation.
The thyrotropin stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR) is a G protein coupled receptor (GPCR) with a large ectodomain. The ligand, TSH, acting via this receptor regulates thyroid growth and thyroid hormone production and secretion. The TSH receptor (TSHR) undergoes complex post-translational modifications including intramolecular cleavage and receptor multimerization. Since monomeric and multimeric receptors coexist in cells, understanding the functional role of just the TSHR multimers is difficult. Therefore, to help understand the physiological significance of receptor multimerization, it will be necessary to abrogate multimer formation, which requires identifying the ectodomain and endodomain interaction sites on the TSHR. Here, we have examined the contribution of the ectodomain to constitutive multimerization of the TSHR and determined the possible residue(s) that may be involved in this interaction. We studied ectodomain multimer formation by expressing the extracellular domain of the TSHR linked to a glycophosphotidyl (GPI) anchor in both stable and transient expression systems. Using co-immunoprecipitation and FRET of tagged receptors, we established that the TSH receptor ectodomain was capable of multimerization even when totally devoid of the transmembrane domain. Further, we studied the effect of two residues that likely made critical contact points in this interaction. We showed that a conserved tyrosine residue (Y116) on the convex surface of the LRR3 was a critical residue in ectodomain multimer formation since mutation of this residue to serine totally abrogated ectodomain multimers. This abrogation was not seen with the mutation of cysteine 176 on the inner side of the LRR5, demonstrating that inter-receptor disulfide bonding was not involved in ectodomain multimer formation. Additionally, the Y116 mutation in the intact wild type receptor enhanced receptor degradation. These data establish the TSH receptor ectodomain as one site of multimerization, independent of the transmembrane region, and that this interaction was primarily via a conserved tyrosine residue in LRR3.

19332151
TSH receptor autoantibodies.
Thyrotropin receptor autoantibodies (TSHR-Abs) of the stimulating variety are the hallmark of Graves' disease. The presence of immune defects leading to synthesis of TSHR-Abs causes hyperthyroidism and is associated with other extrathyroidal manifestations. Further characterization of these antibodies has now been made possible by the generation of monoclonal antibodies with this unique stimulating capacity as well as similar TSHR-Abs not associated with hyperthyroidism. Their present classification divides TSHR-Abs into stimulating, blocking (competing with TSH binding) and neutral (no signaling). Recent studies using monoclonal TSHR-Abs has revealed that stimulating and blocking antibodies bind to the receptor using mostly conformational epitopes, whilst neutral antibodies utilize exclusively linear peptides. Subtle differences in epitopes for stimulating and blocking antibodies account for the diversity of their biological actions. Recently non-classical signaling elicited by neutral antibodies has also been described, raising the need for a new classification of TSHR-Abs.

19328414
The thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor: impact of thyroid-stimulating hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibodies on multimerization, cleavage, and signaling.
The thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR) has a central role in thyrocyte function and is also one of the major autoantigens for the autoimmune thyroid diseases. We review the post-translational processing, multimerization, and intramolecular cleavage of TSHR, all of which may modulate its signal transduction. The recent characterization of monoclonal antibodies to the TSHR, including stimulating, blocking, and neutral antibodies, have also revealed unique biologic insights into receptor activation and the variety of these TSHR antibodies may help explain the multiple clinical phenotypes seen in autoimmune thyroid diseases. Knowledge of the structure/function relationship of the TSHR is beginning to provide a greater understanding of thyroid physiology and thyroid autoimmunity.

18719020
Characterization of thyrotropin receptor antibody-induced signaling cascades.
The TSH receptor (TSHR) is constitutively active and is further enhanced by TSH ligand binding or by stimulating TSHR antibodies (TSHR-Abs) as seen in Graves' disease. TSH is known to activate the thyroid epithelial cell via both Galphas-cAMP/protein kinase A/ERK and Galphaq-Akt/protein kinase C coupled signaling networks. The recent development of monoclonal antibodies to the TSHR has enabled us to investigate the hypothesis that different TSHR-Abs may have unique signaling imprints that differ from TSH ligand itself. We have, therefore, performed sequential studies, using rat thyrocytes (FRTL-5, passages 5-20) as targets, to examine the signaling pathways activated by a series of monoclonal TSHR-Abs in comparison with TSH itself. Activation of key signaling molecules was estimated by specific immunoblots and/or enzyme immunoassays. Continuing constitutive TSHR activity in thyroid cells, deprived of TSH and serum for 48 h, was demonstrated by pathway-specific chemical inhibition. Under our experimental conditions, TSH ligand and TSHR-stimulating antibodies activated both Galphas and Galphaq effectors. Importantly, some TSHR-blocking and TSHR-neutral antibodies were also able to generate signals, influencing primarily the Galphaq effectors and induced cell proliferation. Most strikingly, antibodies that used the Galphaq cascades used c-Raf-ERK-p90RSK as a unique signaling cascade not activated by TSH. Our study demonstrated that individual TSHR-Abs had unique molecular signatures which resulted in sequential preferences. Because downstream thyroid cell signaling by the TSHR is both ligand dependent and independent, this may explain why TSHR-Abs are able to have variable influences on thyroid cell biology.

