20736985
Dyslipidemia in children with chronic kidney disease.
Dyslipidemia, a known risk factor for atherosclerosis, is frequent among both adults and children with chronic kidney disease. Here, we describe the prevalence and pattern of dyslipidemia from a cross-sectional analysis of 391 children aged 1-16 years, enrolled in the multicenter Chronic Kidney Disease in Children (CKiD) study, with a median glomerular filtration rate (GFR), measured by the plasma disappearance of iohexol, of 43?ml/min per 1.73?m2. Multivariate analysis was applied to adjust for age, gender, body mass index (BMI), GFR, and the urinary protein/creatinine ratio. Proteinuria was in the nephrotic range in 44 and the BMI exceeded the 95th percentile in 57 patients of this cohort. Baseline lipid analysis found a high prevalence of hypertriglyceridemia in 126, increased non-HDL-C in 62, and reduced HDL-C in 83. Overall, 177 children had dyslipidemia, of whom 79 had combined dyslipidemia. Lower GFR was associated with higher triglycerides, lower HDL-C, and higher non-HDL-C. Nephrotic-range proteinuria was significantly associated with dyslipidemia and combined dyslipidemia. Compared with children with a GFR>50, children with a GFR<30 had significantly increased odds ratios for any dyslipidemia or for combined dyslipidemia. Hence, among children with moderate chronic kidney disease, dyslipidemia is common and is associated with lower GFR, nephrotic proteinuria, and non-renal factors including age and obesity.

19653009
Postrenal biopsy AVM leading to severe hypertension and dilated cardiomyopathy.
A 3-year-old girl with Alport syndrome presented with decompensated heart failure from hypertension-induced cardiomyopathy 6 months following renal biopsy. Selective renal angiography revealed a large left renal arteriovenous fistula (AVF) with poor perfusion to the left renal parenchyma. The AVF was treated by transcatheter embolization using an Amplatzer vascular plug. Her blood pressure normalized after embolization, and her cardiac function normalized over the following 4 months.

19092117
Liver-kidney transplantation to cure atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.
Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome is often associated with mutations in genes encoding complement regulatory proteins and secondary disorders of complement regulation. Progression to kidney failure and recurrence with graft loss after kidney transplantation are frequent. The most common mutation is in the gene encoding complement factor H. Combined liver-kidney transplantation may correct this complement abnormality and prevent recurrence when the defect involves genes encoding circulating proteins that are synthesized in the liver, such as factor H or I. Good outcomes have been reported when surgery is associated with intensified plasma therapy. A consensus conference to establish treatment guidelines for atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome was held in Bergamo in December 2007. The recommendations in this article are the result of combined clinical experience, shared research expertise, and a review of the literature and registry information. This statement defines groups in which isolated kidney transplantation is extremely unlikely to be successful and a combined liver-kidney transplant is recommended and also defines those for whom kidney transplant remains a viable option. Although combined liver-kidney or isolated liver transplantation is the preferred therapeutic option in many cases, the gravity of risk associated with the procedure has not been eliminated completely, and assessment of risk and benefit requires careful and individual attention.

19005013
Successful split liver-kidney transplant for factor H associated hemolytic uremic syndrome.
A male infant with a family history of thrombotic microangiopathy developed atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS). Case report. Genetic analysis demonstrated a heterozygous mutation (S1191L) of CFH, the gene coding complement factor H (CFH). The child suffered many episodes of HUS, each treated with plasma exchange. In time, despite initiation of a prophylactic regimen of plasma exchange, his renal function declined significantly. At the age of 4 yr he received a (split liver) combined liver-kidney transplant (LKT) with preoperative plasma exchange and enoxaparin anticoagulation. Initial function of both grafts was excellent and is maintained for nearly 2 yr. This report adds to the small but growing number of individuals in whom LKT has provided a favorable outcome for aHUS associated with CFH mutation, expands the technique of using a split liver graft, and describes the unique histologic features of subclinical liver disease in HUS.

17496763
Update on the metabolic syndrome in children.
Provides an update on the metabolic syndrome in childhood. The metabolic syndrome is increasingly recognized among children. It is nearly exclusively encountered in overweight and obese individuals and is associated with atherosclerosis. Development and clustering of cardiovascular risk factors is influenced by many characteristics including heritable traits, prenatal and infantile influences, diet, physical activity, and socioeconomic status. Epidemiological data have become mature in this area. Efforts to design and implement systems to prevent and treat the metabolic syndrome are required.

17390152
Lipoprotein metabolism in chronic renal insufficiency.
Chronic renal insufficiency (CRI) is associated with a characteristic dyslipidemia. Findings in children with CRI largely parallel those in adults. Moderate hypertriglyceridemia, increased triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (TRL) and reduced high-density lipoproteins (HDL) are the most usual findings, whereas total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) remain normal or modestly increased. Qualitative abnormalities in lipoproteins are common, including small dense LDL, oxidized LDL, and cholesterol-enriched TRL. Measures of lipoprotein lipase and hepatic lipase activity are reduced, and concentrations of apolipoprotein C-III are markedly elevated. Still an active area of research, major pathophysiological mechanisms leading to the dyslipidemia of CRI include insulin resistance and nonnephrotic proteinuria. Sources of variability in the severity of this dyslipidemia include the degree of renal impairment and the modality of dialysis. The benefits of maintaining normal body weight and physical activity extend to those with CRI. In addition to multiple hypolipidemic pharmaceuticals, fish oils are also effective as a triglyceride-lowering agent, and the phosphorous binding agent sevelamer also lowers LDL-C. Emerging classes of hypolipidemic agents and drugs affecting sensitivity to insulin may impact future treatment. Unfortunately, cardiovascular benefit has not been convincingly demonstrated by any trial designed to study adults or children with renal disease. Therefore, it is not possible at this time to endorse general recommendations for the use of any agent to treat dyslipidemia in children with chronic kidney disease.

