21598258
Principles and practice of disaster relief: lessons from haiti.
Disaster relief is an interdisciplinary field dealing with the organizational processes that help prepare for and carry out all emergency functions necessary to prevent, prepare for, respond to, and recover from emergencies and disasters caused by all hazards, whether natural, technological, or human-made. Although it is an important function of local and national governing in the developed countries, it is often wanting in resource-poor, developing countries where, increasingly, catastrophic disasters tend to occur and have the greatest adverse consequences. The devastating January 12, 2010, Haiti earthquake is a case study of the impact of an extreme cataclysm in one of the poorest and most unprepared settings imaginable. As such, it offers useful lessons that are applicable elsewhere in the developing world. Emergency preparedness includes 4 phases: mitigation or prevention, preparedness, response, and recovery. Periods of normalcy are the best times to develop disaster preparedness plans. In resource-poor countries, where dealing with the expenses of daily living is already a burden, such planning is often neglected; and, when disasters strike, it is often with great delay that the assistance from international community can be deployed. In this increasingly interconnected world, the Haiti earthquake and the important international response to it make a strong case for a more proactive intervention of the international community in all phases of emergency management in developing countries, including in mitigation and preparedness, and not just in response and recovery. Predisaster planning can maximize the results of the international assistance and decrease the human and material tolls of inevitable disasters. There should be a minimum standard of preparedness that every country has to maintain and the international assistance to achieve that. International academic medical centers interested in global health could strengthen their programs by prospectively including in them contingency planning for international relief operations. Healthcare professionals of these institutions who travel to disaster zones should rigorously prepare themselves and make provisions for collecting and reporting data, which will enrich the knowledge of this growing activity. Mt Sinai J Med 78:306-318, 2011. © 2011 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

19955551
Adult parenteral nutrition utilization at a tertiary care hospital.
Guidelines from the American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition promote appropriate use of parenteral nutrition (PN). In addition, involvement of multidisciplinary nutrition support teams (NSTs) has led to a reduction of inappropriate PN administration. This study evaluated the effect of introducing hospital-wide PN guidelines and a PN review committee on PN prescription behavior of NSTs in the authors' hospital. A PN guidelines form with established indications was developed and made available to the NSTs. A PN review committee was formed to assess the appropriateness of PN prescriptions and educate the NSTs if an inappropriate PN prescription was noted. The initial-phase PN prescriptions were compared with those in a later (established) phase. Of a total of 614 PN prescriptions, 8.1% did not meet the established indications. The initial phase recorded 312 PN prescriptions, and the established phase had 302 prescriptions. The number of inappropriate PN prescriptions decreased significantly from 11.9% in the initial phase to 4.3% in the established phase (P = .001). The incidence of inappropriate PN prescription was low when NSTs were closely involved in patient care. Availability of written guidelines and continuous oversight of NSTs promoted appropriate PN usage.

18405250
Sinus bradycardia associated with daclizumab in liver transplant recipients: report of 3 cases.
Daclizumab is a commonly used immunosuppressive agent for prophylaxis of solid organ rejection. Although rare, the cardiovascular adverse effects of daclizumab include sinus tachycardia, hypotension, and hypertension. Here, we report 3 patients who developed significant and prolonged sinus bradycardia after receiving daclizumab following orthotopic liver transplant. Daclizumab should be considered a possible cause of bradycardia following its administration in orthotopic liver transplant.

17414727
Effect of lower limb compression devices on thermodilution cardiac output measurement.
The aim of this study was to determine whether lower limb (calf) sequential compression devices (SCDs) have a significant effect on thermodilution cardiac output measurements using a pulmonary artery catheter. Prospective clinical investigation. Surgical and neurosurgical intensive care units in a university hospital. A total of 43 patients with pulmonary artery catheters and bilateral lower limb SCDs. Cardiac output was measured (average of three) when the SCDs were off (T1), during the first 2-4 secs of the inflation cycle (T2), during seconds 4-8 of the inflation cycle (T3), and when the SCDs were off again (T4). Cardiac output measurements were consistently lower when measured during the SCD inflation cycle. The decrease in cardiac output ranged from 7.58% to 49.5%, with a mean reduction of 24.51% in the first 2-4 seconds and 20.61% during seconds 4-8 (p < .001). Two patients displayed an increase in cardiac output during the inflation cycle; one patient had an increase of 2.78% and the other an increase of 13.5%. In 11 patients, measurements were also made using a pulse contour-analysis cardiac output device, but no changes in pulse contour-analysis cardiac output were observed during the same time period. Thermodilution cardiac output measurements via a pulmonary artery catheter should not be done during the inflation cycle of lower limb SCDs because they produce a falsely low cardiac output.

