21335514
Virological synapses allow HIV-1 uptake and gene expression in renal tubular epithelial cells.
In animal models of HIV-associated nephropathy, the expression of HIV regulatory genes in epithelial cells is sufficient to cause disease, but how the CD4-negative epithelial cells come to express HIV genes is unknown. Here, we co-cultured T cells infected with fluorescently tagged HIV with renal tubular epithelial cells and observed efficient virus transfer between these cells. The quantity of HIV transferred was much greater than that achieved by exposure to large amounts of cell-free virus and occurred without a requirement for CD4 or Env. The transfer required stable cell-cell adhesion, which could be blocked by sulfated polysaccharides or poly-anionic compounds. We found that the internalization of virus could lead to de novo synthesis of viral protein from incoming viral RNAs even in the presence of a reverse transcriptase inhibitor. These results illustrate an interaction between infected T cells and nonimmune cells, supporting the presence of virological synapses between HIV-harboring T cells and renal tubular epithelial cells, allowing viral uptake and gene expression in epithelial cells.

20404718
HIV-1 viral protein r induces ERK and caspase-8-dependent apoptosis in renal tubular epithelial cells.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is the most common cause of end-stage renal disease in persons with HIV/AIDS and is characterized by focal glomerulosclerosis and dysregulated renal tubular epithelial cell (RTEC) proliferation and apoptosis. HIV-1 viral protein r (Vpr) has been implicated in HIV-induced RTEC apoptosis but the mechanisms of Vpr-induced RTEC apoptosis are unknown. The aim of this study was therefore to determine the mechanisms of Vpr-induced apoptosis in RTEC. Apoptosis and caspase activation were analyzed in human RTEC (HK2) after transduction with Vpr-expressing and control lentiviral vectors. Bax and BID were inhibited with lentiviral shRNA, and ERK activation was blocked with the MEK1,2 inhibitor, U0126. Vpr induced apoptosis as indicated by caspase 3/7 activation, PARP-1 cleavage and mitochondrial injury. Vpr activated both caspases-8 and 9. Inhibition of Bax reduced Vpr-induced apoptosis, as reported in other cell types. Additionally, Vpr-induced cleavage of BID to tBID and suppression of BID expression prevented Vpr-induced apoptosis. Since sustained ERK activation can activate caspase-8 in some cell types, we studied the role of ERK in Vpr-induced caspase-8 activation. Vpr induced sustained ERK activation in HK2 cells and incubation with U0126 reduced Vpr-induced caspase-8 activation, BID cleavage and apoptosis. We detected phosphorylated ERK in RTEC in HIVAN biopsy specimens by immunohistochemistry. These studies delineate a novel pathway of Vpr-induced apoptosis in RTEC, which is mediated by sustained ERK activation, resulting in caspase 8-mediated cleavage of BID to tBID, thereby facilitating Bax-mediated mitochondrial injury and apoptosis.

19959714
The ubiquitin-like protein FAT10 mediates NF-kappaB activation.
NF-kappaB is a central mediator of innate immunity and contributes to the pathogenesis of several renal diseases. FAT10 is a TNF-alpha-inducible ubiquitin-like protein with a putative role in immune response, but whether FAT10 participates in TNF-alpha-induced NF-kappaB activation is unknown. Here, using renal tubular epithelial cells (RTECs) derived from FAT10(-/-) and FAT10(+/+) mice, we observed that FAT10 deficiency abrogated TNF-alpha-induced NF-kappaB activation and reduced the induction of NF-kappaB-regulated genes. Despite normal IkBalpha degradation and polyubiquitination, FAT10 deficiency impaired TNF-alpha-induced IkBalpha degradation and nuclear translocation of p65 in RTECs, suggesting defective proteasomal degradation of polyubiquitinated IkBalpha. In addition, FAT10 deficiency reduced the expression of the proteasomal subunit low molecular mass polypeptide 2 (LMP2). Transduction of FAT10(-/-) RTECs with FAT10 restored LMP2 expression, TNF-alpha-induced IkBalpha degradation, p65 nuclear translocation, and NF-kappaB activation. Furthermore, LMP2 transfection restored IkBalpha degradation in FAT10(-/-) RTECs. In humans, common types of chronic kidney disease associated with tubulointerstitial upregulation of FAT10. These data suggest that FAT10 mediates NF-kappaB activation and may promote tubulointerstitial inflammation in chronic kidney diseases.

19726511
FAT10: a novel mediator of Vpr-induced apoptosis in human immunodeficiency virus-associated nephropathy.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated nephropathy is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in HIV-infected persons. Vpr-induced cell cycle dysregulation and apoptosis of renal tubular epithelial cells are important components of the pathogenesis of HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN). FAT10 is a ubiquitin-like protein that is upregulated in renal tubular epithelial cells in HIVAN. In these studies, we report that Vpr induces increased expression of FAT10 in tubular cells and that inhibition of FAT10 expression prevents Vpr-induced apoptosis in human and murine tubular cells. Moreover, we found that Vpr interacts with FAT10 and that these proteins colocalize at mitochondria. These studies establish FAT10 as a novel mediator of Vpr-induced cell death.

19275581
Murine models of Vpr-mediated pathogenesis.
HIV viral protein r (Vpr) exerts a variety of cellular effects, including modulation of transcription and cytokine production, apoptosis, and cell cycle arrest. Vpr induces these affects by mechanisms that include inhibition of NF-kappaB activation, inducing mitochondrial injury, and promoting proteasomal degradation of cellular factor(s) leading to cell cycle arrest. Murine models have provided invaluable contributions to our understanding of HIV pathogenesis, however many of the HIV-1 proteins, including Vpr, differ in their cellular effects depending upon cell type and species-specific factors. Since the majority of in vivo studies elucidating the role of Vpr in disease pathogenesis have utilized murine models, it is critical to understand the species-specific factors that may affect Vpr function. In this manuscript, we review the cellular pathways and end organ effects of Vpr that have been studied in murine cell lines and mouse models, and discuss the relevance of these studies to the role of Vpr in disease in persons living with HIV/AIDS.

19013323
Pathogenesis of HIV-associated nephropathy.
Human immunodeficiency virus-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is a leading cause of end-stage renal disease in the HIV-1-seropositive population. HIVAN, which is characterized by heavy proteinuria and a rapid decline in renal function, is caused by infection and subsequent expression of viral genes in renal epithelial cells, although the exact mechanism of viral entry into these cells is unknown. The infected renal epithelium is a distinct compartment that supports the evolution of viral strains that may diverge from those found in the patient's blood. Research using animal models and in vitro studies has shown that vpr and nef are the HIV-1 genes most responsible for inducing the characteristic clinical and histopathologic syndrome of HIVAN. Dysregulation of several host factors, including mediators of inflammation, apoptosis, proliferation, transcription, and cell-cell interactions, are also critical factors in determining whether infection of the renal epithelium will lead to HIVAN. Additional research is required to delineate the mechanisms of HIVAN pathogenesis further so that more effective interventions can be implemented to prevent and treat this disease.

