21621281
Stem cells and reprogramming: breaking the epigenetic barrier?
Increasing evidence suggests that epigenetic regulation is key to the maintenance of the stem cell state. Chromatin is the physiological form of eukaryotic genomes and the substrate for epigenetic marking, including DNA methylation, post-translational modifications of histones and the exchange of core histones with histone variants. The chromatin template undergoes significant reorganization during embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation and somatic cell reprogramming (SCR). Intriguingly, remodeling of the epigenome appears to be a crucial barrier that must be surmounted for efficient SCR. This area of research has gained significant attention due to the importance of ESCs in modeling and treating human disease. Here we review the epigenetic mechanisms that are key for maintenance of the ESC state, ESC differentiation and SCR. We focus on murine and human ESCs and induced pluripotent stem cells, and highlight the pharmacological approaches used to study or manipulate cell fate where relevant.

21477851
Wdr5 Mediates Self-Renewal and Reprogramming via the Embryonic Stem Cell Core Transcriptional Network.
The embryonic stem (ES) cell transcriptional and chromatin-modifying networks are critical for self-renewal maintenance. However, it remains unclear whether these networks functionally interact and, if so, what factors mediate such interactions. Here, we show that WD repeat domain 5 (Wdr5), a core member of the mammalian Trithorax (trxG) complex, positively correlates with the undifferentiated state and is a regulator of ES cell self-renewal. We demonstrate that Wdr5, an "effector" of H3K4 methylation, interacts with the pluripotency transcription factor Oct4. Genome-wide protein localization and transcriptome analyses demonstrate overlapping gene regulatory functions between Oct4 and Wdr5. The Oct4-Sox2-Nanog circuitry and trxG cooperate in activating transcription of key self-renewal regulators, and furthermore, Wdr5 expression is required for the efficient formation of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. We propose an integrated model of transcriptional and epigenetic control, mediated by select trxG members, for the maintenance of ES cell self-renewal and somatic cell reprogramming.

21451408
Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes as models for genetic cardiovascular disorders.
The development of induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology has led to many advances in the areas of directed cell differentiation and characterization. New methods for generating iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes provide an invaluable resource for the study of certain cardiovascular disorders. This review highlights the current technology in this field, its application thus far to the study of genetic disorders of the RAS/MAPK pathway and long-QT syndrome (LQTS), and future directions for the field. Enhanced methods increase the efficiency of generating and stringently purifying iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes. The use of cardiomyocytes derived from patients with LEOPARD syndrome and LQTS has shed light on the molecular mechanisms of disease and validated their use as reliable human disease models. The use of iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes to study genetic cardiovascular disorders will enable a deeper and more applicable understanding of the molecular mechanisms of human disease, as well as improving our ability to achieve successful cell-based therapies. Methods to efficiently generate these cells are improving and provide promise for future applications of this technology.

21358635
Generation of anterior foregut endoderm from human embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells.
Directed differentiation of human embryonic stem (hES) cells and human induced pluripotent stem (hiPS) cells captures in vivo developmental pathways for specifying lineages in vitro, thus avoiding perturbation of the genome with exogenous genetic material. Thus far, derivation of endodermal lineages has focused predominantly on hepatocytes, pancreatic endocrine cells and intestinal cells. The ability to differentiate pluripotent cells into anterior foregut endoderm (AFE) derivatives would expand their utility for cell therapy and basic research to tissues important for immune function, such as the thymus; for metabolism, such as thyroid and parathyroid; and for respiratory function, such as trachea and lung. We find that dual inhibition of transforming growth factor (TGF)-? and bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signaling after specification of definitive endoderm from pluripotent cells results in a highly enriched AFE population that is competent to be patterned along dorsoventral and anteroposterior axes. These findings provide an approach for the generation of AFE derivatives.

21343612
Prdm16 is a physiologic regulator of hematopoietic stem cells.
Fetal liver and adult bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) renew or differentiate into committed progenitors to generate all blood cells. PRDM16 is involved in human leukemic translocations and is expressed highly in some karyotypically normal acute myeloblastic leukemias. As many genes involved in leukemogenic fusions play a role in normal hematopoiesis, we analyzed the role of Prdm16 in the biology of HSCs using Prdm16-deficient mice. We show here that, within the hematopoietic system, Prdm16 is expressed very selectively in the earliest stem and progenitor compartments, and, consistent with this expression pattern, is critical for the establishment and maintenance of the HSC pool during development and after transplantation. Prdm16 deletion enhances apoptosis and cycling of HSCs. Expression analysis revealed that Prdm16 regulates a remarkable number of genes that, based on knockout models, both enhance and suppress HSC function, and affect quiescence, cell cycling, renewal, differentiation, and apoptosis to various extents. These data suggest that Prdm16 may be a critical node in a network that contains negative and positive feedback loops and integrates HSC renewal, quiescence, apoptosis, and differentiation.

21176149
SVM classifier to predict genes important for self-renewal and pluripotency of mouse embryonic stem cells.
Mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) are derived from the inner cell mass of a developing blastocyst and can be cultured indefinitely in-vitro. Their distinct features are their ability to self-renew and to differentiate to all adult cell types. Genes that maintain mESCs self-renewal and pluripotency identity are of interest to stem cell biologists. Although significant steps have been made toward the identification and characterization of such genes, the list is still incomplete and controversial. For example, the overlap among candidate self-renewal and pluripotency genes across different RNAi screens is surprisingly small. Meanwhile, machine learning approaches have been used to analyze multi-dimensional experimental data and integrate results from many studies, yet they have not been applied to specifically tackle the task of predicting and classifying self-renewal and pluripotency gene membership. For this study we developed a classifier, a supervised machine learning framework for predicting self-renewal and pluripotency mESCs stemness membership genes (MSMG) using support vector machines (SVM). The data used to train the classifier was derived from mESCs-related studies using mRNA microarrays, measuring gene expression in various stages of early differentiation, as well as ChIP-seq studies applied to mESCs profiling genome-wide binding of key transcription factors, such as Nanog, Oct4, and Sox2, to the regulatory regions of other genes. Comparison to other classification methods using the leave-one-out cross-validation method was employed to evaluate the accuracy and generality of the classification. Finally, two sets of candidate genes from genome-wide RNA interference screens are used to test the generality and potential application of the classifier. Our results reveal that an SVM approach can be useful for prioritizing genes for functional validation experiments and complement the analyses of high-throughput profiling experimental data in stem cell research.

20890967
Toward a complete in silico, multi-layered embryonic stem cell regulatory network.
Recent efforts in systematically profiling embryonic stem (ES) cells have yielded a wealth of high-throughput data. Complementarily, emerging databases and computational tools facilitate ES cell studies and further pave the way toward the in silico reconstruction of regulatory networks encompassing multiple molecular layers. Here, we briefly survey databases, algorithms, and software tools used to organize and analyze high-throughput experimental data collected to study mammalian cellular systems with a focus on ES cells. The vision of using heterogeneous data to reconstruct a complete multi-layered ES cell regulatory network is discussed. This review also provides an accompanying manually extracted dataset of different types of regulatory interactions from low-throughput experimental ES cell studies available at http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/iscmid/literature.

20699150
Exploration of self-renewal and pluripotency in ES cells using RNAi.
Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) have the ability to expand indefinitely in vitro and give rise to cells of all three germ layers as well as germ cells. For these reasons, ESCs hold great promise for biomedicine. In order to harness the potential of pluripotent cells, it is necessary to first understand the molecular mechanisms that control the pluripotent state. The discovery of RNA interference has made such functional analysis, even at high(er) throughput, possible. Here, we describe the methods used for high-throughput siRNA screening by high-content microscopy to identify gene products that regulate mouse ESC fate decision. In addition, we will describe the application of lentivirus-based shRNA knockdown to explore or validate the role of candidate genes in ESC pluripotency.

20535210
Patient-specific induced pluripotent stem-cell-derived models of LEOPARD syndrome.
The generation of reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from patients with defined genetic disorders holds the promise of increased understanding of the aetiologies of complex diseases and may also facilitate the development of novel therapeutic interventions. We have generated iPSCs from patients with LEOPARD syndrome (an acronym formed from its main features; that is, lentigines, electrocardiographic abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary valve stenosis, abnormal genitalia, retardation of growth and deafness), an autosomal-dominant developmental disorder belonging to a relatively prevalent class of inherited RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase signalling diseases, which also includes Noonan syndrome, with pleomorphic effects on several tissues and organ systems. The patient-derived cells have a mutation in the PTPN11 gene, which encodes the SHP2 phosphatase. The iPSCs have been extensively characterized and produce multiple differentiated cell lineages. A major disease phenotype in patients with LEOPARD syndrome is hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. We show that in vitro-derived cardiomyocytes from LEOPARD syndrome iPSCs are larger, have a higher degree of sarcomeric organization and preferential localization of NFATC4 in the nucleus when compared with cardiomyocytes derived from human embryonic stem cells or wild-type iPSCs derived from a healthy brother of one of the LEOPARD syndrome patients. These features correlate with a potential hypertrophic state. We also provide molecular insights into signalling pathways that may promote the disease phenotype.

20362529
Hooking up with Oct4.
The transcription factor Oct4 plays a central role in controlling the undifferentiated state of embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells. Two complementary papers in this issue of Cell Stem Cell describe the extended network of proteins that interact with Oct4. Together, these studies broaden our understanding of the control of pluripotency.

19738627
Systems biology of stem cell fate and cellular reprogramming.
Stem cell differentiation and the maintenance of self-renewal are intrinsically complex processes requiring the coordinated dynamic expression of hundreds of genes and proteins in precise response to external signalling cues. Numerous recent reports have used both experimental and computational techniques to dissect this complexity. These reports suggest that the control of cell fate has both deterministic and stochastic elements: complex underlying regulatory networks define stable molecular 'attractor' states towards which individual cells are drawn over time, whereas stochastic fluctuations in gene and protein expression levels drive transitions between coexisting attractors, ensuring robustness at the population level.

19329576
Toward stem cell systems biology: from molecules to networks and landscapes.
The last few years have seen significant advances in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of stem-cell-fate specification. New and emerging high-throughput techniques, as well as increasingly accurate loss-of-function perturbation techniques, are allowing us to dissect the interplay among genetic, epigenetic, proteomic, and signaling mechanisms in stem-cell-fate determination with ever-increasing fidelity (Boyer et al. 2005, 2006; Ivanova et al. 2006; Loh et al. 2006; Cole et al. 2008; Jiang et al. 2008; Johnson et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2008; Liu et al. 2008; Marson et al. 2008; Mathur et al. 2008). Taken together, recent reports using these new techniques demonstrate that stem-cell-fate specification is an extremely complex process, regulated by multiple mutually interacting molecular mechanisms involving multiple regulatory feedback loops. Given this complexity and the sensitive dependence of stem cell differentiation on signaling cues from the extracellular environment, how are we best to develop a coherent quantitative understanding of stem cell fate at the systems level? One approach that we and other researchers have begun to investigate is the application of techniques derived in the computational disciplines (mathematics, physics, computer science, etc.) to problems in stem cell biology. Here, we briefly sketch a few pertinent results from the literature in this area and discuss future potential applications of computational techniques to stem cell systems biology.

