21062599
Acquired fibrokeratoma presenting as multiple plantar nodules.
Acquired digital fibrokeratoma is a rare benign fibroepithelial tumor that typically presents as a solitary asymptomatic nodule on the finger or toe. Middle-aged adults are most commonly affected. Here we discuss an unusual case of acquired digital fibrokeratoma presenting as a cluster of multiple nodules on the sole of a 15-year-old boy.

20865837
Histopathologic identification of dermal filler agents.
As reflected in the literature, the use of dermal filler agents has increased substantially over the last decade. Consequently, these agents are more frequently encountered on histopathologic examination. A variety of dermal fillers can be readily identified histopathologically, and the accurate identification of these agents is a critical task for dermatopathologists. Furthermore, a basic understanding of the histological features of fillers has relevance to dermatologists and dermatologic surgeons. The identification of filler substances may have important diagnostic, medico-legal and medical management considerations. This concise review aims to provide a pragmatic approach to distinguishing the agents most frequently encountered in routine practice and in the literature.

20214180
Osteoinvasive subungual melanoma: a case and review.
Subungual melanoma is a relatively rare variant of melanoma, accounting for 0.7-3.5% of all melanoma cases in the Caucasian population. Curiously, it occurs in 8-33% of cases in black, Asian, Native American and Hispanic populations, which generally face a substantially lower risk of melanoma. Herein the authors report the case of a 69-year-old Hispanic female with a subungual melanoma of the acral lentiginous type that directly invaded the periosteum, cortex and medulla of the distal phalanx. In addition, we review published reports of acral lentiginous melanoma with osseous invasion and discuss the evidence, on a molecular level, for this entity's aggressive pattern of invasion. The review of cases is limited to those found through the PubMed search engine.

