21056895
Histologic characteristics of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia associated with different pancreatic lesions.
Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) has been found in association with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, intraductal papillary-mucinous neoplasm (IPMN), mucinous cystic neoplasm, and other pancreatic lesions, but the characteristics of PanINs associated with these lesions are not well characterized. In this study, 185 partial or total pancreatectomy specimens were collected, and 173 had complete slides for reviewed, which included 74 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas, 28 IPMNs, 7 mucinous cystic neoplasms, 44 other nonductal tumors, and 20 nontumorous lesions. Differences in grade, extent, and duct involvement among PanINs associated with different lesions were analyzed. Patients with PanINs were older than those without, regardless of associated tumor or lesions. No sex predilection was noted. PanINs were found in 89%, 96%, 86%, 64%, and 55% pancreata with ductal adenocarcinomas, IPMNs, mucinous cystic neoplasm, other nonductal tumors, and nontumorous lesions, respectively. PanIN 1 and 2 were commonly associated with all types of lesions, but high-grade PanIN 3 was more frequently associated with ductal adenocarcinomas. Ductal involvement of PanINs was more extensive in association with ductal adenocarcinomas than in any other types of pancreatic tumors or lesions. PanINs associated with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas affected both the main and branched ducts, whereas PanINs associated with other types of pancreatic tumors or lesions were mainly present in the branch ducts. No statistical differences were observed in distribution, extent, and grade of PanINs among IPMNs, mucinous cystic neoplasms, other nonductal tumors, and nontumorous lesions. Our study demonstrated a high concurrence between PanINs and other precancerous lesions and histologic features of PanINs associated with different pancreatic diseases.

19524573
A system of classifying microvascular invasion to predict outcome after resection in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) recurs in approximately 70% of cases after resection. Vascular invasion by tumor cells can be classified as gross or microscopic (microvascular invasion [mVI]) and is a risk factor for recurrence. We examined a large cohort of patients with HCC who were treated by resection to identify features of mVI that correlated with recurrence and survival. We reviewed the records of all HCC resections performed at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine between January 1990 and March 2006 to identify those with mVI, established by histologic analysis. The numbers and sizes of vessels invaded, invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall, distance from the tumor, and satellite nodules were recorded. Of the 384 patients who underwent resection for HCC, 131 (34.1%) met the entry criteria. The median follow-up period was 28.9 months. There were 68 recurrences and 54 deaths. In multivariate analysis, invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall predicted recurrence (hazard ratio, 1.8; P = .02), and invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall (hazard ratio, 2.2; P = .018) and invasion of a vessel that was more than 1 cm from the tumor (hazard ratio, 2.1; P = .015) predicted survival. A risk score that assigned points for the presence of each variable correlated with recurrence (P = .028) and survival (P < .0001). A novel classification system that includes invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall and invasion of a vessel that is more than 1 cm from the tumor can accurately predict risk of recurrence and survival of patients with mVI after resection of HCC.

17581470
Intraoperative acute tumor lysis syndrome during laparoscopic splenectomy preceded by splenic artery embolization.
Laparoscopic resection has become the standard of care for routine splenectomy. Preoperative splenic artery embolization for massive splenomegaly has been described to allow a laparoscopic approach in previously ineligible laparoscopic candidates. Our case describes an intraoperative cardiac arrest secondary to tumor lysis after preoperative splenic artery embolization. The patient recovered fully after suffering acute renal failure requiring dialysis for 6 weeks postoperatively. Caution using this approach is necessary to avoid this rare and potentially lethal complication.

17429765
The role of fibrin sealants in hepatic surgery.
The repair of all tissue disruption begins with hemostasis and tissue sealing. Fibrin sealant is a concentrated mix of the factors required for the body to initiate this process. By applying this mixture directly to the site of injury, clotting and wound healing can be facilitated. Studies have demonstrated that fibrin sealant is effective in controlling bleeding and inducing tissue sealing in many organs. It is particularly useful in hepatobiliary surgery due to the soft nature of liver parenchyma and its propensity to bleed and leak bile. This chapter will discuss the basic science foundation of fibrin sealants and their applications in hepatic surgery.

