21304308
Predictors of anal dysplasia in men who have sex with men with benign cytology.
Anal cytology is used to screen patients for anal dysplasia. Anal pap smears are collected without direct visualization of the canal, whereas cervical cytology is obtained with direct visualization. Current screening guidelines dictate that patients with abnormal cytology are to be evaluated with high-resolution anoscopy, and patients with benign anal cytology forgo high-resolution anoscopy. We routinely perform standard anoscopy after cytology collection. We endeavored to determine whether our standard procedure would reveal findings supporting high-resolution anoscopy even with benign cytology. We performed a retrospective chart review of all anal cytology results from January 2008 to March 2009, identifying the patients with benign results who had undergone high-resolution anoscopy. Records were analyzed to determine the indication for high-resolution anoscopy and biopsy results. We identified 2084 patients with anal cytology results, including 613 (29%) patients who had benign results and 169 (28%) patients who had undergone high-resolution anoscopy. The main reasons for high-resolution anoscopy were high risk of recurrent dysplasia based on prior high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion with cytology done concurrently in 77 (46%), and abnormal anoscopy findings thought to be indicative of dysplasia (plaque or nodule suspicious of dysplasia, internal or external condyloma, dysplastic appearing fissure) in 92 (54%). Of subjects with abnormal anoscopy findings indicative of dysplasia, 25 (27%) had high-grade and 39 (42%) had low-grade dysplasia. Of those undergoing cytology and high-resolution anoscopy simultaneously, 14 (18%) had high-grade and 12 (16%) had low-grade dysplasia. In total, 90 (53%) of those with benign cytology who had high-resolution anoscopy had abnormal pathology, and 39 (23%) had high-grade dysplasia. Men having sex with men can have significant dysplasia with benign cytology. Standard anoscopy identifies findings indicative of dysplasia that, if present, should lead to high-resolution anoscopy even with benign cytology. Standard anoscopy should become an integral part of anal dysplasia screening. Prior recent history of high-grade dysplasia should lead to high-resolution anoscopy even with benign cytology.

20950728
Should I or shouldn't I: decision making, knowledge and behavioral effects of quadrivalent HPV vaccination in men who have sex with men.
Prior to FDA licensure in men, a surgical practice (SG) offered the quadrivalent HPV vaccine (qHPV) off-label to men who have sex with men (MSM). We administered a written or telephone survey to MSM to elicit drivers and barriers to vaccination, sexual behavior changes post-vaccination, and knowledge. 191 subjects enrolled: 68 refused qHPV, 71 received qHPV <1 year ago, and 52 received qHPV >1 year ago. History of HPV infection (86%, n=164) and level of HPV and qHPV knowledge were high, with a mean of 10.8 of 13 knowledge questions correct. Ninety-seven percent of participants understood that qHPV does not cure present infection or disease. MSM refused qHPV for reasons including cost and not FDA approved; prevention of future HPV infection was the paramount driver for immunization. Vaccination did not affect sexual behavior.

20628276
Detection of oncogenic human papillomavirus impacts anal screening guidelines in men who have sex with men.
It has been shown that testing for oncogenic human papillomavirus (HPV+) improves the sensitivity of cytologic diagnosis of atypical cells of undetermined significance in the cervix and anus, reducing the number of patients requiring colposcopy or high-resolution anoscopy. Some recommend that men who have sex with men with any abnormal cytology undergo high-resolution anoscopy. We endeavored to determine whether HPV testing could predict future high-grade dysplasia (high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions) and modify screening internals. This investigation was conducted via a retrospective chart review of subjects with atypical cells of undetermined significance anal cytology, high-resolution anoscopy, and HPV testing. Records were abstracted for prior and subsequent screenings. Four hundred men who have sex with men (285 HIV-) underwent 2224 screenings. Of 224 subjects monitored for >2 years, the hazard ratio for developing high-grade dysplasia was 77% less for men who have sex with men who never had oncogenic HPV (HPV-) vs those who stayed HPV+ (P < .013). The hazard ratio for high-grade dysplasia in those who were HPV- vs those who became HPV- was not different. Risk of high-grade dysplasia was 28% within 6 months of becoming HPV+. The 3-year high-grade dysplasia risk was 15% and 54% for HPV- vs HPV+ subjects (P = .0006). Frequency of high-grade dysplasia in subjects who remained HPV- with predominantly atypical cells of undetermined significance cytology for 1, 2, or 3 years was 2%, 0% and 0% and was 17%, 0%, and 0% in HIV+ subjects. Kaplan-Meier analysis for HIV- subjects with HPV- predominantly atypical cells of undetermined significance cytology for 1 year showed <5% incidence of high-grade dysplasia at 4 years. Change in HPV status can predict the risk of high-grade dysplasia. Subjects with predominantly HPV- atypical cells of undetermined significance cytology for 2 years have a decreased risk of high-grade dysplasia. HPV testing when screening for anal dysplasia could alter screening parameters.

19333054
Sexually transmitted infections as a cause of proctitis in men who have sex with men.
Many men who have sex with men (MSM) present with complaints of bleeding, pain, and inflammation. We endeavored to determine the incidence of sexually transmitted infections in MSM referred for treatment of these symptoms and the effect of empiric therapy. A retrospective chart review of all MSM seen in 2007 at one surgical practice diagnosed with presumptive proctitis was performed. All MSM are routinely tested for sexually transmitted infections. Twenty-six MSM were identified (mean age, 38 years), and 17 (65 percent) were HIV+. Bleeding and pain were the most common complaints seen in 19 (73 percent) and 16 (62 percent), respectively. The most common findings were discharge in 15 (58 percent) and blood in 14 (54 percent). Sexually transmitted infections were identified in 21 (86 percent) and 3 (11 percent) had unidentified etiology. Gonorrhea was found in eight (43 percent), herpes simplex virus in six (29 percent), lymphogranuloma venereum in four (19 percent), and two each (10 percent) had Chlamydia and syphilis. Three had multiple infections. All but two treated empirically responded without complication and they had Crohn's colitis (n = 1) and rectal lymphoma (n = 1). Sexually transmitted infections are a common cause of proctitis and appropriate testing is imperative. Lymphogranuloma venereum is a common cause. Empiric treatment leads to rapid resolution and diminishes the chance for spread.

19273953
Detection of oncogenic human papillomavirus and other predictors of anal high-grade dysplasia in men who have sex with men with abnormal cytology.
The incidence of anal high-grade dysplasia in men who have sex with men is increasing. Anal cytology that shows atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance is common, nonspecific, and rarely predicts high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion. We want to know whether Hybrid-Capture II(R) testing for oncogenic human papillomavirus (human papillomavirus+) in men who have sex with men with atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance is beneficial and whether other predictors of high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion exist. We performed a retrospective chart review of men who have sex with men undergoing anal screening with atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance cytology, Hybrid-Capture(R) II testing, and biopsy. Records were analyzed for all screenings. A total of 597 men who have sex with men enrolled and had 1,015 atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance cytology results: 185 (18.2 percent) had high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion and 156 (84 percent) were human papillomavirus+. The rates for sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value were 84, 53, 29, and 94 percent, respectively. Of 390 low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion cytology results, high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion was found in 141 and 127 (90 percent) were human papillomavirus+. Those with previous high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions or human immunodeficiency virus had increased risk of high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (hazard ratio = 2.2 and hazard ratio = 1.95, respectively). Age was not a factor. Hybrid-Capture II(R) testing is useful in men who have sex with men with atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance. Referring only those with oncogenic human papillomavirus for biopsy reduces the number requiring this by almost half but some high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions are missed. History of high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion and human immunodeficiency virus are predictors of high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion while screening intervals might be lengthened absent oncogenic human papillomavirus or in those free of high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion for long periods.

17380365
Infrared coagulator ablation of high-grade anal squamous intraepithelial lesions in HIV-negative males who have sex with males.
The incidence of anal squamous carcinoma in males who have sex with males is rising. We reported that infrared coagulation of high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions in HIV-positive males who have sex with males yielded a recurrence rate after the first ablation of 65 percent and 58 percent after a second ablation. The cure rate of an individual lesion was 72 percent. We endeavored to determine whether this technique demonstrates improved results in HIV-negative males who have sex with males. We performed a retrospective review of medical records on HIV-negative males who have sex with males who had infrared coagulation ablation of anal high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions. Patients had at least six months' follow-up with cytology, high-resolution anoscopy, and biopsy. Recurrent high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions were retreated. Seventy-five patients were enrolled, with a median age of 36 years, and 113 lesions were treated. Forty patients (53 percent) developed a recurrence in a median time of 238 days and 35 patients (47 percent) were disease free for a median of 516 days. When patients were treated a second or third time, recurrence rates dropped to 28 and 0 percent, respectively. The probability of successfully treating an individual lesion at first infrared coagulation was 81 percent and 93 percent when retreated. HIV-positive patients were twice as likely to have lesions persist and 1.7 times more likely to develop a recurrent high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion. No patient developed squamous-cell carcinoma, anal stenosis, or had a serious complication. Infrared coagulation is a safe and effective office-based procedure for treating anal high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions. Although recurrence was high after the first infrared coagulation, repeated treatment led to resolution of high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions. Treatment success with infrared coagulation is significantly superior in HIV-negative patients compared with HIV-positive patients.

