21344347
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) type 1, 2, and 3: a review of the liver pathology findings.
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestatic diseases encompass a group of autosomal recessive hereditary diseases, which usually present in infancy or childhood, with cholestasis of hepatocellular origin. The currently preferred nomenclature for the three PFIC disorders that have been characterized to date is FIC1 deficiency, BSEP deficiency, and MDR3 deficiency, relating to mutations in the specific genes involved in bile acid formation and transport. Since the first description of these diseases, extensive clinical, biochemical, and molecular studies have increased our understanding of the features specific to each one of them. This review focuses mainly on the liver histology, summarizing their characteristic pathologic features, the correlation to specific genotypes, and complications arising with disease progression.

21175846
Hepatopulmonary syndrome in children - is conventional liver transplantation always needed?
Willis AD, Miloh TA, Arnon R, Iyer KR, Suchy FJ, Kerkar N. Hepatopulmonary syndrome in children - is conventional liver transplantation always needed? Clin Transplant 2010 DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0012.2010.01378.x. © 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Abstract:? Background:? Hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) is the association of liver disease, hypoxemia, and intrapulmonary vascular dilatations. There are little data on the management of HPS in children other than conventional orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Aims:? To describe the patient characteristics, mode of diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes of children with HPS at our center. Methods:? Retrospective review of patients diagnosed with HPS between 1997 and 2007 after IRB approval. Results:? There were 10 patients, six females; median age at diagnosis of HPS was 12?yr. Six with cirrhosis underwent OLT and had subsequent resolution of HPS and are stable at last follow-up. Of the remaining four, two had cirrhosis. HPS resolved without conventional OLT in the following four patients: hepatitis C after antiviral treatment, biliary atresia with portal hypertension after transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting, Abernethy syndrome after auxiliary partial OLT, and in a child with splenic vein thrombosis after splenectomy. Conclusions:? Our series shows resolution of HPS in all patients and 100% survival after conventional OLT. Four children had resolution of HPS after surgical or medical treatments other than conventional OLT. Careful review of clinical status and underlying pathophysiology and anatomy at diagnosis of HPS should inform treatment decisions.

20404261
National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference: lactose intolerance and health.


18668687
The membrane protein ATPase class I type 8B member 1 signals through protein kinase C zeta to activate the farnesoid X receptor.
Prior loss-of-function analyses revealed that ATPase class I type 8B member 1 [familial intrahepatic cholestasis 1 (FIC1)] posttranslationally activated the farnesoid X receptor (FXR). Mechanisms underlying this regulation were examined by gain-of-function studies in UPS cells, which lack endogenous FIC1 expression. FXR function was assayed in response to wild-type and mutated FIC1 expression constructs with a human bile salt export pump (BSEP) promoter and a variety of cellular localization techniques. FIC1 overexpression led to enhanced phosphorylation and nuclear localization of FXR that was associated with FXR-dependent activation of the BSEP promoter. The FIC1 effect was lost after mutation of the FXR response element in the BSEP promoter. Despite similar levels of FIC1 protein expression, Byler disease FIC1 mutants did not activate BSEP, whereas benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis mutants partially activated BSEP. The FIC1 effect was dependent on the presence of the FXR ligand, chenodeoxycholic acid. The effect of FIC1 on FXR phosphorylation and nuclear localization and its effects on BSEP promoter activity could be blocked with protein kinase C zeta (PKC zeta) inhibitors (pseudosubstrate or small interfering RNA silencing). Recombinant PKC zeta directly phosphorylated immunoprecipitated FXR. The mutation of threonine 442 of FXR to alanine yielded a dominant negative protein, whereas the phosphomimetic conversion to glutamate resulted in FXR with enhanced activity and nuclear localization. Inhibition of PKC zeta in Caco-2 cells resulted in activation of the human apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter promoter. Conclusion: These results demonstrate that FIC1 signals to FXR via PKC zeta. FIC1-related liver disease is likely related to downstream effects of FXR on bile acid homeostasis. Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis emanates from a partially functional FIC1 protein. Phosphorylation of FXR is an important mechanism for regulating its activity.

17641954
Membrane trafficking of the human organic anion-transporting polypeptide C (hOATPC).
The human organic anion transporting polypeptide C (OATPC) is one of the major transport proteins involved in the enterohepatic circulation of bile salts and plays an important role in vectorial transport of organic anions and drugs across hepatocytes. In this study, the effects of biological reagents on the membrane localization of OATPC were investigated by confocal microscopy and estrone-3-sulfate transport. Our results demonstrated that the functional membrane expression of fluorescent chimera OATPC-GFP was achieved in non-polarized (COS7 and HEK293) and polarized (MDCK) cells. Both brefeldin A (a Golgi complex disruptor) and bafilomycin A1 (an inhibitor of vacuolar H+-ATPase) treatment significantly decreased the polarized membrane trafficking and markedly reduced the uptake of estrone-3-sulfate ( approximately 40-90%) in OATPC-GFP transfected cells, suggesting that membrane sorting of hOATPC-GFP was mediated by Golgi complex and vacuolar H+-ATPase-related vesicle transport pathways. Treatment with 8-Br-cAMP (a cAMP analog) stimulated OATPC-GFP membrane localization and enhanced estrone-3-sulfate uptake by approximately 20%. The protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitors (H89 and KT5720), but not a PKG inhibitor, blocked the polarized membrane expression of OATPC-GFP and reduced estrone-3-sulfate transport activity. The simultaneous treatment of cells with PKA activator/inhibitor and bafilomycin A1 demonstrated that bafilomycin A1 did not change the effects of 8-Br-cAMP and H89 on the membrane localization of OATPC-GFP compared with the use of 8-Br-cAMP and H89 alone. These data suggest that a cAMP-PKA sensitive membrane sorting pathway for OATPC-GFP is independent of the vacuolar H+-ATPase associated (bafilomycin A1 sensitive) vesicle mediated membrane sorting pathway. In contrast, with combined treatment with brefeldin A, neither the PKA-activator (8-Br-cAMP) nor the inhibitor (H89) further altered the plasma membrane expression and transport activity of OATPC-GFP compared with brefeldin A treatment alone. These data suggest that the cAMP-PKA regulation of OATPC membrane expression involves the Golgi complex. When the Golgi apparatus was disrupted by brefeldin A treatment, the effects of cAMP-PKA on the Golgi-to-basolateral surface sorting process of OATPC was also diminished. In summary, the plasma membrane localization of human OATPC is mediated by Golgi complex and vacuolar H+-ATPase vesicle mediated membrane sorting pathways. cAMP-PKA regulates sorting process through the Golgi complex but not the vacuolar H+-ATPase associated vesicular pathway.

17332473
Protein-protein interactions and membrane localization of the human organic solute transporter.
Two proteins that mediate bile acid export from the ileal enterocyte, organic solute transporter (OST)-alpha and -beta, have recently been identified. It is unclear whether these two proteins associate directly and how they interact to mediate transport function and membrane localization. In this study, the protein-protein interactions, transport functions, and membrane localization of human (h)OST-alpha and -beta proteins were examined. The results demonstrated that coexpression of hOST-alpha and -beta in transfected cells resulted in a three- to fivefold increase of the initial rate of taurocholate influx or efflux compared with cells expressing each protein individually and nontransfected cells. Confocal microscopy demonstrated plasma membrane colocalization of hOST-alpha and -beta proteins in cells cotransfected with hOST-alpha and -beta cDNAs. Protein-protein interactions between hOST-alpha and -beta were demonstrated by mammalian two-hybrid and coimmunoprecipitation analyses. Truncation of the amino-terminal 50 amino acid extracellular residues of hOST-alpha abolished its interaction with hOST-beta and led to an intracellular accumulation of the two proteins and to only background levels of taurocholate transport. In contrast, carboxyl-terminal 28 amino acid truncated hOST-alpha still interacted with hOST-beta, and majority of this cytoplasmic tail-truncated protein was expressed on the basolateral membrane when it was stably cotransfected with hOST-beta protein in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells. In summary, hOST-alpha and -beta proteins are physically associated. The intracellular carboxyl-terminal domain of hOST-alpha is not essential for this interaction with hOST-beta. The extracellular amino-terminal fragment of hOST-alpha may contain important information for the assembly of the heterodimer and trafficking to the plasma membrane.

