21284665
Dendritic cells in alcoholic liver injury and fibrosis.
Alcohol consumption impairs the development of innate and adaptive immune responses, however the exact mechanism by which alcohol leads to immune defects remains to be established. Dendritic cells (DCs) form a heterogeneous population of hematopoietic cells that are present in all tissues including the liver. DC are initially described playing a key role in the induction of innate and adaptive immune response against specific antigens. In our presentation, we discussed few new aspects of DC development, critical assessment of DC in non-lymphoid organs and the impact of alcohol consumption on DC function. Understanding the mechanism by which DC modulate liver function after alcohol consumption may help uncover novel therapeutic strategies for the treatment of these conditions.

20198704
Dendritic cells in liver fibrosis: conductor of the inflammatory orchestra?


21442058
Hemophagocytic syndrome occurring in an adult liver transplant recipient having Still's disease.
Hemophagocytic syndrome is a potentially fatal complication that rarely occurs after liver transplantation. We present a 25-year-old man with a history of Still's disease who presented with fever, arthralgia, and elevated serum ferritin levels 6 months after undergoing liver transplantation for fulminant hepatic failure due to autoimmune hepatitis potentially triggered by infliximab therapy. Liver biopsy demonstrated features consistent with hemophagocytic syndrome. The patient was successfully treated with a course of high dose steroids and had complete resolution of his symptoms and normalization of liver chemistry test abnormalities. Patients with Still's disease may rarely complicate with fulminant hepatic failure with infliximab therapy. Hemophagocytic syndrome a rare potentially life threatening condition may occur in such patients following liver transplantation.

19396960
Hepatic fibrosis.
This review will summarize the most significant work that contributed to the understanding of liver fibrosis progression and resolution, which in turn has yielded new areas of therapeutic targeting. Liver fibrosis is the result of an imbalance between production and dissolution of extracellular matrix. Stellate cells, portal myofibroblasts, and bone marrow derived cells converge in a complex interaction with hepatocytes and immune cells to provoke scarring in response to liver injury. Uncovering the specific effects of growth factors on these cells, defining the interaction of different cell population during liver fibrosis and characterizing the genetic determinants of fibrosis progression will enable the discovery of new therapeutic approaches. The outcome of improved understanding of liver fibrosis process, especially the regulation and activation of stellate cells, is reflected in the development of new therapeutic strategies, which are validated in animal models.

