21609267
Status report on carbapenemases: challenges and prospects.
Antimicrobial resistance in hospital and community-onset bacterial infections is a significant source of patient morbidity and mortality. In the past decade, we have witnessed the increasing recovery of carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative bacteria. For many isolates, carbapenem resistance is due to the production of carbapenemases, ?-lactamases that can inactivate carbapenems and frequently other ?-lactam antibiotics. Currently, these enzymes are mainly found in three different ?-lactamase classes (class A, B and D). Regardless of the molecular classification, there are few antimicrobials available to treat infections with these organisms and data regarding agents in development are limited to in vitro studies. This article focuses on the epidemiology of carbapenemase-producing Gram-negative bacteria. We also review available agents and those in development with potential activity against this evolving threat.

20930636
Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae and Acinetobacter baumannii: assessing their impact on organ transplantation.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review highlights the impact of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae and carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii on patients who have undergone organ transplantation and explores both available and potential agents to treat infections caused by these multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogens. RECENT FINDINGS: Few antimicrobials exist to treat carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative infections, and resistance to salvage therapies is escalating. Organ transplantation appears to be a risk factor for infections with Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae. Isolation of these MDR bacteria is increasing and may be associated with allograft failure and mortality. In the majority of cases, aminoglycosides, polymyxins, and tigecycline have been employed to treat these infections. Anecdotal successes exist but these antibiotics may be unreliable. Few novel agents are in development. SUMMARY: Bacterial infections remain a leading cause of posttransplantation morbidity and mortality. Carbapenem resistance is a significant threat to allograft and patient survival. With few antimicrobials being developed, transplant centers may be forced to make decisions regarding surveillance, empiric antimicrobial regimens, and transplant candidacy in the setting of carriage of MDR pathogens. There is an urgent need for collaborative studies to address the clinical impact of these infections on transplantation.

19716765
Severe pandemic (H1N1) 2009 influenza with false negative direct fluorescent antibody assay: case series.
Between May and June of 2009 we observed 4 patients that presented with severe influenza-like symptoms and respiratory failure. All cases tested negative for influenza A and B by direct fluorescent antibody assay. Further investigation revealed all cases to be positive for pandemic (H1N1) 2009 influenza virus by real-time RT-PCR. This article includes a description of these cases and the characteristics associated with them.

19170222
Healthcare-associated Infections: epidemiology, prevention, and therapy.
Reducing nosocomial infection rates is a major component of healthcare improvement. This article reviews the epidemiology, prevention, and therapy for some of the most common healthcare-associated infections, including central line-associated bloodstream infections and catheter-associated urinary tract infections, and 3 common organisms: methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, multidrug- resistant gram-negative bacteria, and Clostridium difficile.

18973455
Outcomes of carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae infection and the impact of antimicrobial and adjunctive therapies.
Carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae is an emerging healthcare-associated pathogen. To describe the epidemiology of and clinical outcomes associated with carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection and to identify risk factors associated with mortality among patients with this type of infection. Mount Sinai Hospital, a 1,171-bed tertiary care teaching hospital in New York City. Two matched case-control studies. In the first matched case-control study, case patients with carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection were compared with control patients with carbapenem-susceptible K. pneumoniae infection. In the second case-control study, patients who survived carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection were compared with those who did not survive, to identify risk factors associated with mortality among patients with carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection. There were 99 case patients and 99 control patients identified. Carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection was independently associated with recent organ or stem-cell transplantation (P=.008), receipt of mechanical ventilation (P=.04), longer length of stay before infection (P=.01), and exposure to cephalosporins (P=.02) and carbapenems (P<.001). Case patients were more likely than control patients to die during hospitalization (48% vs 20%; P<.001) and to die from infection (38% vs 12%; P<.001). Removal of the focus of infection (ie, debridement) was independently associated with patient survival (P=.002). The timely administration of antibiotics with in vitro activity against carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae was not associated with patient survival. Carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection is associated with numerous healthcare-related risk factors and with high mortality. The mortality rate associated with carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection and the limited antimicrobial options for treatment of carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection highlight the need for improved detection of carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection, identification of effective preventive measures, and development of novel agents with reliable clinical efficacy against carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae.

