20503403
Human mammary tumor virus in inflammatory breast cancer.
The authors have found that retroviral sequences with 85% to 95% homology to the mouse mammary tumor virus were present in 40% of the sporadic breast cancers of American women. These sequences were not found in normal breasts or other tumors. A whole proviral structure was detected in 2 tumors. Breast cancer cells in culture were shown to contain and shed betaretroviral particles. This virus was designated human mammary tumor virus (HMTV). The authors have investigated the presence of HMTV sequences in a variety of breast conditions and geographic locations. Here they report that inflammatory breast cancer from American women shows a higher incidence of viral sequences (71%) than sporadic breast cancers. Similar incidence has been found in inflammatory breast cancers from Tunisia, and in gestational breast cancers. Because these conditions represent highly invasive malignancies, it is concluded that HMTV is sometimes associated with a particularly malignant phenotype.

20501913
Discontinuous drug binding to proteins: binding of an antineoplastic benzyl styryl sulfone to albumin and enzymes in vitro and in phase I clinical trials.
Sodium (E)-{N-[2-methyloxy-5-(2',4',6'-trimethoxy-styrylsulfonyl) methylenephenyl]amino}acetate (C(21)H(24)NNaO(8)S, ON 01910.Na) is a novel, synthetic benzyl styryl sulfone, currently in phase I clinical trials in cancer patients. Our objective was to use electrospray mass spectrometry to determine, in intact complexes, the number of drug molecules bound to albumin and selected enzymes. Native and recombinant albumin incubated with the drug, at various molar ratios, revealed simultaneous and discontinuous progression of drug binding, yielding intact albumin-drug complexes containing up to 22 drug molecules. Comparable complex protein-drug patterns were obtained for several enzymes, e.g., carbonic anhydrase. Intact albumin-ON 01910 complexes were also found in all patient samples. The drug-binding profiles were comparable, but not identical, for increasing sampling times and different doses (400-1700 mg/m(2)). We concluded that the techniques developed are capable of detecting the simultaneous formation of intact protein-drug complexes and of determining the number of drug molecules bound to proteins. The results enhance our hypothesis that drug binding may lead to conformational changes in proteins that, in turn, account for the exclusion of specific binding complexes and may influence protein behavior and activity. Application of these techniques reveals new insights about the nature of the antineoplastic drug ON 01910 in patient plasma, and the information obtained may have significance in understanding drug delivery to tumors.

19781575
Detection of human mammary tumor virus proteins in human breast cancer cells.
Mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) has been proven to induce mammary cancer in mice. MMTV-like env gene sequences have been detected in one-third of the human breast tumors studied. The whole proviral structure with 95% homology to MMTV was found in two human breast tumors and was designated as human mammary tumor virus (HMTV). HMTV viral particles with betaretroviral features have been isolated. In addition, a retrovirus called human betaretrovirus (HBRV), homologous to the mentioned retroviruses, has been isolated from tissues of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis. In this report, the expression of HMTV envelope (Env) and capsid (Ca) was detected in 10 primary cultures of human breast cancer containing HMTV sequences (MSSM) by Western blot and fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS), using a panel of antibodies against HMTV Env, HBRV Env and Ca and the MMTV Env Gp36 and Ca P27 proteins. By contrast, HMTV proteins did not react with antibody against the MMTV Env Gp52 protein. All the antibodies detected MMTV proteins with exception of two out of four monoclonal antibodies against HMTV Env. Approximately 13% of the MSSM cells showed HMTV protein expression by FACS analysis. This report shows the expression of HMTV proteins for the first time in human breast cancer cells using a panel of antibodies against HMTV, HBRV and MMTV proteins. This should be taken into consideration when MMTV antibodies are used to detect HMTV proteins in human tissues.

18375887
Breaking the cure barrier 25 years later.


17875739
Characterization of viral particles isolated from primary cultures of human breast cancer cells.
The association of human breast cancer with sequences similar to the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) has been shown, but convincing evidence for the presence of viral particles in breast tumors has been lacking. We have described the complete proviral structure of a retrovirus in human breast cancer. This provirus, designated as human mammary tumor virus (HMTV), was 95% homologous to MMTV and revealed features of a replication-competent virus. We have therefore investigated the production of viral particles in primary cultures of human breast cancer (MSSM). Cells isolated from ascites or pleural effusions of patients with metastatic breast cancer contained viral sequences in their DNA, expressed Env protein, and showed retroviral particles by electron microscopy. Viral particles from culture media exhibited morphologic features of beta-retroviruses sedimenting at buoyant densities of 1.12 to 1.18 g/mL in sucrose gradients and showed reverse transcriptase activity. cDNA sequences from virion RNA were synthesized, amplified, and sequenced and all the virion genes were detected and 70% of the virion RNA was sequenced. The sequence homologies were, respectively, 85% to 95% compared with the MMTV and HMTV proviruses we have previously described. These results clearly show that breast cancer cells in primary cultures produced HMTV viral particles that are similar to the mouse virus and which may play a role in human breast cancer pathogenesis.

17342334
Expression of Wnt5A and Wnt10B in non-immortalized breast cancer cells.
Wnt signaling is usually divided into two pathways: the 'canonical', acting through beta-catenin, and the 'non-canonical' acting through the Ca2+ and planar cell polarity pathway. Both pathways have been implicated in different types of cancer. Most results obtained with established cell lines have been contradictory. Here, we have investigated the expression of Wnt10B (canonical) and Wnt5A (non-canonical) in a panel of finite life-span and established normal and breast cancer cells using quantitative RT-PCR. It was found that there were both significant overexpression of Wnt5A and underexpression of Wnt10B in the metastasis-derived finite life-span breast cancer cells when they were compared to the finite life-span normal and established normal and breast tumor cells. Since expression profiles of primary breast cancer cultures are closer to the original tumor than the established cell lines, future research in this area should take into consideration these differences.

17173685
Transcription profile of a human breast cancer cell line expressing MMTV-like sequences.
It has been postulated that inflammation caused by certain viruses might result in cancer. Recently, it was shown that childhood lymphoblastic leukemia, breast and ovarian cancers express an interferon-related signature, providing support for this notion. We have previously shown that 38% of the sporadic breast cancers contain MMTV-like env gene sequences. To find out if the presence and expression of MMTV-like sequences correlated with an inflammatory phenotype, we have compared the expression profile of two sublines of MCF-7 cells, one containing the MMTV-like sequences (env+), the other one lacking them (env-). The results indicated that there were 47 differentially expressed genes between the two sublines. Among 27 upregulated genes in the env+ cells there were 7 interferon-related genes, 5 TNF-connected genes and 2 TGFbeta-related genes. These results suggest that the env+ cells were most likely responding to an infectious agent, and support the hypothesis that a viral infection may play a role in breast cancer pathogenesis.

21227046
Inhibition of vascular endothelial cell growth factor suppresses the in vivo growth of human prostate tumors.
The LNCaP human prostate cancer cell line is androgenand stromal-dependent for in vivo growth. We co-inoculated LNCaP cells with human fetal fibroblasts, isolated from prostate, bone (male), and lung (male and female) derived from 18- to 22-week-old human fetal tissue, into non-castrate male nude mice. Co-inoculation of LNCaP with fetal prostatic fibroblasts resulted in high tumor take rates (27 of 30, or 90%) 6 to 8 weeks after subcutaneous co-inoculation. Serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) values correlated strongly with wet tumor weight (r=0.86). The fetal fibroblast enhancement of tumor take rates in vivo was neither gender- nor organ-specific. Fetal fibroblast-conditioned medium (CM) did not have a significant proliferative effect on LNCaP cell growth in vitro. Areas of angiogenesis were demonstrable in all tumors, with blood vessels arising at the interface between stromal and tumor cells. The fetal fibroblasts, but not the LNCaP cells, expressed significant amounts of the mRNA and protein for vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF). Treatment of tumor-bearing animals with neutralizing antibodies to VEGF resulted in significant tumor growth suppression. These findings indicate that VEGF is an important mediator of stromal-induced enhancement of human prostate cancer cell growth in vivo.

