21192256
The economics of glycemic control in the ICU in the United States.
Currently the USA has an aging population, with increasing deficits and a healthcare system that most would agree is in need of repair. Finding ways to curtail costs is urgently needed. Attention to glycemic control and metabolic care offers a cost-effective method of treatment to reduce complications. Healthcare-related expenses occupy an expanding portion of gross domestic product in the US and are a driver of the deficit. Despite all of this spending, the US receives average marks on outcomes and is not obtaining value in its healthcare. Any movements toward healthcare reform must focus on improving outcomes per healthcare dollar spent, and increasing value. The Affordable Care Act will place greater emphasis on preventing complications and reducing hospital-acquired infections. The original Leuven trial demonstrated that proper implementation of glycemic control can reduce morbidity and mortality. More recent studies have shown that there is a cost-benefit to glycemic control as well, through reduction of hospital stay and prevention of complications. On the basis of these changes, physicians who practice metabolic care and provide glycemic control are well positioned to add value in this era of healthcare reform. Glycemic control is inherently valuable in the care of ICU patients as it decreases infectious complications, reduces lengths of stay, and has a positive effect on morbidity and mortality. Further studies should be completed to delineate the exact amount of cost-savings that can be obtained by proper implementation of glycemic control in the ICU.

21149836
Proposal for subspecialty physician fellowship training in nutrition and health promotion.
Subspecialty fellowship training programs in nutrition and health promotion (NHP) are necessary for any comprehensive solution to address physician shortages in this discipline. After a careful needs and resource assessment, current or future program directors can decide on 1 of 3 potential NHP training models: dedicated continuous, dedicated carve-out, or concurrent continuous. Each of these models will need to provide complete elements of core curricula and a sufficient amount of specialized modular NHP training. At the conclusion of the training program, NHP fellows should have fulfilled board certification eligibility requirements so that they may later become NHP experts and mentors to perpetuate this subspecialty.

21167457
Glycemic control and nutritional strategies in the cardiothoracic surgical intensive care unit--2010: state of the art.
Patients in the cardiothoracic surgical intensive care unit are generally critically ill and undergoing a systemic inflammatory response to cardiopulmonary bypass, ischemia/reperfusion, and hypothermia. This presents several metabolic challenges: hyperglycemia in need of intensive insulin therapy, catabolism, and uncertain gastrointestinal tract function in need of nutritional strategies. Currently, there are controversies surrounding the standard use of intensive insulin therapy and appropriate glycemic targets as well as the use of early enteral nutrition ± parenteral nutrition. In this review, an approach for intensive metabolic support in the cardiothoracic surgical intensive care unit is presented incorporating the most recent clinical evidence. This approach advocates an IIT blood glucose target of 80-110 mg/dL if, it can be implemented safely, with early nutrition support (using parenteral nutrition as needed) to prevent a critical energy debt.

21108516
Introduction to Molecular and Integrative Physiology of the Musculoskeletal System.


21062292
A systems approach to bone pathophysiology.
With evolving interest in multiscalar biological systems one could assume that reductionist approaches may not fully describe biological complexity. Instead, tools such as mathematical modeling, network analysis, and other multiplexed clinical- and research-oriented tests enable rapid analyses of high-throughput data parsed at the genomic, proteomic, metabolomic, and physiomic levels. A physiomic-level approach allows for recursive horizontal and vertical integration of subsystem coupling across and within spatiotemporal scales. Additionally, this methodology recognizes previously ignored subsystems and the strong, nonintuitively obvious and indirect connections among physiological events that potentially account for the uncertainties in medicine. In this review, we flip the reductionist research paradigm and review the concept of systems biology and its applications to bone pathophysiology. Specifically, a bone-centric physiome model is presented that incorporates systemic-level processes with their respective therapeutic implications.

20814769
The skeletal subsystem as an integrative physiology paradigm.
Homeostatic bone remodeling depends on precise regulation of osteoblast-osteoclast coupling through intricate endocrine, immune, neuronal, and mechanical factors. The osteoblast-osteoclast model of bone physiology with layers of regulatory complexity can be investigated as a component of a local skeletal subsystem or as a part of a complete whole-body system. In this review, we flip the traditional investigative paradigm of scientific experimentation ("bottom-top research") to a "top-bottom" approach using systems biology. We first establish the intricacies of the two-cell model at the molecular signaling level. We then provide, on a systems level, an integrative physiologic approach involving many recognized organ-level subsystems having direct and/or indirect effects on bone remodeling. Lastly, a hypothetical model of bone remodeling based on frequency and amplitude regulatory mechanisms is presented. It is hoped that by providing a thorough model of skeletal homeostasis, future progress can be made in researching and treating skeletal morbidities.

20609797
Extracorporeal peritoneovenous shunt for the management of postaneurysmectomy chylous ascites in a Marfan patient.
Chylous ascites is an uncommon complication after aortic and other retroperitoneal surgeries. The management is very specific to the etiology and clinical status of the patient. The mortality from chylous ascites is not negligible, and aggressive measures are often needed. A voluminous chylous ascites developed in a 38-year-old woman after an open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair that was refractive to initial therapeutic interventions. We used an extracorporeal peritoneovenous shunt to control the abdominal ascites and improve the patient's immunologic and nutritional status.

20010098
Critique of normoglycemia in intensive care evaluation: survival using glucose algorithm regulation (NICE-SUGAR)--a review of recent literature.
The publication of the long awaited results of the Normoglycaemia in Intensive Care Evaluation - Survival Using Glucose Algorithm Regulation (NICE-SUGAR) trial generated intense controversy in the area of glycemic control in the critically ill. NICE-SUGAR reported results in direct contrast to the original Leuven study and challenged the legitimacy of a mortality benefit of tight glycemic control in the intensive care unit (ICU). This review of the recent literature critically examines the salient differences between NICE-SUGAR and the original Leuven study. Differences in glycemic targets within the control and intervention groups, variability with patients reaching these set targets, and the disparity in study execution and nutritional strategies are some of the methodological differences explaining the observed differences in mortality and morbidity between the two studies. The Leuven study should be viewed as a 'proof-of-concept' study with future studies aimed at confirming its finding and optimizing clinical algorithms to safely implement it in various 'real world' settings. Discrepancies in implementation and nutrition make direct comparison of NICE-SUGAR and the original Leuven study impracticable. Accurate replication of the original Leuven methodology may be the limiting factor for achieving the benefits gained by intensive insulin therapy (IIT). Determination of ICU capability (physicians, nurses, standardization of equipment, etc.) is crucial to implementing tight glycemic targets. If IIT is not achievable due to adverse outcomes such as hypoglycemia, more lax and reachable glucose control should be sought.

19700348
Pheochromocytoma presenting as severe biventricular failure requiring insertion of a biventricular assist device.


19482685
Skeletal morphofunctional considerations and the pituitary-thyroid axis.
The past decade has unraveled novel molecular mechanisms not only of skeletal remodeling, which is the process by which the skeleton is restructured throughout adult life, but also the precision by which the skeleton is put together during embryogenesis and later modeled during growth. It is now possible to delete single genes in individual cells and during specified periods of life. This has allowed us to pin down specific molecular events that underlie individual cellular processes, and also importantly, to identify molecular defects underlying disorders of skeletal morphogenesis and remodeling. Particularly novel has been the demonstration of cross-talk, some of which is humoral, between the skeleton and organs as diverse as the brain, pituitary, and even adipose tissue and pancreas. The current review describes these molecular mechanisms in relation to the way thyroid hormones, and the pituitary hormone thyrotropin (TSH), regulate skeletal morphogenesis and remodeling.

19202391
Impact of new technologies on metabolic care in the intensive care unit.
Technological innovations in the ICU have lead to extraordinary advances in modern critical care. Renal replacement therapy (RRT) innovations and ventricular assist devices (VAD) are now becoming common interventions in the ICU environment. The purpose of this article is to describe the impact of RRT and VAD on critical care medicine with particular reference to metabolic care. Continuous venovenous hemofiltration and slow low efficient daily dialysis are effective modalities of RRT in hemodynamically unstable patients. These continuous forms of RRT can result in accentuated protein and nutrient losses but also provide an opportunity for intradialytic parenteral nutrition support. VAD patients typically have cardiac cachexia and develop chronic critical illness syndrome. Intensive metabolic support, incorporating trophic, concentrated, semielemental enteral nutrition, supplemental parenteral nutrition, and intensive insulin therapy is a rational strategy to implement in VAD patients. Unfortunately, there is insufficient evidence at this time to support the routine use of these nutritional interventions with RRT and VAD. Patients requiring RRT or VAD are at high nutritional risk, which negatively affects ICU outcome. Prompt nutritional risk assessment and early optimization of metabolic care is crucial in this patient population.

19095608
Intensive metabolic support: evolution and revolution.
To describe a new aspect of critical care termed intensive metabolic support. We performed a MEDLINE search of the English-language literature published between 1995 and 2008 for studies regarding the metabolic stages of critical illness, intensive insulin treatment, and intensive metabolic support in the intensive care unit, and we summarize the clinical data. Intensive metabolic support is a 3-component model involving metabolic control and intensive insulin therapy, early nutrition support, and nutritional pharmacology aimed at preventing allostatic overload and the development of chronic critical illness. To improve clinical outcome and prevent mortality, intensive metabolic support should start on arrival to the intensive care unit and should end only when patients are in the recovery phase of their illness. Intensive metabolic support should be an essential part of the daily treatment strategy in critical care medicine. This will involve a newfound and extensive collaboration between the endocrinologist and the intensivist. We call for well-designed future studies involving implementation of this protocol to decrease the burden of chronic critical illness.

18754175
Partial retraction. Retraction of specific recommendations regarding bariatric surgery for children and adolescents in "Executive summary of the recommendations of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, the Obesity Society, and American Society for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery medical guidelines for clinical practice for the perioperative nutritional, metabolic, and nonsurgical support of the bariatric surgery patient" (Endocr Pract. 2008;14[3]:318-336).


18752920
Thyroid cancer: the impact of emerging technologies on clinical practice guidelines.
Clinical practice guidelines are available for the evaluation and management of thyroid nodules and thyroid cancer. Nevertheless, there are uncertainties associated with these protocols due to genomic variations among patients and an incomplete evidence base. In addition, deviations from these protocols are due to physician bias and different levels of training. These shortcomings may eventually disappear as emerging technologies enter mainstream medicine. These interventions include (1) better risk stratification with the routine use of diagnostic molecular marker panels in the cytological analysis of thyroid fine-needle aspiration specimens as well as hybridized imaging modalities, (2) less aggressive therapies in low- and intermediate-risk thyroid cancer patients, and (3) molecular targeted therapy, pretargeted radioimmunotherapy, and novel minimally invasive surgical techniques in high-risk thyroid cancer patients.

18685466
Special commentary: a call for intensive metabolic support.
This special commentary addresses recent clinical reviews regarding appropriate nutrition and metabolic support in the critical care setting. There are divergent approaches between North America and Europe for the use of early nutrition support and combined enteral nutrition and parenteral nutrition support possibly due to the commercial availability of specific parenteral nutrients. The advent of intensive insulin therapy has changed the landscape of metabolic support in the intensive care unit, and previous notions about infective risk of parenteral nutrition will need to be re-addressed. Patients with brain failure may benefit from an intensive insulin therapy with a blood glucose target that is higher than that used in patients without brain failure. Patients with heart failure may benefit from the addition of nutritional pharmacology that targets proximate oxidative pathophysiological pathways. Intradialytic parenteral nutrition may be viewed as another form of supplemental parenteral nutrition when enteral nutrition is insufficient in patients on hemodialysis in the intensive care unit. It is proposed that intensive metabolic support be routinely implemented in the intensive care unit based on the following steps: intensive insulin therapy with an appropriate blood glucose target, nutrition risk assessment, early and if needed combined enteral nutrition and parenteral nutrition to target 20-25 kcal/kg/day and 1.2-1.5 g protein/kg/day, and nutritional and metabolic monitoring.

18595867
Chromium infusion reverses extreme insulin resistance in a cardiothoracic ICU patient.
Insulin resistance is common and often multifactorial in acutely critically ill patients. At our institution, glycemic control is achieved in these patients using an intravenous insulin protocol. The authors present a case in which a patient developed severe insulin resistance following surgical repair of a thoracic aorta aneurysm. Postoperatively, the patient required 2110 units of insulin over 40 hours while receiving pressors and glucocorticoids. After the administration of intravenous chromium at 3 microg/h, the blood sugar normalized and insulin therapy was discontinued. This case represents a unique approach using intravenous chromium to achieve glycemic control in a patient with extreme insulin resistance and acute critical illness. Prospective clinical trials using intravenous chromium may provide the means to optimize intensive insulin therapy for critically ill patients.

18301091
Early nutrition support in the intensive care unit: a US perspective.
Early nutrition support, defined as within the first 24-48 h of ICU care, is recommended by clinical practice guidelines. The purpose of this paper is to provide an evidence-based US perspective on early nutrition support in critical illness, explain its mechanism of action, and describe its implementation using combined enteral and parenteral nutrition support. Recent American and Canadian guidelines recommend starting enteral nutrition within the first 24-48 h of ICU care. This is mainly due to accrued 'energy debt' from underfeeding in certain patients. This energy debt leads to increased risks of complications and longer lengths of stay. Strong clinical evidence, however, in the form of prospective, randomized, controlled intervention studies of early nutrition support in the setting of routine intensive insulin therapy, is lacking. Early enteral nutrition should be first-line therapy in the ICU. If a caloric goal of 20-25 kcal/kg/day is not possible, then combined enteral and parenteral nutrition should be started. In the new age of intensive insulin therapy, parenteral nutrition has not been shown to confer significant additional infective risk. There are many unanswered questions, but a proactive posture for metabolic support in the ICU is advocated.

17901106
Diabetes is not a risk factor for hospital mortality following contemporary coronary artery bypass grafting.
The outcome of coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) in diabetic patients has traditionally been worse than in non-diabetic patients. Recent studies have suggested an improvement in outcome in diabetic patients undergoing contemporary CABG. However, the direct impact of diabetes on mortality and morbidities following CABG remains unclear. We retrospectively analyzed prospectively collected data of 2725 CABG patients from January 1998 to December 2005: one thousand and eighty-five (40%) diabetics and 1640 (60%) non-diabetics [mean age 65+/-11 years, 1882 (69%) male]. Subgroup analysis was performed for two study periods (1998-2002 vs. 2003-2005). The overall hospital mortality was 1.8% [n=50; diabetics: 2.4%, non-diabetics: 1.5% (P=0.07)]. The mortality rate among diabetics decreased from 3.1% in 1998-2002 to 1.0% in 2003-2005 (P=0.021). Diabetes was not an independent predictor of hospital mortality but predicted the occurrence of deep sternal wound infection (OR=3.77). Diabetes significantly decreased long-term survival [1-year and 5-year survival 94.7+/-0.7% and 81.9+/-1.4% for diabetic vs. 95.4+/-0.5% and 85.9+/-1.0% for non-diabetic patients (P=0.01)]. Excellent results following contemporary CABG can be expected in diabetics with a similar mortality compared to non-diabetics. Therefore, our data suggest that diabetes may, in fact, not be a risk factor for adverse outcome following CABG. However, long-term survival in diabetics remains significantly inferior compared to non-diabetics.

17543734
Dietary supplements and nutraceuticals in the management of andrologic disorders.
Dietary supplements and nutraceuticals are commonly used by men with erectile dysfunction, decreased libido, BPH, and concerns about developing prostate cancer. Many preparations do not contain the advertised dosages of the active ingredient or are contaminated. Dietary supplements and nutraceuticals, particularly those addressing erectile dysfunction and libido, need to undergo rigorous testing before they can be wholeheartedly recommended.

17285009
Hypoglycemia in the intensive care unit.
To review recent articles and evaluate hypoglycemia as a major complication of intensive insulin therapy in anticipation of emerging data from current clinical studies. Following the 2001 landmark Leuven study demonstrating that intensive insulin therapy in the surgical intensive care unit reduces mortality, many studies have evaluated aspects of intensive insulin therapy with respect to improved clinical outcome and the impact of hypoglycemia. Specific risk factors for hypoglycemia in the intensive care unit with intensive insulin therapy are diabetes, octreotide therapy, nutrition support, continuous venovenous hemofiltration with bicarbonate replacement fluid, sepsis and need for inotropic support. In prospective studies with a comparator group, the incidence of hypoglycemia in intensive care unit patients treated with intensive insulin therapy is up to 25%, corresponding to a relative risk of 5.0. In studies without a comparator group, however, the incidence is less than 7%. Hypoglycemia is associated with adverse outcome in intensive care unit patients. It remains unclear whether intensive insulin therapy-induced hypoglycemia per se is responsible for this adverse outcome. The threat of hypoglycemia is a barrier to intensive insulin therapy in critical care, supporting the need for frequent glucose monitoring, readily available concentrated intravenous dextrose infusions, better training of nurses and technological advances in glucose-sensing and insulin-dosing algorithms.

18411116
Hirsutism.
The clinical presentation and management of the hirsute woman is illustrated in cases of idiopathic hirsutism, polycystic ovarian disease, and nonclassical congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Therapeutic regimens manage hyperandrogenic signs, induce ovulation, and protect the endometrium.

