21028895
Multimodal clinical imaging to longitudinally assess a nanomedical anti-inflammatory treatment in experimental atherosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease causing great morbidity and mortality in the Western world. To increase the anti-inflammatory action and decrease adverse effects of glucocorticoids (PLP), a nanomedicinal liposomal formulation of this drug (L-PLP) was developed and intravenously applied at a dose of 15 mg/kg PLP to a rabbit model of atherosclerosis. Since atherosclerosis is a systemic disease, emerging imaging modalities for assessing atherosclerotic plaque are being developed. (18)F-Fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography and dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging, methods commonly used in oncology, were applied to longitudinally assess therapeutic efficacy. Significant anti-inflammatory effects were observed as early as 2 days that lasted up to at least 7 days after administration of a single dose of L-PLP. No significant changes were found for the free PLP treated animals. These findings were corroborated by immunohistochemical analysis of macrophage density in the vessel wall. In conclusion, this study evaluates a powerful two-pronged strategy for efficient treatment of atherosclerosis that includes nanomedical therapy of atherosclerotic plaques and the application of noninvasive and clinically approved imaging techniques to monitor delivery and therapeutic responses. Importantly, we demonstrate unprecedented rapid anti-inflammatory effects in atherosclerotic lesions after the nanomedical therapy.

20926130
The biological properties of iron oxide core high-density lipoprotein in experimental atherosclerosis.
Lipoproteins are a family of plasma nanoparticles responsible for the transportation of lipids throughout the body. High-density lipoprotein (HDL), the smallest of the lipoprotein family, measures 7-13 nm in diameter and consists of a cholesteryl ester and triglyceride core that is covered with a monolayer of phospholipids and apolipoproteins. We have developed an iron oxide core HDL nanoparticle (FeO-HDL), which has a lipid based fluorophore incorporated in the phospholipid layer. This nanoparticle provides contrast for optical imaging, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Consequently, FeO-HDL can be visualized on the anatomical, cellular and sub-cellular level. In the current study we show that the biophysical features of FeO-HDL closely resemble those of native HDL and that FeO-HDL possess the ability to mimic HDL characteristics both in vitro as well as in vivo. We demonstrate that FeO-HDL can be applied to image HDL interactions and to investigate disease settings where HDL plays a key function. More generally, we have demonstrated a multimodal approach to study the behavior of biomaterials in vitro as well as in vivo. The approach allowed us to study nanoparticle dynamics in circulation, as well as nanoparticle targeting and uptake by tissues and cells of interest. Moreover, we were able to qualitatively assess nanoparticle excretion, critical for translating nanotechnologies to the clinic.

20668118
Atherosclerotic plaque composition: analysis with multicolor CT and targeted gold nanoparticles.
To investigate the potential of spectral computed tomography (CT) (popularly referred to as multicolor CT), used in combination with a gold high-density lipoprotein nanoparticle contrast agent (Au-HDL), for characterization of macrophage burden, calcification, and stenosis of atherosclerotic plaques. The local animal care committee approved all animal experiments. A preclinical spectral CT system in which incident x-rays are divided into six different energy bins was used for multicolor imaging. Au-HDL, an iodine-based contrast agent, and calcium phosphate were imaged in a variety of phantoms. Apolipoprotein E knockout (apo E-KO) mice were used as the model for atherosclerosis. Gold nanoparticles targeted to atherosclerosis (Au-HDL) were intravenously injected at a dose of 500 mg per kilogram of body weight. Iodine-based contrast material was injected 24 hours later, after which the mice were imaged. Wild-type mice were used as controls. Macrophage targeting by Au-HDL was further evaluated by using transmission electron microscopy and confocal microscopy of aorta sections. Multicolor CT enabled differentiation of Au-HDL, iodine-based contrast material, and calcium phosphate in the phantoms. Accumulations of Au-HDL were detected in the aortas of the apo E-KO mice, while the iodine-based contrast agent and the calcium-rich tissue could also be detected and thus facilitated visualization of the vasculature and bones (skeleton), respectively, during a single scanning examination. Microscopy revealed Au-HDL to be primarily localized in the macrophages on the aorta sections; hence, the multicolor CT images provided information about the macrophage burden. Spectral CT used with carefully chosen contrast agents may yield valuable information about atherosclerotic plaque composition.

20352038
HDL as a contrast agent for medical imaging.
Contrast-enhanced MRI of atherosclerosis can provide valuable additional information on a patient's disease state. As a result of the interactions of HDL with atherosclerotic plaque and the flexibility of its reconstitution, it is a versatile candidate for the delivery of contrast-generating materials to this pathogenic lesion. We herein discuss the reports of HDL modified with gadolinium to act as an MRI contrast agent for atherosclerosis. Furthermore, HDL has been modified with fluorophores and nanocrystals, allowing it to act as a contrast agent for fluorescent imaging techniques and for computed tomography. Such modified HDL has been found to be macrophage specific, and, therefore, can provide macrophage density information via noninvasive MRI. As such, modified HDL is currently a valuable contrast agent for probing preclinical atherosclerosis. Future developments may allow the application of this particle to further diseases and pathological or physiological processes in both preclinical models as well as in patients.

19815819
High-density lipoprotein-based contrast agents for multimodal imaging of atherosclerosis.
Lipoproteins, natural nanoparticles, have a well-recognized biological role and are highly suitable as a platform for delivering imaging agents. The ease with which both the exterior and interior of the particles can be modified permits the creation of multifunctional nanoparticles for imaging as well as the delivery of therapeutics. Importantly, their endogenous nature may make them biocompatible and biodegradable and allows them to avoid the recognition of the reticuloendothelial system. In particular, high-density lipoproteins (HDL) are of interest, because of their small size they can easily cross the endothelium and penetrate the underlying tissue. We summarize here the progress in establishing HDL as a vector for delivering a variety of diagnostically active materials to vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques in mouse models of atherosclerosis. By loading various types of image-enhancing compounds into either the core or surface of HDL, they can be visualized by different imaging modalities (MRI, CT, optical). By rerouting of HDL away from plaque macrophages, imaging of biological processes in diseases besides atherosclerosis may also be achieved.

19378935
Comparison of synthetic high density lipoprotein (HDL) contrast agents for MR imaging of atherosclerosis.
Determining arterial macrophage expression is an important goal in the molecular imaging of atherosclerosis. Here, we compare the efficacy of two synthetic, high density lipoprotein (HDL) based contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of macrophage burden. Each form of HDL was labeled with gadolinium and rhodamine to allow MRI and fluorescence microscopy. Either the 37 or 18 amino acid peptide replaced the apolipoprotein A-I in these agents, which were termed 37pA-Gd or 18A-Gd. The diameters of 37pA-Gd and 18A-Gd are 7.6 and 8.0 nm, respectively, while the longitudinal relaxivities are 9.8 and 10.0 (mM s)(-1). 37pA has better lipid binding properties. In vitro tests with J774A.1 macrophages proved the particles possessed the functionality of HDL by eliciting cholesterol efflux and were taken up in a receptor-like fashion by the cells. Both agents produced enhancements in atherosclerotic plaques of apolipoprotein E knockout mice of approximately 90% (n = 7 per agent) and are macrophage specific as evidenced by confocal microscopy on aortic sections. The half-lives of 37pA-Gd and 18A-Gd are 2.6 and 2.1 h, respectively. Despite the more favorable lipid interactions of 37pA, both agents gave similar, excellent contrast for the detection of atherosclerotic macrophages using MRI.

19361222
High-relaxivity gadolinium-modified high-density lipoproteins as magnetic resonance imaging contrast agents.
There is an ongoing desire to produce high-relaxivity, Gd-based magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agents. These may allow for lower doses to be used, which is especially important in view of the current safety concerns surrounding Gd in patients. Here we report the synthesis of a high-relaxivity MRI contrast agent, by incorporating Gd-chelating lipids that coordinate two water molecules into high-density lipoprotein (q = 2 HDL). We compared the properties of q = 2 HDL with those of an analogous HDL particle labeled with Gd-chelating lipids that coordinate only one water molecule (q = 1 HDL). We found that the q = 2 HDL possessed an elevated r(1) of 41 mM(-1) s(-1) compared to 9 mM(-1) s(-1) for q = 1 HDL at 20 MHz, but the q = 2 HDL exhibited high R(2)* values at high fields, precluding imaging above 128 MHz. While carrying out this investigation we observed that enlarged, disrupted particles were formed when the synthesis was carried out above the lipid critical micelle concentration (cmc), indicating the importance of synthesis below the cmc when modifying lipoproteins in this manner. The high relaxivity of q = 2 HDL means it will be an efficacious contrast agent for future MR imaging studies.

19072768
Incorporation of an apoE-derived lipopeptide in high-density lipoprotein MRI contrast agents for enhanced imaging of macrophages in atherosclerosis.
Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is becoming a pivotal diagnostic method to identify and characterize vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques. We previously reported a reconstituted high-density lipoprotein (rHDL) nanoparticle platform enriched with Gd-based amphiphiles as a plaque-specific MR imaging contrast agent. Further modification can be accomplished by inserting targeting moieties into this platform to potentially allow for improved intraplaque macrophage uptake. Since studies have indicated that intraplaque macrophage density is directly correlated to plaque vulnerability, modification of the rHDL platform may allow for better detection of vulnerable plaques. In the current study we incorporated a carboxyfluoresceine-labeled apolipoprotein E-derived lipopeptide, P2fA2, into rHDL. The in vitro macrophage uptake and in vivo MR efficacy were demonstrated using murine J774A.1 macrophages and the apolipoprotein E knock-out (apoE(-/-)) mouse model of atherosclerosis. The in vitro studies indicated enhanced association of murine macrophages to P2fA2 enriched rHDL (rHDL-P2A2) nanoparticles, relative to rHDL, using optical techniques and MR imaging. The in vivo studies showed a more pronounced and significantly higher signal enhancement of the atherosclerotic wall 24 h after the 50 micromol Gd/kg injection of rHDL-P2A2 relative to administration of rHDL. The normalized enhancement ratio for atherosclerotic wall of rHDL-P2A2 contrast agent injection was 90%, while that of rHDL was 53% 24 h post-injection. Confocal laser scanning microscopy revealed that rHDL-P2A2 nanoparticles co-localized primarily with intraplaque macrophages. The results of the current study confirm the hypothesis that intraplaque macrophage uptake of rHDL may be enhanced by the incorporation of the P2fA2 peptide into the modified HDL particle.

18939808
Nanocrystal core high-density lipoproteins: a multimodality contrast agent platform.
High density lipoprotein (HDL) is an important natural nanoparticle that may be modified for biomedical imaging purposes. Here we developed a novel technique to create unique multimodality HDL mimicking nanoparticles by incorporation of gold, iron oxide, or quantum dot nanocrystals for computed tomography, magnetic resonance, and fluorescence imaging, respectively. By including additional labels in the corona of the particles, they were made multifunctional. The characteristics of these nanoparticles, as well as their in vitro and in vivo behavior, revealed that they closely mimic native HDL.

18803939
Plasma carboxyl ester lipase activity modulates apolipoprotein B-containing lipoprotein metabolism in a transgenic mouse model.
Pancreatic carboxyl ester lipase (CEL) is in the plasma of many mammals, including humans and rats, but not mice. In vitro, CEL hydrolyzes cholesterol esters of apolipoprotein B-containing lipoproteins (apo B-Lp). To study the effect of CEL on metabolism of apo B-Lp and atherosclerosis in vivo, apo E-knockout (EKO) mice, which have high plasma levels of apo B-Lp and are prone to atherosclerosis, were made to secrete CEL into plasma by introducing a transgene containing a liver-specific promoter and rat CEL complementary DNA. Plasma CEL activity in EKO-CEL mice was comparable with that found in rats. Evidence of modification of apo B-Lp by plasma CEL in vivo was an increase in the free cholesterol to cholesterol ester ratio of apo B-Lp from mice on chow or a Western-type diet. In addition, plasma total cholesterol levels were elevated in EKO-CEL mice, with the elevation found exclusively in the apo B-Lp fraction. Associated with the increase in steady-state apo B-Lp levels was an increase in the plasma half-life of very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) in EKO-CEL mice, measured by the clearance rate of injected VLDL. Interestingly, despite the increase of apo B-Lp, the atherosclerotic lesion did not differ between EKO and EKO-CEL mice on a Western-type diet. In summary, our results demonstrate that plasma CEL modulates apo B-Lp metabolism in vivo, resulting in reduced VLDL clearance and elevated plasma cholesterol levels.

18712752
An ApoA-I mimetic peptide high-density-lipoprotein-based MRI contrast agent for atherosclerotic plaque composition detection.
Cardiovascular disease is one of the prime causes of mortality throughout the world and there is a need for targeted and effective contrast agents to allow noninvasive imaging of the cholesterol-rich atherosclerotic plaques in arteries. A new, fully synthetic, high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-mimicking MRI contrast agent is developed, which enhances macrophage-rich areas of plaque in a mouse model of atherosclerosis by 94%. Confirmation of the targeting of this nanoparticulate agent is achieved using confocal microscopy by tracking a fluorescent lipid incorporated into the nanoparticle.

17729343
Magnetic resonance imaging of vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques: current imaging strategies and molecular imaging probes.
The vulnerability or destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques has been directly linked to plaque composition. Imaging modalities, such as magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, that allow for evaluation of plaque composition at a cellular and molecular level, could further improve the detection of vulnerable plaque and may allow for monitoring the efficacy of antiatherosclerotic therapies. In this review we focus on MR imaging strategies for the detection and evaluation of atherosclerotic plaques and their composition. We highlight recent advancements in the development of MR pulse sequences, computer image analysis, and the use of commercially available MR contrast agents, such as gadopentic acid (Gd-DTPA), for plaque characterization. We also discuss molecular imaging strategies that are currently being used to design specific imaging probes targeted to biochemical and cellular markers of atherosclerotic plaque vulnerability.

17472705
Elevated plasma cholesterol does not affect brain Abeta in mice lacking the low-density lipoprotein receptor.
Epidemiological studies support an association between vascular risk factors, including hypercholesterolemia, and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Recently, there has been much interest in the possibility that hypercholesterolemia might directly promote beta-amyloid (Abeta) production. Indeed, in vitro studies have shown that increasing cellular cholesterol levels enhances Abeta production. However, studies in AD transgenic mouse models have not consistently found that elevated plasma cholesterol leads to increased Abeta production or deposition in vivo. In this study, we determined whether elevated peripheral cholesterol influences Abeta production in mice with a null mutation of the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR). We show that dramatically elevated plasma cholesterol levels, whether induced by high cholesterol, high fat, or high fat/high cholesterol diets, did not affect either levels of brain Abeta40, Abeta42, or APP, or the Abeta42/40 or APP-CTF/APP ratios, nor substantially alter brain cholesterol levels. ApoE protein levels in brain were, however, elevated, in LDLR-/- mice by post-transcriptional mechanisms. Collectively, these studies argue that plasma cholesterol levels do not normally regulate production of brain Abeta.

17451174
Non-invasive MRI of mouse models of atherosclerosis.
Early detection and characterization of atherosclerotic lesions susceptible to sudden rupture and thrombosis may decrease morbidity and mortality. Plaque development has been extensively studied using MRI in animal models of rapidly progressing atherosclerosis. These transgenic mice develop atherosclerotic plaques in the aortic root by 10 weeks of age and throughout the vasculature thereafter. Transplantation of lesion-containing segments of the thoracic aorta into wild-type mice results in nearly total reversal of atherosclerosis, making it possible to study both progression and regression of plaques in this model. MRI permits the non-invasive accurate assessment of atherosclerotic plaque burden and the differentiation between the lipid and fibrous content of individual plaques, thus providing a non-invasive approach to serially monitor the evolution of individual plaques in the mouse models. Emergence of novel contrast agents that target a diverse set of molecules within the plaque are now helping to elucidate the changes at the cellular and molecular levels during plaque progression and regression.

17417649
Noninvasive detection of macrophages using a nanoparticulate contrast agent for computed tomography.
Sudden fibrous cap disruption of 'high-risk' atherosclerotic plaques can trigger the formation of an occlusive thrombus in coronary arteries, causing acute coronary syndromes. High-risk atherosclerotic plaques are characterized by their specific cellular and biological content (in particular, a high density of macrophages), rather than by their impact on the vessel lumen. Early identification of high-risk plaques may be useful for preventing ischemic events. One major hurdle in detecting high-risk atherosclerotic plaques in coronary arteries is the lack of an imaging modality that allows for the identification of atherosclerotic plaque composition with high spatial and temporal resolutions. Here we show that macrophages in atherosclerotic plaques of rabbits can be detected with a clinical X-ray computed tomography (CT) scanner after the intravenous injection of a contrast agent formed of iodinated nanoparticles dispersed with surfactant. This contrast agent may become an important adjunct to the clinical evaluation of coronary arteries with CT.

17215360
Detecting and assessing macrophages in vivo to evaluate atherosclerosis noninvasively using molecular MRI.
We investigated the ability of targeted immunomicelles to detect and assess macrophages in atherosclerotic plaque using MRI in vivo. There is a large clinical need for a noninvasive tool to assess atherosclerosis from a molecular and cellular standpoint. Macrophages play a central role in atherosclerosis and are associated with plaques vulnerable to rupture. Therefore, macrophage scavenger receptor (MSR) was chosen as a target for molecular MRI. MSR-targeted immunomicelles, micelles, and gadolinium-diethyltriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) were tested in ApoE-/- and WT mice by using in vivo MRI. Confocal laser-scanning microscopy colocalization, macrophage immunostaining and MRI correlation, competitive inhibition, and various other analyses were performed. In vivo MRI revealed that at 24 h postinjection, immunomicelles provided a 79% increase in signal intensity of atherosclerotic aortas in ApoE-/- mice compared with only 34% using untargeted micelles and no enhancement using gadolinium-DTPA. Confocal laser-scanning microscopy revealed colocalization between fluorescent immunomicelles and macrophages in plaques. There was a strong correlation between macrophage content in atherosclerotic plaques and the matched in vivo MRI results as measured by the percent normalized enhancement ratio. Monoclonal antibodies to MSR were able to significantly hinder immunomicelles from providing contrast enhancement of atherosclerotic vessels in vivo. Immunomicelles provided excellent validated in vivo enhancement of atherosclerotic plaques. The enhancement seen is related to the macrophage content of the atherosclerotic vessel areas imaged. Immunomicelles may aid in the detection of high macrophage content associated with plaques vulnerable to rupture.

