21386954
An update on nonmelanoma skin cancer.
Estimates from the American Cancer Society suggest that there are more than two million cases of nonmelanoma skin cancer in the United States per year. The following review highlights the topics of actinic keratoses, basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, Kaposi's sarcoma, and Merkel cell carcinoma. This update on the cutting-edge clinical and dermpathologic research will assist the dermatologist in approaching, diagnosing, and managing nonmelanoma skin carcinoma. Immunologic and genetic research into nonmelanoma skin carcinoma has paved the way for novel therapeutic options for patients who were previously without any viable treatment alternatives. While still in preliminary stages, agents, such as ingenol mebutate, vismodegib, and sirolumus, may become integral drugs in the armamentarium of managing cutaneous carcinoma.

20878586
American Academy of Dermatology - 2010 summer meeting.
The 2010 Summer Meeting of the American Academy of Dermatology, held in Chicago, included topics covering new therapeutic developments in the field of dermatological diseases, including psoriasis. This conference report highlights selected presentations on the use of etanercept, adalimumab and briakinumab in the treatment of psoriasis.

20865837
Histopathologic identification of dermal filler agents.
As reflected in the literature, the use of dermal filler agents has increased substantially over the last decade. Consequently, these agents are more frequently encountered on histopathologic examination. A variety of dermal fillers can be readily identified histopathologically, and the accurate identification of these agents is a critical task for dermatopathologists. Furthermore, a basic understanding of the histological features of fillers has relevance to dermatologists and dermatologic surgeons. The identification of filler substances may have important diagnostic, medico-legal and medical management considerations. This concise review aims to provide a pragmatic approach to distinguishing the agents most frequently encountered in routine practice and in the literature.

20667928
Verrucous carcinoma masquerading as a giant fibroepithelial polyp.
The authors report a case of a verrucous carcinoma (VC) of the buttocks clinically simulating a giant (6.5 cm in length and 5.4 cm in greatest diameter) fibroepithelial polyp (FEP) capped by a large cutaneous horn. The growth had been present for 15 years and had never been biopsied despite numerous physical exams. VC typically presents distinctly as a large cauliflower-like growth with histological features of acanthosis, parakeratosis, minimal cytological atypia, and deep pushing epithelial borders. It is considered a low-grade, well-differentiated variant of squamous cell cancer and is commonly associated with human papillomavirus (HPV). Anogenital VC has been associated more with "low-risk" (type 6 and 11) than "high-risk" (16 and 18) HPV types. Presentation of VC as a FEP is unusual and demonstrates the necessity of maintaining a high level of clinical suspicion of anogenital growths, particularly those involving atypical features such as ulceration or the presence of a cutaneous horn.

20432186
American Academy of Dermatology-68th annual meeting. 5-9 March 2010, Miami Beach, FL, USA.
The American Academy of Dermatology, held in Miami Beach, FL, USA, included topics covering new therapeutic and diagnostic developments in the field of dermatological diseases. This conference report highlights selected presentations on melanoma, including genetic risk factors, improvements in detection, molecular classification and targeting BRAF mutations, and on psoriasis, including the immunology of psoriasis, biological therapies and psoriasis as a systemic illness.

19958440
Verruciform xanthoma in the setting of cutaneous trauma and chronic inflammation: report of a patient and a brief review of the literature.
We report a rare case of multiple, co-exisitng verruciform xanthomas (VXs) of the anogenital region in the setting of cutaneous trauma. VX is a rare benign mucocutaneous neoplasm that typically presents as a solitary lesion with a predilection for the oral cavity, although extra-oral lesions have been reported involving the vulva, scrotum, penis, anal region and extremities. The etiology and pathogenesis of VX have yet to be determined; however, recent literature has reported that multifocal cutaneous VX are frequently associated with pre-existing inflammatory processes. A significant number of VXs of the skin have been found to co-exist with cutaneous disorders including graft vs. host disease, discoid lupus erythematosus, pemphigus vulgaris, and recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. Therefore, we speculate severe cutaneous trauma and chronic inflammation may induce epithelial keratinocytes to respond aberrantly leading to epidermal hyperplasia and foamy cell formation characterizing the VX lesion.

19790008
American Academy of Dermatology--Summer Meeting. 29 July-2 August 2009, Boston, MA, USA.
The 2009 Summer Meeting of the American Academy of Dermatology held in Boston, MA included topics covering new therapeutic developments in the field of dermatology. This conference report highlights selected presentations on the use of TNF agents and treatment options for psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, as well as for melanoma and basal cell carcinoma. Investigational drugs discussed include PLX-4032 (Plexxikon Inc/F Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd) and GDC-0449 (Curis Inc/Genentech Inc/ F Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd).

