19672119
Diminished benefits of drug-eluting stents versus bare metal stents in patients with severe renal insufficiency.
Since their introduction, the use of drug-eluting stents (DES) has increasingly become standard practice due to their decreased rates of in-stent restenosis and target lesion revascularization (TLR) rates in comparison to bare metal stents (BMS). However, these benefits have not been reproduced in patients with severe renal disease (SRD). This study compared TLR rates in patients with severe renal insufficiency treated with DES vs. BMS. Between 2003 and 2006, we collected data on 6,220 consecutive patients receiving either DES or BMS. Both groups were similar in angiographic and clinical variables. TLR rates at 270 days and 1 year were then compared between patients receiving DES or BMS with varying creatinine clearance (CrCl). At 1 year after PCI, TLR rates were significantly lower for DES in patients with CrCl >60 (5 vs. 9.3%; p < 0.0001). However, in patients with CrCl <40 ml/min or on dialysis there was no significant difference in TLR rates for DES vs. BMS. While DES showed improved clinical outcomes in patients with normal and mildly impaired renal function, they showed no benefit over BMS in patients with moderate to severe renal insufficiency. Coupled with the possibly increased risk of late stent thrombosis with DES, BMS may be a more appropriate and safer stent in this population.

18760134
Bolus-only versus bolus + infusion of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors during percutaneous coronary intervention.
The present study was done to analyze if glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (GPI) bolus-only will reduce vascular/bleeding complications and cost with similar major adverse cardiac events (MACE) when compared with GPI bolus + infusion. Evidence-based therapy of GPI inhibitors during percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) incorporates intravenous bolus followed by 12 to 18 hours of infusion. However, GPI bolus + infusion may increase vascular/bleeding complications and may not reduce MACE when compared with GPI bolus-only. From January 1, 2003, to December 31, 2004, 2,629 consecutive patients received GPI during PCI at a single center. Of these, 1,064 patients received GPI bolus + infusion in 2003 and were compared with 1,565 patients that received GPI bolus-only in 2004. Baseline characteristics were similar in both groups. Patients receiving GPI bolus-only had reduced vascular/bleeding complications when compared with bolus + infusion (4.9% vs 7%, P < .05, odds ratio 0.62, 95% confidence interval 0.45-0.89). Furthermore, ischemic complications were similar in both groups, including periprocedural creatine kinase-MB enzyme release (12.8% vs 15.3%, P = NS), MACE at 30 days (3.2% vs 3%, P = NS), and death and myocardial infarction at 1 year (7.1% vs 7.8%, P = NS). In addition, GPI bolus-only reduced cost in US dollars ($323 vs $706, P < .001) and increased ambulatory PCI (13.1% vs 3.2%, P < .01), with reduced length of stay (1.1 vs 1.6 days, P < .01), when compared with GPI bolus + infusion. Glycoprotein inhibitor bolus-only reduces vascular/bleeding complications with similar MACE and reduced cost when compared with GPI bolus + infusion. In addition, GPI bolus-only improved ambulatory PCI and reduced length of stay. These results are consistent with a safer and cost-effective strategy for bolus-only when GPI therapy is considered during PCI.

17679071
Dobutamine-induced myocardial infarction with normal coronary arteries during stress SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging.


17659921
Comparison of platelet function and morphology in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention receiving bivalirudin versus unfractionated heparin versus clopidogrel pretreatment and bivalirudin.
We hypothesized that direct thrombin inhibition could attenuate platelet activation and release of soluble CD40 ligand (sCD40L), a marker of inflammation, during percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). To assess platelet function under flow conditions with bivalirudin versus unfractionated heparin (UFH), we employed the cone and plate(let) analyzer (CPA) assay in drug-spiked blood samples from volunteers (n = 3) in vitro, and then in PCI patients who received bivalirudin alone (n = 20), UFH alone (n = 15), and clopidogrel pretreatment plus bivalirudin (n = 15). Scanning electron microscopy was employed to image bivalirudin or UFH-treated platelets to determine whether platelet function observations had a morphologic explanation. Enzyme immunoassay was used to measure sCD40L levels in PCI patients. In vitro, bivalirudin decreased platelet surface coverage; UFH increased platelet surface coverage. In PCI patients, bivalirudin alone decreased platelet surface coverage, UFH alone increased platelet surface coverage, and clopidogrel pretreatment plus bivalirudin additively reduced platelet surface coverage. Unlike UFH, bivalirudin did not activate platelets in SEM studies. Bivalirudin alone or coupled with clopidogrel significantly reduced plasma sCD40L in PCI patients. In conclusion, our findings suggest that under flow conditions, bivalirudin alone or coupled with clopidogrel may have an antiplatelet effect versus UFH alone during PCI. These data suggest that bivalirudin and UFH may confer an anti-inflammatory effect by reducing sCD40L during PCI.

