19702428
The relationship between employment-related self-efficacy and quality of life following traumatic brain injury.
This study examines the relative contribution of employment-related and general self-efficacy to perceptions of quality of life (QoL) for individuals with traumatic brain injury. Correlational. Community-based research and training center. 427 individuals with self-reported TBI under the age of 65 were included in analysis. Employment-related self-efficacy, general self-efficacy, perceived quality of life (PQoL), unmet important needs (UIN). Significant correlations were found between income, injury severity, age at injury, and employment and the QoL variables. In addition, employment-related and general self-efficacy correlated positively with both PQoL and UIN. Employment-related and general self-efficacy accounted for 16% of the variance in PQoL and 9.5% of the variance in UIN, over and above other variables traditionally associated with QoL. These findings highlight the importance of including subjective appraisals of employment, such as perceived self-efficacy at the workplace, in assessing QoL and successful return to work following TBI.

19306374
Cognitive rehabilitation following traumatic brain injury: assessment to treatment.
Cognitive rehabilitation refers to a set of interventions that aim to improve a person's ability to perform cognitive tasks by retraining previously learned skills and teaching compensatory strategies. Cognitive rehabilitation begins with a thorough neuropsychological assessment to identify cognitive strengths and weaknesses and the degree of change in cognitive ability following a brain injury. The conclusions of the assessment are used to formulate appropriate treatment plans. Common interventions for improvements in attention, memory, and executive function, as well as the nature of comprehensive programs, which combine treatment modalities, are reviewed. Cognitive rehabilitation is effective for mild-to-severe injuries and beneficial at any time post-injury. Sufficient evidence exists supporting the efficacy and effectiveness of cognitive rehabilitation, which has become the treatment of choice for cognitive impairments and leads to improvements in cognitive and psychosocial functioning.

19208955
Objective and subjective assessment of long-term community integration in minority groups following traumatic brain injury.
Previous studies that used objective measures of community integration found that in the first year after injury, minority groups with traumatic brain injury (TBI) exhibit lower levels of community integration than White participants. The objective of this study was to determine if this discrepancy persists beyond one year post injury, and if assessing subjective components of community integration helps understand these differences. Participants were 360 community dwelling adults with TBI including 29% from minority backgrounds. Mean time post injury was 8.66 years (SD = 9.94). Main outcome measure utilized was the Participation Objective Participation Subjective (POPS). Multiple regression indicated that minority status predicted levels of transportation use (p < 0.01), with white participants reporting less use, after controlling for demographic and injury variables. When looking at subjective indicators, minority status predicted levels of dissatisfaction with community, civic, life and leisure participation (p < 0.01), and total levels of participation (p < 0.0125), with White participants reporting significantly less dissatisfaction. Findings indicate that differences between minorities and white participants in objective aspects of community integration after one year post-injury are only evident in levels of transportation use. However, when looking at subjective indicators differences between groups are present in other areas. These findings underscore the importance of considering the consumer's subjective experience when providing services to minorities in a rehabilitation setting.

