20171483
Mandibular ramus/coronoid process grafts in maxillofacial reconstructive surgery.
To evaluate the utility of autogenous extended mandibular ramus and coronoid process bone grafts for maxillofacial reconstructive surgery. Twelve patients aged 23 to 76 years (mean, 52) who underwent extended ramus/coronoid process grafts for reconstruction of maxillofacial deformities due to trauma, alveolar atrophy, or iatrogenic nasal deformity. All patients had either unilateral or bilateral combined coronoid process-mandibular ramus bone grafts for their reconstruction. There was 1 nasal reconstruction, 2 unilateral mandibles, 1 bilateral mandible, 4 unilateral maxillas, 1 unilateral maxilla and mandible combined, and 1 bilateral maxilla and mandible combined. The procedure was considered a success when the patient's deformities were reconstructed ad integrum and when there were no failures of the dental implants placed in the augmented areas as of the longest follow-up. All patients were successfully reconstructed. There was 1 infection at a donor site that resolved with local care and oral antibiotics. All but 1 of the maxillary and mandibular alveolar augmentations underwent endosteal implant placement approximately 4 to 6 months following grafting. The nasal reconstruction restored normal function and symmetry. Using both the coronoid process of the mandible and the mandibular ramus as a source for autogenous bone graft can provide sufficient bone in quantity and quality for selected maxillofacial reconstructions.

20006168
Intranasal desmopressin versus blood transfusion in cirrhotic patients with coagulopathy undergoing dental extraction: a randomized controlled trial.
Cirrhotic patients waiting for liver transplantation who need dental extractions are given fresh frozen plasma and/or platelets to correct coagulopathy. This is costly and may be associated with transfusion reactions and fluid overload. We evaluated the efficacy of intranasal desmopressin as an alternative to transfusion to correct the coagulopathy of cirrhotic patients undergoing dental extraction. Cirrhotic patients with platelet counts of 30,000 to 50,000/microL and/or international normalized ratio (INR) 2.0 to 3.0 were enrolled in a prospective, controlled, randomized clinical trial. Blood transfusion (fresh frozen plasma 10 mL/kg and/or 1 unit of single donor platelets, respectively) or intranasal desmopressin (300 microg) were given before dental extraction. A standard oral and maxillofacial surgical treatment protocol was performed by the same surgeon. Patients were followed for postextraction bleeding and side-effects over the next 24 to 48 hours. No significant differences were noted between the 2 groups in gender, age, INR, platelet count, creatinine, total bilirubin, ALT, albumin, MELD score, or number of teeth removed (median 3 vs 4). The number of teeth removed ranged between 1 and 31 in the desmopressin group and 1 and 22 in the transfusion group. No patients in desmopressin group required rescue blood transfusion after extraction. One patient in the transfusion group had bleeding after the procedure and required an additional transfusion. Another patient experienced an allergic reaction at the end of transfusion, which was effectively treated with diphenhydramine. Treatment associated average costs were lower for desmopressin ($700/patient) compared with transfusion ($1,173/patient). Intranasal desmopressin was as effective as blood transfusion in achieving hemostasis in cirrhotic patients with moderate coagulopathy undergoing dental extraction. Intranasal desmopressin was much more convenient, less expensive, and well tolerated.

