21246519
Phase 1 trial of concurrent erlotinib, celecoxib, and reirradiation for recurrent head and neck cancer.
BACKGROUND: Concurrent inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is an active and well tolerated regimen in recurrent head and neck cancer (HNC). In the current phase 1 trial, the authors sought to determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and efficacy of concurrent erlotinib and celecoxib as a radiosensitizing regimen. METHODS: Fourteen patients with previously irradiated HNC with no distant metastases who required reirradiation were eligible. Treatment consisted of daily erlotinib 150 mg and twice daily celecoxib (escalated from 200 mg to 600 mg using a 3 + 3 design with an expanded cohort at the MTD) starting on Day 1 and was continued during radiation. Daily radiation was started on Day 15, and maintenance erlotinib was recommended. RESULTS: The recommended phase 2 dose of celecoxib was 400 mg. Three dose-limiting toxicities included late in-field orocutaneous fistula (Dose Level 2), osteonecrosis (Dose Level 3), and trismus (Dose Level 3). Acute grade ?3 toxicities were uncommon and included mucositis (21%) and dermatitis (14%). At a median follow-up of 11 months, the 1-year locoregional control, progression-free survival, and overall survival rates were 60%, 37%, and 55%, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Concurrent erlotinib, celecoxib, and reirradiation was a feasible and clinically active regimen in a population of patients with recurrent HNC who had a poor prognosis. Cancer 2011. © 2011 American Cancer Society.

20833855
FDG PET with contrast-enhanced CT: a critical imaging tool for laryngeal carcinoma.
Fluorine 18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) has evolved to be an essential imaging modality in the evaluation of laryngeal carcinoma. Although the modality has limited utility in assessing the extent of the primary tumor, FDG PET has proved to be superior to anatomic modalities in the detection of lymph node and distant metastases. The role of FDG PET in the evaluation of patients with laryngeal tumors that are clinically classified as N0 has not shown consistent usefulness because of the innate resolution limitations of the camera. In the posttherapy setting, however, FDG PET has consistently demonstrated a high negative predictive value in the identification of recurrent disease, both during the course of therapy and during long-term follow-up. In addition, contrast material-enhanced computed tomography (CT) in conjunction with FDG PET has demonstrated a complementary role by allowing for superior anatomic coregistration and therefore more definitive diagnosis. There is sufficient evidence that with further advances in PET technology, this modality will likely become more useful in the detection of small lesions and occult nodal disease, as well as in guiding the management of laryngeal carcinoma.

20830768
Phase 2 trial of concurrent 5-fluorouracil, hydroxyurea, cetuximab, and hyperfractionated intensity-modulated radiation therapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer.
The objective of this phase 2 study was to evaluate the tolerability and efficacy of incorporating cetuximab and simultaneous integrated-boost (SIB), intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) into a well described 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and hydroxyurea (HU)-based chemoradiation regimen. Patients with stage IVA and IVB or high-risk stage III squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck were enrolled on a phase 2 trial. Prior organ-conserving surgery or induction chemotherapy was allowed off protocol. SIB-IMRT was prescribed to low-risk volumes (43.2 gray [Gy] to 48 Gy) and intermediate-risk volumes (54-63 Gy). A separate IMRT cone-down plan was targeted to macroscopic disease (72 Gy). The median radiation dose was 72 Gy (range, 60-72 Gy) administered in 1.5 Gy fractions twice daily during Weeks 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9. Concurrent systemic therapy consisted of 5-FU (600 mg/m²), HU (500 mg twice daily), and cetuximab (250 mg/m²). From January 2007 through April 2008, 33 patients were enrolled. At a median follow-up of 24 months, the 2-year rates of locoregional control, distant control, disease-free survival, and overall survival were 83%, 79%, 69%, and 86%, respectively. Grade 3 toxicity consisted of mucositis in 33% of patients, radiation dermatitis in 15%of patients, anemia in 18% of patients, leukopenia in 18% of patients, neutropenia in 12% of patients, and thrombocytopenia in 3% of patients. Most patients (64%) were able to tolerate treatment without a feeding tube, and there were no acute or late grade ?4 adverse events. The current results indicated that concurrent 5-FU, HU, and cetuximab plus SIB-IMRT is a promising and reasonably well tolerated approach to incorporating molecularly targeted therapy into curative therapy for patients with locally advanced head and neck cancer.

