18350459
Longitudinal associations among quality of life and its predictors in patients treated for prostate cancer: the moderating role of age.
This study examined moderating effects of age on longitudinal associations among quality of life (QOL) and its demographic (e.g., age), clinical [e.g., prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level], and affective and cognitive predictors (i.e., distress, worries about recurrence, decisional regret, subjective life expectancy) in prostate cancer patients treated with external beam radiation (N = 391). Demographic and clinical characteristics were assessed at diagnosis, affective and cognitive variables at 6 months after diagnosis, and QOL at 12 months after diagnosis. Multiple-group analyses showed that among younger patients (< or =68 years old, n = 199), lower levels of decisional regret were associated with better functional QOL, and lower Gleason scores and PSA levels were associated with lower levels of distress and longer expected survival time, respectively. Being employed was related to higher levels of functional QOL and frequent worries about recurrence. Among older patients (>68 years old, n = 192), lower levels of distress were associated with higher levels of functional QOL, and longer expected survival time was associated with better functional and physical QOL.

17882657
Regret of treatment decision and its association with disease-specific quality of life following prostate cancer treatment.
We examined decisional regret among prostate cancer patients and its association with disease-specific quality of life. Patients (N = 793) completed questionnaires at diagnosis, at 6 months, and 12 months thereafter. Although levels of decisional regret were low, regret increased significantly between 6 and 12 months after diagnosis. The increase was substantial for patients treated with prostatectomy compared to patients treated with external beam radiation or brachytherapy. Cross-sectional, significant, and positive associations among regret, activity limitation attributed to urinary dysfunction, and bother with sexual and urinary dysfunction emerged. Longitudinally, the change in the level of regret was significantly associated with treatment modality and with the change in bother with sexual dysfunction over the first 6 months after diagnosis. Extensive discussions about disease-specific quality of life should be included when physicians counsel patients about treatment options.

