20308168
Anesthetic experience with endovascular aortic aneurysm repair.
We endeavored to characterize the anesthesia experience with endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) at a large academic medical center in the United States. A retrospective review of electronic medical records was conducted for all patients undergoing elective EVAR from 2002 to 2007 in a large academic medical center. A total of 522 cases met inclusion criteria, with 4% of cases using general anesthesia (GA), 92% regional anesthesia (RA), and 4% local anesthesia (LA). There was no statistically significant difference between the groups for duration of surgery or in-hospital mortality. In-hospital length of stay was longer for GA than LA or RA. Four cases were converted to open repair. Two mortalities occurred during the perioperative period (0.4% of cases). The vast majority of EVAR were successfully performed under RA, involved mild blood loss, involved infrequent need for conversion to GA, and resulted in brief in-hospital length of stay and low mortality rate.

19923513
A comparison of transmittance and reflectance pulse oximetry during vascular surgery.
New reflectance pulse oximetry probes placed on the forehead may be an improvement over transmittance probes placed on a finger, toe, or earlobe in patients with compromised perfusion. We compared the reliability and accuracy of the 2 types of probes in patients undergoing vascular surgery. Patients with peripheral vascular disease undergoing vascular surgery under general anesthesia were monitored with both a transmittance earlobe probe and a reflectance forehead probe. Spo(2) was recorded continuously from both probes, and arterial blood gas samples were analyzed when clinically indicated. The average values from both probes over each minute were compared using Bland-Altman analysis. Twenty patients were included yielding a total of 3993 1-min averaged data pairs. Neither probe failed to report a value for more than 1 min. A Bland-Altman plot showed the limits of agreement between the probes of -4.0% to +2.6%. Twenty-eight arterial blood samples were analyzed for 14 patients and Sao(2) closely matched both Spo(2) probe values at the time of sampling. Compared with Sao(2), analysis demonstrated limits of agreement of -4.7% to 6.1% for ear and -3.3% to 3.4% for forehead sites. The new reflectance forehead Spo(2) probe tested has acceptable agreement with the older transmittance probe placed on the earlobe for pulse oximetry within typical ranges of Spo(2) in patients undergoing vascular surgery.

19468845
Watch your back.


20187488
Administration of desflurane with bistrectal index monitoring in a patient with narcolepsy undergoing anesthesia.


