21365124
Congenital Erythropoietic Porphyria: Characterization of Murine Models of the Severe Common (C73R/C73R) and Later-Onset Genotypes.
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) is an autosomal recessive disorder due to the deficient activity of uroporphyrinogen III synthase (UROS). Knock-in mouse models were generated for the common, hematologically severe human genotype, C73R/C73R, and milder genotypes (C73R/V99L and V99L/V99L). The UROS enzyme specific activities in the livers and erythrocytes of these mice averaged approximately 1.2%, 11% and 19% of normal, respectively. C73R/C73R mice that survived fetal life to weaning age (~12%) had a severe microcytic hypochromic anemia (Hb=7.9 g/dL, MCV=26.6 fl, MCHC=27.4 g/dL, RDW=37.7%, 19% reticulocytes) and massively accumulated isomer I porphyrins (95 ?M, 183 ?M and 44 ?M in erythrocytes, spleen and liver, respectively), but a nearly normal lifespan. In adult C73R/C73R mice, spleen and liver weights were 8.2- and 1.5-fold increased, respectively. C73R/V99L mice were mildly anemic, (Hb=14.0 g/dL, and MCH=13.3), and minimally accumulated porphyrins (0.10, 5.54, and 0.58 ?M in erythrocytes, spleen and liver, respectively), while adult V99L/V99L mice were normal. Of note, even the mildest genotype, V99L/V99L, exhibited porphyria in utero that disappeared by two months of age. These severe and mild mouse models inform therapeutic interventions and permit further investigation of the porphyrin-induced hematopathology, which leads to the photo-induced cutaneous lesions. Of significance for therapeutic intervention, these mouse models suggest that only 11% of wild-type activity might be needed to reverse the pathology in CEP patients.

20485863
Feline congenital erythropoietic porphyria: two homozygous UROS missense mutations cause the enzyme deficiency and porphyrin accumulation.
The first feline model of human congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) due to deficient uroporphyrinogen III synthase (URO-synthase) activity was identified by its characteristic clinical phenotype, and confirmed by biochemical and molecular genetic studies. The proband, an adult domestic shorthair cat, had dark-red urine and brownish discolored teeth with red fluorescence under ultraviolet light. Biochemical studies demonstrated markedly increased uroporphyrinogen I in urine and plasma (2,650- and 10,700-fold greater than wild type, respectively), whereas urinary 5-aminolevulinic acid and porphobilinogen were lower than normal. Erythrocytic URO-synthase activity was <1% of mean wild-type activity, confirming the diagnosis and distinguishing it from feline phenocopies having acute intermittent porphyria. Sequencing of the affected cat's UROS gene revealed two missense mutations, c.140C>T (p.S47F) in exon 3 and c.331G>A (p.G111S) in exon 6, both of which were homozygous, presumably owing to parental consanguinity. Neither was present in 100 normal cat alleles. Prokaryotic expression and thermostability studies of the purified monomeric wild-type, p.S47F, p.G111S, and p.S47F/G111S enzymes showed that the p.S47F enzyme had 100% of wild-type specific activity but ~50% decreased thermostability, whereas the p.G111S and p.S47F/G111S enzymes had about 60% and 20% of wild-type specific activity, respectively, and both were markedly thermolabile. Molecular modeling results indicated that the less active/less stable p.G111S enzyme was further functionally impaired by a structural interaction induced by the presence of the S47F substitution. Thus, the synergistic interaction of two rare amino acid substitutions in the URO-synthase polypeptide caused the feline model of human CEP.

19965637
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria: a novel uroporphyrinogen III synthase branchpoint mutation reveals underlying wild-type alternatively spliced transcripts.
Splicing mutations account for approximately 10% of lesions causing genetic diseases, but few branchpoint sequence (BPS) lesions have been reported. In 3 families with autosomal recessive congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) resulting from uroporphyrinogen III synthase (URO-synthase) deficiency, sequencing the promoter, all 10 exons and the intron/exon boundaries did not detect a mutation. Northern analyses of lymphoblast mRNAs from 2 patients and reverse-transcribed polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of lymphoblast mRNAs from all 3 patients revealed multiple longer transcripts involving intron 9 and low levels of wild-type message. Sequencing intron 9 RT-PCR products and genomic DNA in each case revealed homozygosity for a novel BPS mutation (c.661-31T-->G) and alternatively spliced transcripts containing 81, 246, 358, and 523 nucleotides from intron 9. RT-PCR revealed aberrant transcripts in both wild-type and CEP lymphoblasts, whereas BPS mutation reduced the wild-type transcript and enzyme activity in CEP lymphoblasts to approximately 10% and 15% of normal, respectively. Although the +81-nucleotide alternative transcript was in-frame, it only contributed approximately 0.2% of the lymphoblast URO-synthase activity. Thus, the BPS mutation markedly reduced the wild-type transcript and enzyme activity, thereby causing the disease. This is the first BPS mutation in the last intron, presumably accounting for the observed 100% intron retention without exon skipping.

19934113
Feline acute intermittent porphyria: a phenocopy masquerading as an erythropoietic porphyria due to dominant and recessive hydroxymethylbilane synthase mutations.
Human acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), the most common acute hepatic porphyria, is an autosomal dominant inborn error of heme biosynthesis due to the half-normal activity of hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMB-synthase). Here, we describe the first naturally occurring animal model of AIP in four unrelated cat lines who presented phenotypically as congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP). Affected cats had erythrodontia, brownish urine, fluorescent bones, and markedly elevated urinary uroporphyrin (URO) and coproporphyrin (COPRO) consistent with CEP. However, their uroporphyrinogen-III-synthase (URO-synthase) activities (deficient in CEP) were normal. Notably, affected cats had half-normal HMB-synthase activities and elevated urinary 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen (PBG), the deficient enzyme and accumulated metabolites in human AIP. Sequencing the feline HMB-synthase gene revealed different mutations in each line: a duplication (c.189dupT), an in-frame 3 bp deletion (c.842_844delGAG) identical to that causing human AIP and two missense mutations, c.250G>A (p.A84T) and c.445C>T (p.R149W). Prokaryotic expression of mutations c.842_844delGAG and c.445C>T resulted in mutant enzymes with <1% wild-type activity, whereas c.250G>A expressed a stable enzyme with approximately 35% of wild-type activity. The discolored teeth from the affected cats contained markedly elevated URO I and III, accounting for the CEP-like phenocopy. In three lines, the phenotype was an autosomal dominant trait, while affected cats with the c.250G>A (p.A84T) mutation were homozygous, a unique recessive form of AIP. These animal models may permit further investigation of the pathogenesis of the acute, life-threatening neurological attacks in human AIP and the evaluation of therapeutic strategies. GenBank Accession Numbers: GQ850461-GQ850464.

19861948
AAV8-mediated gene therapy prevents induced biochemical attacks of acute intermittent porphyria and improves neuromotor function.
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), an autosomal dominant hepatic porphyria due to half-normal hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMB-synthase) activity, is manifested by life-threatening acute neurological attacks that are precipitated by factors that induce heme biosynthesis. The acute attacks are currently treated with intravenous hemin, but a more continuous therapy is needed, particularly for patients experiencing frequent attacks. Thus, a recombinant AAV8-based serotype vector expressing murine HMB-synthase driven by liver-specific regulatory elements was generated and its effectiveness to prevent the biochemical induction of an acute attack was evaluated in an AIP mouse model. Intraperitoneal administration of the adeno-associated viral (AAV) vector resulted in a rapid and dose-dependent increase of HMB-synthase activity that was restricted to the liver. Stable expression of hepatic HMB-synthase was achieved and wild-type or greater levels were sustained for 36 weeks. When heme synthesis was periodically induced by a series of phenobarbital injections, the treated mice did not accumulate urinary delta-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) or porphobilinogen (PBG), indicating that the expressed enzyme was functional in vivo and prevented induction of the acute attack. Further, rotarod performance and footprint analyses improved significantly. Thus, liver-directed gene therapy provided successful long-term correction of the hepatic metabolic abnormalities and improved neuromotor function in the murine model of human AIP.

19347245
Sequences of polycythemia-type Friend spleen focus-forming virus in clone-745-derived mouse erythroleukemia cells.
Friend leukemia virus complex consists of a replication-competent virus plus one of two replication-incompetent viruses, spleen focus-forming virus anemia virus or spleen focus-forming virus polycythemia virus. The replication-incompetent viruses induce rapid malignant transformation of erythroid precursor cells. Transformed cell lines from mice infected with the complex can be induced to undergo erythrodifferentiation in vitro. However, lines containing the anemia-type virus require erythropoietin and another agent such as dimethyl sulfoxide for optimal erythrodifferentiation, whereas those containing the polycythemia-type virus do not require or respond to erythropoietin. Mice infected with the original Friend virus isolates were anemic, so sub-lines derived from these mice should be erythropoietin-dependent for induction of erythrodifferentiation. However, many of the widely studied sub-lines are erythropoietin-independent. In order to clarify this apparent anomaly, the genomes of viruses present in two commonly used erythropoietin-independent sub-lines were sequenced. Sequence analysis demonstrates that they contain the polycythemia-type virus and not the anemia-type virus.

18004775
Human uroporphyrinogen III synthase: NMR-based mapping of the active site.
Uroporphyrinogen III synthase (URO-synthase) catalyzes the cyclization and D-ring isomerization of hydroxymethylbilane (HMB) to uroporphyrinogen (URO'gen) III, the cyclic tetrapyrrole and physiologic precursor of heme, chlorophyl, and corrin. The deficient activity of human URO-synthase results in the autosomal recessive cutaneous disorder, congenital erythropoietic porphyria. Mapping of the structural determinants that specify catalysis and, potentially, protein-protein interactions is lacking. To map the active site and assess the enzyme's possible interaction in a complex with hydroxymethylbilane-synthase (HMB-synthase) and/or uroporphyrinogen-decarboxylase (URO-decarboxylase) by NMR, an efficient expression and purification procedure was developed for these cytosolic enzymes of heme biosynthesis that enabled preparation of special isotopically-labeled protein samples for NMR characterization. Using an 800 MHz instrument, assignment of the URO-synthase backbone (13)C(alpha) (100%), (1)H(alpha) (99.6%), and nonproline (1)H(N) and (15)N resonances (94%) was achieved as well as 85% of the side-chain (13)C and (1)H resonances. NMR analyses of URO-synthase titrated with competitive inhibitors N(D)-methyl-1-formylbilane (NMF-bilane) or URO'gen III, revealed resonance perturbations of specific residues lining the cleft between the two major domains of URO synthase that mapped the enzyme's active site. In silico docking of the URO-synthase crystal structure with NMF-bilane and URO'gen III was consistent with the perturbation results and provided a 3D model of the enzyme-inhibitor complex. The absence of chemical shift changes in the (15)N spectrum of URO-synthase mixed with the homogeneous HMB-synthase holoenzyme or URO-decarboxylase precluded occurrence of a stable cytosolic enzyme complex.

17654633
Acute intermittent porphyria: vector optimization for gene therapy.
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by the half-normal activity of hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMB-synthase). Affected individuals can experience episodic, life-threatening, acute neurological attacks that are precipitated by various drugs, dieting, and hormonal changes. Intravenous hematin is used to treat the attacks, but a more effective, preventive therapy is needed, especially for patients with frequent attacks. Since the disease is a hepatic encephalopathy, efforts were focused towards evaluating four different combinations of liver-specific enhancers and promoters for maximal hepatic HMB-synthase expression. Four different mammalian expression vectors, each carrying a unique combination of liver-specific enhancers and promoters driving murine HMB-synthase cDNA expression, were transiently transfected into HepG2 cells. The vectors included: HMBS-1; human alpha1-microglobulin enhancer/alpha1-antityrpsin promoter (alpha1Me/alpha1ATp), HMBS-2; alpha1Me/human serum albumin promoter (alpha1Me/SAp), HMBS-3; human prothrombin enhancer/SAp (PTe/SAp), and HMBS-4; (PTe/alpha1ATp). Each HMB-synthase construct and a luciferase reporter construct were hydrodynamically coinjected into mice with HMB-synthase deficiency and evaluated for hepatic expression 24 h post-injection, the time-point of peak hepatic HMB-synthase expression. Following transient transfection into HepG2 cells, HMBS-1 (alpha1Me/alpha1ATp) had the highest HMB-synthase expression level, with an approximately 8-fold increase over endogenous cellular activities. Construct HMBS-1 also had the highest hepatic HMB-synthase activity following hydrodynamic delivery into HMB-synthase deficient mice, with a approximately 6-fold increase over saline-treated mice. These studies support the use of a gene therapy vector containing the alpha1Me/alpha1ATp combination for preclinical studies of the efficacy and safety of liver-targeted gene therapy for AIP.

