21523234
Effect of bariatric surgery on future general surgical procedures.
Bariatric surgery is now accepted as a safe and effective procedure for morbid obesity. The frequency of bariatric procedures is increasing with the adoption of the laparoscopic approach. The general surgeons will be facing many more of such patients presenting with common general surgical problems. Many of the general surgeons, faced with such situations, may not be aware of the changes in the gastrointestinal anatomy following bariatric procedures and management of these clinical situations will therefore present diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. We hereby present a review of management of few common general surgical problems in patients with a history of bariatric surgery.

21082290
GIP and bariatric surgery.
Bariatric surgery is the most effective modality of achieving weight loss as well as the most effective treatment for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) is an incretin and is implicated in the pathogenesis of obesity and T2DM. Its role in weight loss and resolution of T2DM after bariatric surgery is very controversial. We have made an attempt to review the physiology of GIP and its role in weight loss and resolution of T2DM after bariatric surgery. We searched PubMed and included all relevant original articles (both human and animal) in the review. Whereas most human studies have shown a decrease in GIP post-malabsorptive bariatric surgery, the role of GIP in bariatric surgery done in animal experiments remains inconclusive.

20383602
Animal models in bariatric surgery--a review of the surgical techniques and postsurgical physiology.
Bariatric surgery is considered the most effective current treatment for morbid obesity. Since the first publication of an article by Kremen, Linner, and Nelson, many experiments have been performed using animal models. The initial experiments used only malabsorptive procedures like intestinal bypass which have largely been abandoned now. These experimental models have been used to assess feasibility and safety as well as to refine techniques particular to each procedure. We will discuss the surgical techniques and the postsurgical physiology of the four major current bariatric procedures (namely, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, gastric banding, sleeve gastrectomy, and biliopancreatic diversion). We have also reviewed the anatomy and physiology of animal models. We have reviewed the literature and presented it such that it would be a reference to an investigator interested in animal experiments in bariatric surgery. Experimental animal models are further divided into two categories: large mammals that include dogs, cats, rabbits, and pig and small mammals that include rats and mice.

20339873
Comparison of comorbidity resolution and improvement between laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy and laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding.
This study aimed to compare the rates for resolution and improvement of common comorbidities between laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) and laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding. The comorbid conditions included were type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension (HTN), hyperlipidemias (LPD), degenerative joint disease (DJD), gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), and asthma. A retrospective chart review of the patients who underwent LSG or laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding at our institution from July 2004 to July 2007 was performed. The resolution of comorbidities was determined via patient-completed questionnaires and objective data. Of the 123 patients (29 men and 94 women) reviewed, 49 had undergone LSG, and 74 had undergone laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding. The mean preoperative body mass index (BMI) was 52 kg/m(2) for the LSG patients and 44 kg/m(2) for the laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding patients. The overall percentages of excess weight loss (%EWL) were respectively 50.6 and 40.3% (P = 0.03) during mean follow-up periods of 15 and 17 months. There was a greater resolution or improvement of DM after LSG (100% vs 46%), HTN (78% vs 48%), and LPD (87% vs. 50%) than after laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding. Other comorbidities resolved or improved at a similar rate. Although both LSG and laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding resulted in postoperative improvement or resolution of comorbidities associated with obesity, LSG statistically showed a significantly higher rate of resolution or improvement of DM, HTN, and LPD. There was no significant difference between the groups for DJD, GERD, OSA, or asthma.

20181549
Perception of NOTES among health care workers and medical students.
Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) is an experimental surgical approach. Several intra-abdominal procedures have been successfully performed in animals and humans although the long-term safety is still unknown. Potential advantages are reduction of wound-related complications, reduced postoperative pain, improved cosmesis, and short recovery time. This study aimed to measure the overall perception among health care workers and medical students. Materials: A brief 9-item survey was created to measure the perception among health care workers and medical students. A total of 120 surveys were completed. RESULTS: Overall, 15% had a favorable perception, 29% had an unfavorable perception, and 55% were undecided. A total of 40% considered the possibility of avoiding wound-related complications the most appealing advantage, whereas 54% cited unknown safety as the most concerning possible disadvantage. Current occupation, previous knowledge, and affiliation to the surgical department influenced the overall perception. CONCLUSION: Most health care workers and medical students in our sample were undecided in their perception of NOTES.

17964919
Bariatric surgery for morbid obesity--a cure for metabolic syndrome?
At present there is no single medication that targets the metabolic syndrome directly. Bariatric surgery, a treatment option for morbidly obese individuals who fail medical therapy, has been shown to be very effective in treating multiple aspects of the metabolic syndrome. The decrease in insulin resistance is because of significant weight loss and by enhancing secretion of gut hormones such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1).

