21478152
Resistin Promotes Cardiac Hypertrophy via the AMP-activated Protein Kinase/Mammalian Target of Rapamycin (AMPK/mTOR) and c-Jun N-terminal Kinase/Insulin Receptor Substrate 1 (JNK/IRS1) Pathways.
Resistin has been suggested to be involved in the development of diabetes and insulin resistance. We recently reported that resistin is expressed in diabetic hearts and promotes cardiac hypertrophy; however, the mechanisms underlying this process are currently unknown. Therefore, we wanted to elucidate the mechanisms associated with resistin-induced cardiac hypertrophy and myocardial insulin resistance. Overexpression of resistin using adenoviral vector in neonatal rat ventricular myocytes was associated with inhibition of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activity, activation of tuberous sclerosis complex 2/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, and increased cell size, [(3)H]leucine incorporation (i.e. protein synthesis) and mRNA expression of the hypertrophic marker genes, atrial natriuretic factor, brain natriuretic peptide, and ?-myosin heavy chain. Activation of AMPK with 5-aminoimidazole-4-carbozamide-1-?-d-ribifuranoside or inhibition of mTOR with rapamycin or mTOR siRNA attenuated these resistin-induced changes. Furthermore, resistin increased serine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate (IRS1) through the activation of the apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1/c-Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK) pathway, a module known to stimulate insulin resistance. Inhibition of JNK (with JNK inhibitor SP600125 or using dominant-negative JNK) reduced serine 307 phosphorylation of IRS1. Resistin also stimulated the activation of p70(S6K), a downstream kinase target of mTOR, and increased phosphorylation of the IRS1 serine 636/639 residues, whereas treatment with rapamycin reduced the phosphorylation of these residues. Interestingly, these in vitro signaling pathways were also operative in vivo in ventricular tissues from adult rat hearts overexpressing resistin. These data demonstrate that resistin induces cardiac hypertrophy and myocardial insulin resistance, possibly via the AMPK/mTOR/p70(S6K) and apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1/JNK/IRS1 pathways.

21440552
Cyclosporine attenuates cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by RAF1 mutants in Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes.
RAS activation is implicated in physiologic and pathologic cardiac hypertrophy. Cross-talk between the Ras and calcineurin pathways, the latter also having been implicated in cardiac hypertrophy, has been suspected for pathologic hypertrophy. Our recent discovery that germ-line mutations in RAF1, which encodes a downstream RAS effector, cause Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes with a high prevalence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy provided an opportunity to elaborate the role of RAF1 in cardiomyocyte biology. Here, we characterize the role of RAF1 signaling in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy with an aim of identifying potential therapeutic targets. We modeled hypertrophic cardiomyopathy by infecting neonatal and adult rat cardiomyocytes (NRCMs and ARCMs, respectively) with adenoviruses encoding wild-type RAF1 and three Noonan/LEOPARD syndrome-associated RAF1 mutants (S257L, D486N or L613V). These RAF1 proteins, except D486N, engendered cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Surprisingly, these effects were independent and dependent of mitogen activated protein kinases in NRCMs and ARCMs, respectively. Inhibiting Mek1/2 in RAF1 overexpressing cells blocked hypertrophy in ARCMs but not in NRCMs. Further, we found that endogenous and heterologously expressed RAF1 complexed with calcineurin, and RAF1 mutants causing hypertrophy signaled via nuclear factor of activated T cells (Nfat) in both cell types. The involvement of calcineurin was also reflected by down regulation of Serca2a and dysregulation of calcium signaling in NRCMs. Furthermore, treatment with the calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine blocked hypertrophy in NRCMs and ARCMs overexpressing RAF1. Thus, we have identified calcineurin as a novel interaction partner for RAF1 and established a mechanistic link and possible therapeutic target for pathological cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by mutant RAF1. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 'Possible Editorial'.

20461063
SERCA2a gene transfer enhances eNOS expression and activity in endothelial cells.
Congestive heart failure (HF) is associated with impaired endothelium-dependent nitric oxide-mediated vasodilatation. The aim of this study was to examine the effects of sarco/endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca(2+)-ATPase 2a (SERCA2a) gene transfer on endothelial function in a swine HF model. Two months after the creation of mitral regurgitation to induce HF, the animals underwent intracoronary injection of adeno-associated virus (AAV) carrying SERCA2a (n = 7) or saline (n = 6). At 4 months, coronary flow (CF) was measured in the mid-portion of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery. In the failing animals, CF was decreased significantly; SERCA2a gene transfer rescued CF to levels observed in sham-group [ml/min/g, 0.47 +/- 0.064 saline versus 0.89 +/- 0.116, SERCA2a; P < 0.05; 1.00 +/- 0. 185 sham P = NS (nonsignificant)]. In coronary arteries from HF animals, SERCA2a and endothelial isoform of nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) protein expression were decreased, but restored to normal levels by SERCA2a gene transfer. In human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAECs), SERCA2a overexpression increased eNOS expression, phosphorylation, eNOS promoter activity, Ca(2+) storage capacity, and enhanced histamine-induced calcium oscillations, eNOS activity, and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) production. Thus, SERCA2a gene transfer increases eNOS expression and activity by modulating calcium homeostasis to improve CF. These findings suggest that SERCA2a gene transfer improves vascular reactivity in the setting of HF.

20222816
Diabetic cardiomyopathy: signaling defects and therapeutic approaches.
Diabetes mellitus is the world's fastest growing disease with high morbidity and mortality rates, predominantly as a result of heart failure. A significant number of diabetic patients exhibit diabetic cardiomyopathy; that is, left ventricular dysfunction independent of coronary artery disease or hypertension. The pathogenesis of diabetic cardiomyopathy is complex, and is characterized by dysregulated lipid metabolism, insulin resistance, mitochondrial dysfunction and disturbances in adipokine secretion and signaling. These abnormalities lead to impaired calcium homeostasis, ultimately resulting in lusitropic and inotropic defects. This article discusses the impact of these hallmark factors in diabetic cardiomyopathy, and concludes with a survey of available and emerging therapeutic modalities.

20051248
KChIP2 attenuates cardiac hypertrophy through regulation of Ito and intracellular calcium signaling.
Recent evidence shows that the auxiliary subunit KChIP2, which assembles with pore-forming Kv4-subunits, represents a new potential regulator of the cardiac calcium-independent transient outward potassium current (I(to)) density. In hypertrophy and heart failure, KChIP2 expression has been found to be significantly decreased. Our aim was to examine the role of KChIP2 in cardiac hypertrophy and the effect of restoring its expression on electrical remodeling and cardiac mechanical function using a combination of molecular, biochemical and gene targeting approaches. KChIP2 overexpression through gene transfer of Ad.KChIP2 in neonatal cardiomyocytes resulted in a significant increase in I(to)-channel forming Kv4.2 and Kv4.3 protein levels. In vivo gene transfer of KChIP2 in aortic banded adult rats showed that, compared to sham-operated or Ad.beta-gal-transduced hearts, KChIP2 significantly attenuated the developed left ventricular hypertrophy, robustly increased I(to) densities, shortened action potential duration, and significantly altered myocyte mechanics by shortening contraction amplitudes and maximal rates of contraction and relaxation velocities and decreasing Ca(2+) transients. Interestingly, blocking I(to) with 4-aminopyridine in KChIP2-overexpressing adult cardiomyocytes significantly increased the Ca(2+) transients to control levels. One-day-old rat pups intracardially transduced with KChIP2 for two months then subjected to aortic banding for 6-8 weeks (to induce hypertrophy) showed similar echocardiographic, electrical and mechanical remodeling parameters. In addition, in cultured adult cardiomyocytes, KChIP2 overexpression increased the expression of Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA2a) and sodium calcium exchanger but had no effect on ryanodine receptor 2 or phospholamban expression. In neonatal myocytes, KChIP2 notably reversed Ang II-induced hypertrophic changes in protein synthesis and MAP-kinase activation. It also significantly decreased calcineurin expression, NFATc1 expression and nuclear translocation and its downstream target, MCiP1.4. Altogether, these data show that KChIP2 can attenuate cardiac hypertrophy possibly through modulation of intracellular calcium concentration and calcineurin/NFAT pathway.

19649297
Gene remodeling in type 2 diabetic cardiomyopathy and its phenotypic rescue with SERCA2a.
Diabetes-associated myocardial dysfunction results in altered gene expression in the heart. We aimed to investigate the changes in gene expression profiles accompanying diabetes-induced cardiomyopathy and its phenotypic rescue by restoration of SERCA2a expression. Using the Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima Fatty rat model of type 2 diabetes and the Agilent rat microarray chip, we analyzed gene expression by comparing differential transcriptional changes in age-matched control versus diabetic hearts and diabetic hearts that received gene transfer of SERCA2a. Microarray expression profiles of selected genes were verified with real-time qPCR and immunoblotting. Our analysis indicates that diabetic cardiomyopathy is associated with a downregulation of transcripts. Diabetic cardiomyopathic hearts have reduced levels of SERCA2a. SERCA2a gene transfer in these hearts reduced diabetes-associated hypertrophy, and differentially modulated the expression of 76 genes and reversed the transcriptional profile induced by diabetes. In isolated cardiomyocytes in vitro, SERCA2a overexpression significantly modified the expression of a number of transcripts known to be involved in insulin signaling, glucose metabolism and cardiac remodeling. This investigation provided insight into the pathophysiology of cardiac remodeling and the potential role of SERCA2a normalization in multiple pathways in diabetic cardiomyopathy.

18813212
Interplay between impaired calcium regulation and insulin signaling abnormalities in diabetic cardiomyopathy.
According to the International Diabetes Federation the number of people between the ages of 20 and 79 years diagnosed with diabetes mellitus is projected to reach 380 million worldwide by 2025. Cardiovascular disease, including heart failure, is the major cause of death in patients with diabetes. A contributing factor to heart failure in such patients is the development of diabetic cardiomyopathy--a clinical myocardial condition distinguished by ventricular dysfunction that can present independently of other risk factors such as hypertension or coronary artery disease. This disorder has been associated with both type 1 and type 2 diabetes, and is characterized by early-onset diastolic dysfunction and late-onset systolic dysfunction. The development of diabetic cardiomyopathy and the cellular and molecular perturbations associated with the pathology are complex and multifactorial. Hallmark mechanisms include abnormalities in regulation of calcium homeostasis, and associated abnormal ventricular excitation-contraction coupling, metabolic disturbances, and alterations in insulin signaling. An emerging concept is that disruptions in calcium homeostasis might be linked to diminished insulin responsiveness. An understanding of the cellular effect of these abnormalities on cardiomyocytes should be useful in predicting the maladaptive cardiac structural and functional consequences of diabetes.

18597775
Role of resistin in cardiac contractility and hypertrophy.
Cardiovascular sequelae including diabetic cardiomyopathy constitute the major cause of death in diabetic patients. Although several factors may contribute to the development of this cardiomyopathy, the underlying molecular/cellular mechanisms leading to cardiac dysfunction are still partially understood. Recently, a novel paradigm for the role of the adipocytokine resistin in diabetes has emerged. Resistin has been proposed to be a link between obesity, insulin resistance and diabetes. Using microarray analysis, we have recently found that cardiomyocytes isolated from type 2 diabetic hearts express high levels of resistin. However, the function of resistin with respect to cardiac function is unknown. In this study we show that resistin is not only expressed in the heart, but also promotes cardiac hypertrophy. Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of resistin in cultured neonatal rat ventricular myocytes (NRVM) significantly increased sarcomere organization and cell size, increased protein synthesis and increased the expression of atrial natriuretic factor and beta-myosin heavy chain. Overexpression of resistin in NRVM was also associated with activation of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, ERK1/2 and p38, as well as increased Ser-636 phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), indicating that IRS-1/MAPK pathway may be involved in the observed hypertrophic response. Overexpression of resistin in adult cultured cardiomyocytes significantly altered myocyte mechanics by depressing cell contractility as well as contraction and relaxation velocities. Intracellular Ca(2+) measurements showed slower Ca(2+) transients decay in resistin-transduced myocytes compared to controls, suggesting impaired cytoplasmic Ca(2+) clearing or alterations in myofilament activation. We conclude that resistin overexpression alters cardiac contractility, confers to primary cardiomyocytes all the features of the hypertrophic phenotype and promotes cardiac hypertrophy possibly via the IRS-1/MAPK pathway.

18342232
Reversal of cardiac dysfunction after long-term expression of SERCA2a by gene transfer in a pre-clinical model of heart failure.
The aim of this study was to examine the effects of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase (SERCA2a) gene transfer in a swine heart failure (HF) model. Reduced expression and activity of SERCA2a have been documented in HF. Prior studies have reported the beneficial effects of short-term SERCA2a overexpression in rodent models. However, the effects of long-term expression of SERCA2a in pre-clinical large animal models are not known. Yorkshire-Landrace pigs were used (n = 16) to create volume overload by percutaneously severing chordae tendinae of the mitral apparatus with a bioptome to induce mitral regurgitation. At 2 months, pigs underwent intracoronary delivery of either recombinant adeno-associated virus type 1 (rAAV1) carrying SERCA2a under a cytomegalovirus promoter (rAAV1.SERCA2a) (n = 10; group 1) or saline (n = 6; group 2). At 2 months, study animals were found to be in a compensated state of volume-overload HF (increased left ventricular internal diastolic and systolic diameters [LVIDd and LVIDs]). At 4 months, gene transfer resulted in: 1) positive left ventricular (LV) inotropic effects (adjusted peak left ventricular pressure rate of rise (dP/dt)max/P, 21.2 +/- 3.2 s(-1) group 1 vs. 15.5 +/- 3.0 s(-1) group 2; p < 0.01); 2) improvement in LV remodeling (% change in LVIDs -3.0 +/- 10% vs. +15 +/- 11%, respectively; p < 0.01). At follow-up, brain natriuretic peptide levels remained stable in group 1 after gene transfer, in contrast to rising levels in group 2. Further, cardiac SERCA2a expression was significantly decreased in group 2 whereas in group 1 it was restored to normal levels. There was no histopathological evidence of acute myocardial inflammation or necrosis. Using a large-animal, volume-overload model of HF, we report that long-term overexpression of SERCA2a by in vivo rAAV1-mediated intracoronary gene transfer preserved systolic function, potentially prevented diastolic dysfunction, and improved ventricular remodeling.

17220178
Targeted gene transfer increases contractility and decreases oxygen cost of contractility in normal rat hearts.
The aim of this study was to examine how global cardiac gene transfer of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA2a) can influence left ventricular (LV) mechanical and energetic function, especially in terms of O(2) cost of LV contractility, in normal rats. Normal rats were randomized to receive an adenovirus carrying the SERCA2a (SERCA) or beta-galactosidase (beta-Gal) gene or saline by a catheter-based technique. LV mechanical and energetic function was measured in cross-circulated heart preparations 2-3 days after the infection. The end-systolic pressure-volume relation was shifted upward, end-systolic pressure at 0.1 ml of intraballoon water volume was higher, and equivalent maximal elastance, i.e., enhanced LV contractility, was higher in the SERCA group than in the normal, beta-Gal, and saline groups. Moreover, the LV relaxation rate was faster in the SERCA group. There was no significant difference in myocardial O(2) consumption per beat-systolic pressure-volume area relation among the groups. Finally, O(2) cost of LV contractility was decreased to subnormal levels in the SERCA group but remained unchanged in the beta-Gal and saline groups. This lowered O(2) cost of LV contractility in SERCA hearts indicates energy saving in Ca(2+) handling during excitation-contraction coupling. Thus overexpression of SERCA2a transformed the normal energy utilization to a more efficient state in Ca(2+) handling and superinduced the supranormal contraction/relaxation due to enhanced Ca(2+) handling.

