17342334
Expression of Wnt5A and Wnt10B in non-immortalized breast cancer cells.
Wnt signaling is usually divided into two pathways: the 'canonical', acting through beta-catenin, and the 'non-canonical' acting through the Ca2+ and planar cell polarity pathway. Both pathways have been implicated in different types of cancer. Most results obtained with established cell lines have been contradictory. Here, we have investigated the expression of Wnt10B (canonical) and Wnt5A (non-canonical) in a panel of finite life-span and established normal and breast cancer cells using quantitative RT-PCR. It was found that there were both significant overexpression of Wnt5A and underexpression of Wnt10B in the metastasis-derived finite life-span breast cancer cells when they were compared to the finite life-span normal and established normal and breast tumor cells. Since expression profiles of primary breast cancer cultures are closer to the original tumor than the established cell lines, future research in this area should take into consideration these differences.

17173685
Transcription profile of a human breast cancer cell line expressing MMTV-like sequences.
It has been postulated that inflammation caused by certain viruses might result in cancer. Recently, it was shown that childhood lymphoblastic leukemia, breast and ovarian cancers express an interferon-related signature, providing support for this notion. We have previously shown that 38% of the sporadic breast cancers contain MMTV-like env gene sequences. To find out if the presence and expression of MMTV-like sequences correlated with an inflammatory phenotype, we have compared the expression profile of two sublines of MCF-7 cells, one containing the MMTV-like sequences (env+), the other one lacking them (env-). The results indicated that there were 47 differentially expressed genes between the two sublines. Among 27 upregulated genes in the env+ cells there were 7 interferon-related genes, 5 TNF-connected genes and 2 TGFbeta-related genes. These results suggest that the env+ cells were most likely responding to an infectious agent, and support the hypothesis that a viral infection may play a role in breast cancer pathogenesis.

