20556597
Sling procedures after repair of obstetric vesicovaginal fistula in Niamey, Niger.
The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the results of sling procedures for stress incontinence after repair of vesicovaginal fistulae at the National Hospital in Niamey, Niger. This study is a retrospective chart review of 701 women surgically treated for vesicovaginal fistulae. One hundred forty women subsequently underwent a sling procedure for stress incontinence after fistula repair. The demographics among the groups were similar. No significant difference was seen in results between the sling types except the risk of erosion was significantly greater in the synthetic sling group. There was a trend towards greater sling success in the fascia lata group. Correction of incontinence is a common and difficult challenge following repair of obstetric vesicovaginal fistula. Compared to published studies on sling procedures, these patients have higher rates of continued incontinence. This is likely due to the frequent loss of a urethral sphincter as well as high prevalence of detrusor overactivity and decreased bladder capacity.

20303834
Robot-assisted laparoscopic myomectomy is an improvement over laparotomy in women with a limited number of myomas.
To compare surgical and immediate postoperative results of robot-assisted laparoscopic myomectomy vs myomectomy via laparotomy in patients with 3 myomas or fewer. Case-control (Canadian Task Force classification II-2). University hospital. Seventy-five women who had undergone robotic-assisted laparoscopic myomectomy were compared with patients who had undergone myomectomy via laparotomy. Medical records were reviewed for surgical and postoperative variables. Both groups had 3 myomas or fewer confirmed at preoperative magnetic resonance imaging or final pathology report. No significant differences were observed between patients insofar as preoperative demographic data. There was a significant increase in mean duration of surgery for robotic-assisted myomectomy. There was a significant decrease in blood loss, change in hematocrit concentration on postoperative day 1, length of stay, number of days to regular diet, and febrile morbidity in robotic-assisted myomectomies. There were no significant differences in operative or postoperative complications. Although robotic-assisted myomectomy took substantially longer, most of the other variables improved in comparison with similar procedures performed via laparotomy.

19170220
Fistula experience in Niger: how we overcame an ethical dilemma.


19155900
Cervical vasopressin compared with no premedication and blood loss during vaginal hysterectomy: a randomized controlled trial.
To compare blood loss, operative time, postoperative pain medication requirements, and complication rates in patients undergoing vaginal hysterectomy who were randomly assigned to receive preoperative intracervical vasopressin or no intracervical injection. Fifty-eight women undergoing vaginal hysterectomy were randomly allocated to receive either eight units of vasopressin intracervically or nothing preoperative from January 2004 to January 2005. A researcher blinded to the study group determined blood loss. The surgeries were performed using uniform steps by senior residents under the direction of two attending surgeons. Multiple preoperative and postoperative values were evaluated, including time to specific points in surgery and use of postoperative pain medication. Independent sample t tests, Fisher exact test, and Pearson chi tests were used to analyze the data. The two groups were similar in terms of age, weight, parity, and ethnicity. There was also no difference in indication for surgery or estimated uterine size. The vasopressin group lost significantly less blood (145.3 mL compared with 266.4 mL control; P=.022). There was a significant difference in the increase in mean blood pressure at 5 minutes after injection (10.4 for the vasopressin group compared with. 2.5 for the control group, P=.043). There was no significant difference in immediate recovery room morphine requirements, but patient-controlled anesthesia usage was significantly higher in the vasopressin group. The preoperative injection of intracervical vasopressin leads to decreased blood loss during vaginal hysterectomy. There was, however, a significant increase in postoperative morphine use in patients receiving vasopressin. ClinicalTrials.gov, www.clinicaltrials.gov, NCT00799292 I.

