21617149
Hypertension Impairs Vascular Reactivity in the Pediatric Brain.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Chronic hypertension impairs cerebrovascular regulation in adults, but its effects on the pediatric population are unknown. The objective of this study was to investigate cerebrovascular abnormalities in hypertensive children and adolescents. METHODS: Sixty-four children and adolescents aged 7 to 20 years underwent transcranial Doppler examinations of the middle cerebral artery at the time of rebreathing CO(2). Time-averaged maximum mean cerebral blood flow velocity and end-tidal CO(2) were used to quantify cerebrovascular reactivity during hypercapnia. Patients were clinically categorized as hypertensive, prehypertensive, or white coat hypertensive based on 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure measurements. Their reactivities were compared with 9 normotensive control subjects and evaluated against baseline mean blood pressure z-scores and loads. RESULTS: Untreated hypertensive children had significantly lower hypercapnic reactivity than normotensive children (2.556±1.832 cm/s · mm Hg versus 4.256±1.334 cm/s · mm Hg, P<0.05). Baseline mean diastolic blood pressure z-scores (r=-0.331, P=0.037) and diastolic blood pressure loads (r=-0.351, P=0.026) were inversely related to reactivity. CONCLUSIONS: Untreated hypertensive children and adolescents have blunted reactivity to hypercapnia, indicating deranged vasodilatory reactivity. The inverse relationship between diastolic blood pressure indices and reactivity suggests that diastolic blood pressure may be a better predictor of cerebral end organ damage than systolic blood pressure.

20192052
Web-based multi-center data management system for clinical neuroscience research.
Modern clinical research often involves multicenter studies, large and heterogeneous data flux, and intensive demands of collaboration, security and quality assurance. In the absence of commercial or academic management systems, we designed an open-source system to meet these requirements. Based on the Apache-PHP-MySQL platform on a Linux server, the system allows multiple users to access the database from any location on the internet using a web browser, and requires no specialized computer skills. Multi-level security system is implemented to safeguard the protected health information and allow partial or full access to the data by individual or class privilege. The system stores and manipulates various types of data including images, scanned documents, laboratory data and clinical ratings. Built-in functionality allows for various search, quality control, analytic data operations, visit scheduling and visit reminders. This approach offers a solution to a growing need for management of large multi-center clinical studies.

19828153
Putaminal volume and diffusion in early familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
The putamen is centrally implicated in the pathophysiology of Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD). To our knowledge, its volume has never been measured in this disease. We investigated whether gross putaminal atrophy can be detected by MRI in early stages, when the diffusion is already reduced. Twelve familial CJD patients with the E200K mutation and 22 healthy controls underwent structural and diffusion MRI scans. The putamen was identified in anatomical scans by two methods: manual tracing by a blinded investigator, and automatic parcellation by a computerized segmentation procedure (FSL FIRST). For each method, volume and mean Apparent Diffusion Coefficient (ADC) were calculated. ADC was significantly lower in CJD patients (697+/-64 microm(2)/s vs. 750+/-31 microm(2)/s, p<0.005), as expected, but the volume was not reduced. The computerized FIRST delineation yielded comparable ADC values to the manual method, but computerized volumes were smaller than manual tracing values. We conclude that significant diffusion reduction in the putamen can be detected by delineating the structure manually or with a computerized algorithm. Our findings confirm and extend previous voxel-based and observational studies. Putaminal volume was not reduced in our early-stage patients, thus confirming that diffusion abnormalities precede detectible atrophy in this structure.

19394205
Neural correlates of emotion processing in borderline personality disorder.
Emotional instability is a hallmark feature of borderline personality disorder (BPD), yet its biological underpinnings are poorly understood. We employed functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to compare patterns of regional brain activation in BPD patients and healthy volunteers as they process positive and negative social emotional stimuli. fMRI images were acquired while 19 BPD patients and 17 healthy controls (HC) viewed emotion-inducing pictures from the International Affective Pictures System set. Activation data were analyzed with SPM5 ANCOVA models to derive the effects of diagnosis and stimulus type. BPD patients demonstrated greater differences in activation than controls, when viewing negative pictures compared with rest, in the amygdala, fusiform gyrus, primary visual areas, superior temporal gyrus (STG), and premotor areas, while healthy controls showed greater differences than BPD patients in the insula, middle temporal gyrus and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA46). When viewing positive pictures compared with rest, BPD patients showed greater differences in the STG, premotor cortex, and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. These findings suggest that BPD patients show greater amygdala activity and heightened activity of visual processing regions relative to findings for HC subjects in the processing of negative social emotional pictures compared with rest. The patients activate neural networks in emotion processing that are phylogeneticall older and more reflexive than those activated by HC subjects.

19342124
Memory activation in healthy nonagenarians.
Little is known about brain function in the oldest old, although this is the fastest growing segment of the population in developed countries and is of paramount importance in public health considerations. In this study, we investigated the cerebral response to a memory task in healthy subjects over age 90 compared with healthy younger elderly. We studied 29 healthy elderly subjects, 12 over age 90 and 17 between age 70 and 80. All subjects were cognitively intact, as verified by a neuropsychological battery, and performed a nonverbal memory task while undergoing a functional MRI (fMRI). Activation results were analyzed by a random-effects ANCOVA using SPM5. The task resulted in activation of similar areas of the posterior temporal, parietal, and posterior frontal cortexes, but the activation was more robust in the younger subjects, especially in the right hippocampus, and parietal and temporal cortices. This finding remained after controlling for education, cognition, task performance or cerebral atrophy. The phenomenon of relatively maintained performance, despite significant brain atrophy and lower activation is consistent with the cognitive reserve theory and may be specific to subjects with extremely successful aging. Further investigation of brain activation patterns in the oldest old is warranted.

19209182
Hemodynamic etiology of elevated flow velocity and stroke in sickle-cell disease.
Elevation of blood flow velocity in the large cerebral vessels is known to be of substantial pathophysiologic and prognostic significance in sickle-cell disease (SCD). Its precise cause is not established, but the two obvious proximal mechanisms are obstructive vascular stenosis and hemodynamic dilatation. Here we revisit this distinction by analyzing cerebrovascular reserve capacity. Forty-two patients with SCD underwent measurements of global cerebral blood flow in grey matter by the 133Xe inhalation method during normocapnia and hypercapnia to quantify cerebrovascular reactivity. Cerebral blood flow was significantly higher in SCD patients (120+/-31 ml/100 g/min) than in controls (76+/-20 ml/100 g/min). Reactivity was significantly lower in SCD patients (1.06+/-1.92 versus 2.16+/-1.15%/mm Hg). Stepwise multiple regressions within the SCD sample determined that normocapnic cerebral blood flow was largely predicted by hematocrit (r=-0.59; P<0.0001), whereas hypercapnic reactivity was only predicted by normocapnic flow across all subjects (r=-0.52; P<0.0001). None of the controls, but 24% of the SCD patients showed 'steal' (negative reactivity, chi2=6.05; P<0.02). This impairment of vasodilatory capacity, occurring at perfusion levels above 150 ml/100 g/min, may reflect intrinsic limitations of the human cerebrovascular system and can explain both the elevated blood flow velocities and the high risk of stroke observed in such patients.

18930381
Cross-validation of brain segmentation by SPM5 and SIENAX.
Volumes of cerebral grey (GM) or white matter (WM) are often used as clinical observations or statistical covariates. Several automated segmentation tools can be used for this purpose, but they have not been validated against each other. We used the most common ones, SPM5 and SIENAX 2.4, to derive volumes of grey and white matter in 56 healthy subjects (mean age 49+/-13, range 22-80) and compared the two methods. Both methods yielded significant correlations with age in the expected directions, and estimates of parenchymal volumes were highly correlated. However, without use of prior probability maps, or priors, in SIENAX, GM was significantly underestimated in comparison to SPM (0.52+/-.06 vs 0.66+/-.07 L) and WM was significantly overestimated (0.48+/-.07 vs 0.46+/-.07 L). This error was associated with misclassification of GM as cerebrospinal fluid, especially in deep grey matter. Invoking prior probabilities in SIENAX resulted in excellent agreement with SPM: GM and WM volumes were found to be 0.64+/-0.07 L and 0.47+/-0.07 L, respectively. We conclude that SIENAX requires priors for accurate volumetric estimates, and then provides close agreement with SPM5.

18079025
Number of children is associated with neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease in women.
To examine the association between number of born children and neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The brains of 86 subjects with data on the number of biological children born, were studied postmortem. Primary analyses included 73 subjects (average age at death=80; 42 women) devoid of cerebrovascular disease associated lesions (i.e., infarcts) or of non-AD related neuropathology. Women were significantly older at death than men (85.6 vs. 73.4; p<.0005) but did not differ significantly from men in number of children or dementia severity. Secondary analyses included 13 additional subjects who had concomitant cerebrovascular disease. Density of neuritic plaques (NPs) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, amygdala and multiple regions of the cerebral cortex, as well as composites of these indices reflecting overall neuropathology, were analyzed. For men and women separately, partial correlations, controlling for age at death and dementia severity, were used to assess the associations of number of children with these neuropathological variables. Among women, all the partial correlations were positive, with statistical significance for overall neuropathology (r=.37; p=.02), overall NPs (r=.36; p=.02), and for NPs in the amygdala (r=.47; p=.002). Among men, none of the partial correlations were statistically significant. Results of the secondary analyses were similar. Since the associations between number of children and neuropathology of AD were found for women only, they might reflect sex-specific mechanisms (such as variations in estrogen or luteinizing hormone levels) rather than social, economic, biological or other mechanisms common to both men and women.

17406658
Cerebrovascular effects of hemodialysis in chronic kidney disease.
Patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) undergoing hemodialysis are known to suffer cognitive deficits and stroke of unknown etiology. It has been suspected that the treatment itself may contribute to the syndrome by unknown mechanisms, which we investigated in this study. End-stage renal disease patients on hemodialysis (n=19) or peritoneal dialysis (PD, n=5) were compared with 14 healthy controls. Subjects participated in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) measurements of cerebral atrophy, cerebral blood flow (CBF) arterial spin labeled-MRI (ASL-MRI), quantitative Doppler blood flow through the internal carotid artery, and cerebral oxymetry. The Doppler and oxymetry procedures were also performed at the beginning and end of a single hemodialysis session. End-stage renal disease patients on hemodialysis showed significant cerebral atrophy, associated with longer hemodialysis duration and cognitive deficits, including focal bilateral lesions in the caudate nucleus and midbrain. Cerebral oxygenation was extremely low before dialysis (rSO(2) 41+/-13, compared with 70+/-2 in controls, P<0.02) and improved only slightly after dialysis. Carotid blood flow was also very low at the start of dialysis (115+/-28 mL/sec, versus 193+/-56 in controls, P<0.005) but normalized at the end of the session (181 mL/sec). The PD patients showed intermediate values, between the hemodialysis and controls. Notably, duration of hemodialysis treatment predicted global gray-matter volume (r=-0.74), change of blood flow during dialysis (r=-0.65), and baseline rSO(2) (r=-0.65). The findings suggest that ESRD patients on hemodialysis suffer low CBF during the interdialytic cycle. Coupled with low cerebral oxygenation levels and atherosclerosis, this may contribute significantly to the etiology of the observed cerebral atrophy, cognitive deficits, and high stroke prevalence.

21303352
The Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) neurological status scale: a new tool for evaluation of disease severity and progression.
Cohen OS, Prohovnik I, Korczyn AD, Ephraty L, Nitsan Z, Tsabari R, Appel S, Rosenmann H, Kahana E, Chapman J. The Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) neurological status scale: a new tool for evaluation of disease severity and progression. Acta Neurol Scand: DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2011.01489.x. © 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Objectives?-? To develop a scale sensitive for the neurological manifestations of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). Methods?-? A 26-item CJD neurological status scale (CJD-NS) was created based on characteristic disease manifestations. Each sign was assigned to one of eight neurological systems to calculate a total scale score (TSS) and a system involvement score (SIS). The scale was administered to 37 CJD patients, 101 healthy first-degree relatives of the patients and 14 elderly patients with Parkinson's disease (PD). Results?-? The mean TSS (±SD) was significantly higher in patients with CJD (13.19?±?5.63) compared with normal controls (0.41?±?0.78) and PD patients (9.71?±?3.05). The mean SIS was also significantly different between the CJD (5.19?±?1.22) and PD (2.78?±?1.18 P???0.01) groups reflecting the disseminated nature of neurological involvement in CJD. Using a cutoff of TSS?>?4 yielded a sensitivity of 97% for CJD, and specificity of 100% against healthy controls. All individual items showed excellent specificity against healthy subjects, but sensitivity was highly variable. Repeat assessments of CJD patients over 3-9?months revealed a time-dependent increase in both the TSS and the SIS reflecting the scale's ability to track disease progression. Conclusions?-? The CJD-NS scale is sensitive to neurological signs and their progression in CJD patients.

19749217
Enhanced detection of diffusion reductions in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease at a higher B factor.
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) is sensitive to the cerebral manifestations of human prion diseases. The magnitude of diffusion weighting, termed "b factor," has only been evaluated at the standard b = 1000 s/mm(2). This is the first rigorous evaluation of b = 2000 s/mm(2) in Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD). We compared DWI characteristics of 13 patients with CJD and 15 healthy controls at b = 1000 s/mm(2) and b = 2000 s/mm(2). Apparent diffusion coefficients (ADC) were computed and analyzed for the whole brain by voxel-wise analysis (by SPM5) as well as in anatomically defined volumes of interest (by FSL FIRST). Measured ADC was significantly lower (by approximately 5%-15%) at b = 2000 s/mm(2) than at b = 1000 s/mm(2) and significantly lower in patients than in controls. The differences between patients and controls were greater and more extensive at b = 2000 s/mm(2) than at b = 1000 s/mm(2) in the expected regions (thalamus, putamen, and caudate nucleus). Because higher b factors change the absolute value of observed ADC, as well as lesion detection, care should be taken when combining studies using different b factors. While the clinical application of high b factors is currently limited by a low signal intensity-to-noise ratio, it may offer more information in questionable cases, and our results confirm and extend the central role of diffusion imaging in human prion diseases.

