21239913
Propofol abuse.


21239912
The drug seeking anesthesia care provider.


21239906
The anesthetic implications of illicit opioid abuse.


21239901
Introduction.


21206375
Prolonged succinylcholine action during electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) after cytarabine, vincristine, and rituximab chemotherapy.
Succinylcholine is a depolarizing neuromuscular blocker frequently used during electroconvulsive therapy. In most patients, the duration of paralysis is brief, allowing for spontaneous respiration shortly after the therapy. We report a case of delayed return of neuromuscular function after succinylcholine administered during electroconvulsive therapy in a 72-year-old man receiving cytarabine, vincristine, and rituximab chemotherapy for chronic lymphocytic leukemia. We hypothesize that an interaction between succinylcholine and one of the chemotherapeutic agents caused the prolongation of paralysis and believe that this is the first reported case of prolonged duration of succinylcholine following this regimen of chemotherapy. Despite this unexpected prolonged neuromuscular blockade, the patient could be treated uneventfully, with attention paid to his respiratory support and with subsequent succinylcholine dose titration to effect.

21074741
Anesthesia for patients on buprenorphine.
Opioid abuse is a devastating, costly, and growing problem in the United States, and one for which treatment can be complicated by barriers such as access to care and legal issues. Only 12% to 15% of the opioid-dependent population is enrolled in methadone maintenance programs. A significant breakthrough occurred with passage of the Drug Addiction Treatment Act of 2000 (DATA 2000). For the first time in approximately 80 years, physicians could legally prescribe opioid medications for the treatment of opioid addiction. The opiate, so designated, was buprenorphine (Subutex).

20880370
Adding emotional stressors to training in simulated cardiopulmonary arrest enhances participant performance.
Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) skills tend to degrade over time. There is mounting evidence that high-fidelity simulation (HFS) is advantageous to teaching ACLS. The aspects of HFS that enhance learning are not entirely clear, but the anxiety generated by a scenario may enhance retention through well-established learning pathways. We sought to determine whether an HFS with added emotional stress could provoke anxiety and, if so, whether or not participants learning ACLS would demonstrate better written and applied knowledge retention 6 months after their initial course. Twenty-five student volunteers from Year 1 and 2 at Mount Sinai School of Medicine were randomly assigned to a control group or an emotional content (EC) group for a sudden cardiac death management course. All subjects were monitored for heart rate and were assessed using the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Control group participants experienced an HFS in which actors were not scripted to add stress, whereas EC group participants were exposed to an emotionally charged environment using the same actors. Participants across the two groups were well matched by resting heart rates, baseline anxiety and prior ACLS knowledge. The EC group participants experienced greater anxiety than controls (mean state anxiety score: 35.0 versus 28.2 [p<0.05]; average heart rate [HR]: 94.6 bpm versus 72.9 bpm [p<0.05]; maximum HR: 120.8 bpm versus 95.3 bpm [p<0.05]). Six months later, written test scores were similar, but the EC group participants achieved higher practical competency examination ('mega code') scores than controls (32.5 versus 25.0; p<0.05). Independent t-tests and Spearman rank coefficients were employed where applicable. Simulation with added emotional stressors led to greater anxiety during ACLS instruction but correlated with enhanced performance of ACLS skills after this course. The quantitative and qualitative values of added stressors need further exploration, but these values represent important variables in simulation-based education.

19642147
The utility of simulation in medical education: what is the evidence?
Medical schools and residencies are currently facing a shift in their teaching paradigm. The increasing amount of medical information and research makes it difficult for medical education to stay current in its curriculum. As patients become increasingly concerned that students and residents are "practicing" on them, clinical medicine is becoming focused more on patient safety and quality than on bedside teaching and education. Educators have faced these challenges by restructuring curricula, developing small-group sessions, and increasing self-directed learning and independent research. Nevertheless, a disconnect still exists between the classroom and the clinical environment. Many students feel that they are inadequately trained in history taking, physical examination, diagnosis, and management. Medical simulation has been proposed as a technique to bridge this educational gap. This article reviews the evidence for the utility of simulation in medical education. We conducted a MEDLINE search of original articles and review articles related to simulation in education with key words such as simulation, mannequin simulator, partial task simulator, graduate medical education, undergraduate medical education, and continuing medical education. Articles, related to undergraduate medical education, graduate medical education, and continuing medical education were used in the review. One hundred thirteen articles were included in this review. Simulation-based training was demonstrated to lead to clinical improvement in 2 areas of simulation research. Residents trained on laparoscopic surgery simulators showed improvement in procedural performance in the operating room. The other study showed that residents trained on simulators were more likely to adhere to the advanced cardiac life support protocol than those who received standard training for cardiac arrest patients. In other areas of medical training, simulation has been demonstrated to lead to improvements in medical knowledge, comfort in procedures, and improvements in performance during retesting in simulated scenarios. Simulation has also been shown to be a reliable tool for assessing learners and for teaching topics such as teamwork and communication. Only a few studies have shown direct improvements in clinical outcomes from the use of simulation for training. Multiple studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of simulation in the teaching of basic science and clinical knowledge, procedural skills, teamwork, and communication as well as assessment at the undergraduate and graduate medical education levels. As simulation becomes increasingly prevalent in medical school and resident education, more studies are needed to see if simulation training improves patient outcomes.

19583079
Anesthetic implications of acute methylenedioxymethamphetamine intoxication in a patient with traumatic intracerebral hemorrhage.
The use of the street drug methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), commonly referred to as ecstasy, has become increasingly prevalent amongst teenagers and young adults in the United States and many other parts of the world. While most anesthesiologists are facile with the intricacies of managing patients intoxicated by alcohol, cocaine and narcotics the new "club" drugs present a challenge, especially under emergency conditions. MDMA, in particular, is the most commonly abused club drug and potentially one of the most dangerous in the perioperative period. We present a case report of traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage in a patient with acute MDMA intoxication and a review of the anesthetic implications.

18761254
One approach to the return to residency for anesthesia residents recovering from opioid addiction.
There is a high rate of relapse among anesthesia residents attempting to re-enter clinical anesthesia training programs after completing treatment for opioid addiction. Individuals may return to clinical practice after a short period of treatment only to relapse into active addiction, and for the opioid addicted anesthesia resident, this often results in death. The objective of this study was to determine weather or not a period of time away from clinical practice after treatment would reduce the rate of relapse by allowing the individual to concentrate on recovery in the critical first year after treatment, during which the majority of relapses occur. 5 residents identified as being addicted to a controlled substance were removed from residency training and offered treatment. Prior to returning to residency training they were required to complete a post-treatment program involving no less than 12 months of work in the anesthesia simulator, followed by a graded re-introduction into the clinical practice of anesthesia. Academic anesthesia practice in a large teaching hospital. Of the 5 residents who participated in the program, 3 (60%) successfully completed their residency program and their 5 year monitoring contract, and entered the anesthesia workforce as attending anesthesiologists. The treatment of addicted physicians can be successful, and return of the highly motivated individual to the clinical practice of Anesthesiology is a realistic goal, but this reintroduction must be undertaken in a careful, stepwise fashion. A full understanding of the disease process, the potential for relapse, and the implications of too rapid a return to practice must be taken into careful consideration.

18637598
The simulation theatre: a means to enhanced learning in the 21st century.
The increasing role of simulation in medical education has paralleled advancement of this technology. Full environment simulation (FES) can be employed to effectively replicate rare medical catastrophes with exacting realism. It has been suggested that emotion can significantly enhance learning by producing memories that are processed and stored via the amygdaloid complex which is relatively impervious to extinction and thus forgetting. Theoretically the addition of emotional content to simulated crises during FES can be used to affect such changes in the participants and thus facilitate learning. We discuss the theoretic benefit and the use of FES with emotional enhancement as it relates to improved memory and learning.

18044279
Management of the patient reporting an allergy to penicillin.
Recent emphasis on the prevention of surgical wound infection has highlighted the role of the anesthesiologist as the physician responsible for administering appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis. Patients often report a distant or unclear history of penicillin allergy. Administering an antibiotic to which the patient has a true allergy can provoke a life threatening reaction. The anesthesiologist should be aware of the prevalence, severity, and manifestations of allergies to antibiotics, as well as the available alternatives. Unnecessary administration of more powerful broad-spectrum antibiotics leads to the development of antimicrobial resistance and should be avoided. It is the anesthesiologists' duty to balance these issues when selecting appropriate antibiosis.

17511180
Management of the patient at high risk for postoperative nausea and vomiting.
Postoperative nausea and vomiting continue to be problematic areas in anesthesia as evidenced by frequent reports of therapies in the literature. No single therapy has been proven curative for all cases, in part because of the several emetic centers, all of which may be blocked by different classes of drugs and the diverse risk factors which act alone or in combination to cause vomiting. Identification of the patient most at risk allows for cost effective prophylactic management. An appropriate anesthetic technique can be planned that, relying on evidence based medicine, will decrease if not prevent the incidence of this most troubling complication.

