21145068
Anterior cingulate volume reduction in adolescents with borderline personality disorder and co-morbid major depression.
Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD) is a serious illness characterized by emotional dysregulation, impulsivity, and impaired interpersonal relationships. Prior work shows the anterior cingulate gyrus (ACG)-a region primarily involved in assessing the salience of emotional information and regulating emotional responses--is smaller in adults with BPD. We tested the hypothesis that, similar to adults, adolescents with BPD would have reduced Brodmann area (BA)-24 volume. Thirteen adolescent inpatients with co-morbid BPD and Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) and 13 matched healthy controls received 3T-MRI scans. Using a cytoarchitecturally-derived approach measuring gray and white matter volume, we observed a Group × Cingulate BA (25,24,31,23,29) × Matter (gray, white) type interaction indicating the BPD/MDD adolescents had smaller BA24 volume in gray but not white matter. Greater number of suicide attempts and BPD symptom severity measured by the Diagnostic Interview for BPD-revised (DIB-R) total score but not depressive symptoms measured by the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) was associated with smaller BA24 volume. Our preliminary findings suggest that BPD-related abnormalities in BA24 volume may occur early in the developmental course of BPD with MDD. Future studies examining samples of MDD patients with and without BPD co-morbidity will be needed to clarify whether BA24 volume reductions are specific to BPD.

21115066
Dorso- and ventro-lateral prefrontal volume and spatial working memory in schizotypal personality disorder.
Schizotypal personality disorder (SPD) individuals and borderline personality disorder (BPD) individuals have been reported to show neuropsychological impairments and abnormalities in brain structure. However, relationships between neuropsychological function and brain structure in these groups are not well understood. This study compared visual-spatial working memory (SWM) and its associations with dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) gray matter volume in 18 unmedicated SPD patients with no BPD traits, 18 unmedicated BPD patients with no SPD traits, and 16 healthy controls (HC). Results showed impaired SWM in SPD but not BPD, compared with HC. Moreover, among the HC group, but not SPD patients, better SWM performance was associated with larger VLPFC (BA44/45) gray matter volume (Fisher's Z p-values <0.05). Findings suggest spatial working memory impairments may be a core neuropsychological deficit specific to SPD patients and highlight the role of VLPFC subcomponents in normal and dysfunctional memory performance.

20451217
Tryptophan-hydroxylase 2 haplotype association with borderline personality disorder and aggression in a sample of patients with personality disorders and healthy controls.
There is a decreased serotonergic function in impulsive aggression and borderline personality disorder (BPD), and genetic association studies suggest a role of serotonergic genes in impulsive aggression and BPD. Only one study has analyzed the association between the tryptophan-hydroxylase 2 (TPH2) gene and BPD. A TPH2 "risk" haplotype has been described that is associated with anxiety, depression and suicidal behavior. We assessed the relationship between the previously identified "risk" haplotype at the TPH2 locus and BPD diagnosis, impulsive aggression, affective lability, and suicidal/parasuicidal behaviors, in a well-characterized clinical sample of 103 healthy controls (HCs) and 251 patients with personality disorders (109 with BPD). A logistic regression including measures of depression, affective lability and aggression scores in predicting "risk" haplotype was conducted. The prevalence of the "risk" haplotype was significantly higher in patients with BPD compared to HCs. Those with the "risk" haplotype have higher aggression and affect lability scores and more suicidal/parasuicidal behaviors than those without it. In the logistic regression model, affect lability was the only significant predictor and it correctly classified 83.1% of the subjects as "risk" or "non-risk" haplotype carriers. We found an association between the previously described TPH2 "risk" haplotype and BPD diagnosis, affective lability, suicidal/parasuicidal behavior, and aggression scores.

19473820
Smaller superior temporal gyrus volume specificity in schizotypal personality disorder.
Superior temporal gyrus (STG/BA22) volume is reduced in schizophrenia and to a milder degree in schizotypal personality disorder (SPD), representing a less severe disorder in the schizophrenia spectrum. SPD and Borderline personality disorder (BPD) are severe personality disorders characterized by social and cognitive dysfunction. However, while SPD is characterized by social withdrawal/anhedonia, BPD is marked by hyper-reactivity to interpersonal stimuli and hyper-emotionality. This is the first morphometric study to directly compare SPD and BPD patients in temporal lobe volume. We compared three age-, sex-, and education-matched groups: 27 unmedicated SPD individuals with no BPD traits, 52 unmedicated BPD individuals with no SPD traits, and 45 healthy controls. We examined gray matter volume of frontal and temporal lobe Brodmann areas (BAs), and dorsal/ventral amygdala from 3-T magnetic resonance imaging. In the STG, an auditory association area reported to be dysfunctional in SPD and BPD, the SPD patients had significantly smaller volume than healthy controls and BPD patients. No group differences were found between BPD patients and controls. Smaller BA22 volume was associated with greater symptom severity in SPD patients. Reduced STG volume may be an important endophenotype for schizophrenia-spectrum disorders. SPD is distinct from BPD in terms of STG volume abnormalities which may reflect different underlying pathophysiological mechanisms and could help discriminate between them.

19394205
Neural correlates of emotion processing in borderline personality disorder.
Emotional instability is a hallmark feature of borderline personality disorder (BPD), yet its biological underpinnings are poorly understood. We employed functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to compare patterns of regional brain activation in BPD patients and healthy volunteers as they process positive and negative social emotional stimuli. fMRI images were acquired while 19 BPD patients and 17 healthy controls (HC) viewed emotion-inducing pictures from the International Affective Pictures System set. Activation data were analyzed with SPM5 ANCOVA models to derive the effects of diagnosis and stimulus type. BPD patients demonstrated greater differences in activation than controls, when viewing negative pictures compared with rest, in the amygdala, fusiform gyrus, primary visual areas, superior temporal gyrus (STG), and premotor areas, while healthy controls showed greater differences than BPD patients in the insula, middle temporal gyrus and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA46). When viewing positive pictures compared with rest, BPD patients showed greater differences in the STG, premotor cortex, and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. These findings suggest that BPD patients show greater amygdala activity and heightened activity of visual processing regions relative to findings for HC subjects in the processing of negative social emotional pictures compared with rest. The patients activate neural networks in emotion processing that are phylogeneticall older and more reflexive than those activated by HC subjects.

18708183
Preclinical assessment for selectively disrupting a traumatic memory via postretrieval inhibition of glucocorticoid receptors.
Traumatic experiences may lead to debilitating psychiatric disorders including acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder. Current treatments for these conditions are largely ineffective, and novel therapies are needed. A cardinal symptom of these pathologies is the reexperiencing of the trauma through intrusive memories and nightmares. Studies in animal models indicate that memories can be weakened by interfering with the postretrieval restabilization process known as memory reconsolidation. We previously reported that, in rats, intraamygdala injection of the glucocorticoid receptor antagonist RU38486 disrupts the reconsolidation of a traumatic memory. Here we tested parameters important for designing novel clinical protocols targeting the reconsolidation of a traumatic memory with RU38486. Using rat inhibitory avoidance, we tested the efficacy of postretrieval systemic administration of RU38486 on subsequent memory retention and evaluated several key preclinical parameters. Systemic administration of RU38486 before or after retrieval persistently weakens inhibitory avoidance memory retention in a dose-dependent manner, and memory does not reemerge following a footshock reminder. The efficacy of treatment is a function of the intensity of the initial trauma, and intense traumatic memories can be disrupted by changing the time and number of interventions. Furthermore, one or two treatments are sufficient to disrupt the memory maximally. The treatment selectively targets the reactivated memory without interfering with the retention of another nonreactivated memory. RU38486 is a potential novel treatment for psychiatric disorders linked to traumatic memories. Our data provide the parameters for designing promising clinical trials for the treatment of flashback-type symptoms of PTSD.

18638645
Recent advances in the biological study of personality disorders.
While it is premature to provide a simple model for the vulnerability to the development of either borderline (BPD) or schizotypal (SPD) personality disorder, it is clear that these heritable disorders lend themselves to fruitful neurobiological exploration. The most promising findings in BPD suggest that a diminished top-down control of affective responses, which is likely to relate to deceased responsiveness of specific midline regions of prefrontal cortex, may underlie the affective hyperresponsiveness in this disorder. In addition, genetic and neuroendocrine and molecular neuroimaging findings point to a role for serotonin in this affective disinhibition. Clearly SPD falls within the schizophrenia spectrum, but precisely the nature of what predicts full-blown schizophrenia as opposed to the milder symptoms of SPD is not yet clear.

18588988
Frontal-striatal-thalamic mediodorsal nucleus dysfunction in schizophrenia-spectrum patients during sensorimotor gating.
Prepulse inhibition (PPI) refers to a reduction in the amplitude of the startle eyeblink reflex to a strong sensory stimulus, the pulse, when it is preceded shortly by a weak stimulus, the prepulse. PPI is a measure of sensorimotor gating which serves to prevent the interruption of early attentional processing and it is impaired in schizophrenia-spectrum patients. In healthy individuals, PPI is more robust when attending to than ignoring a prepulse. Animal and human work demonstrates that frontal-striatal-thalamic (FST) circuitry modulates PPI. This study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate FST circuitry during an attention-to-prepulse paradigm in 26 unmedicated schizophrenia-spectrum patients (13 schizotypal personality disorder (SPD), 13 schizophrenia) and 13 healthy controls. During 3T-fMRI acquisition and separately measured psychophysiological assessment of PPI, participants heard an intermixed series of high- and low-pitched tones serving as prepulses to an acoustic-startle stimulus. Event-related BOLD response amplitude curves in FST regions traced on co-registered anatomical MRI were examined. Controls showed greater activation during attended than ignored PPI conditions in all FST regions-dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Brodmann areas 46, 9), striatum (caudate, putamen), and the thalamic mediodorsal nucleus. In contrast, schizophrenia patients failed to show differential BOLD responses in FST circuitry during attended and ignored prepulses, whereas SPD patients showed greater-than-normal activation during ignored prepulses. Among the three diagnostic groups, lower left caudate BOLD activation during the attended PPI condition was associated with more deficient sensorimotor gating as measured by PPI. Schizophrenia-spectrum patients exhibit inefficient utilization of FST circuitry during attentional modulation of PPI. Schizophrenia patients have reduced recruitment of FST circuitry during task-relevant stimuli, whereas SPD patients allocate excessive resources during task-irrelevant stimuli. Dysfunctional FST activation, particularly in the caudate may underlie PPI abnormalities in schizophrenia-spectrum patients.

18550033
The case for shifting borderline personality disorder to Axis I.
Through reviewing what is known about the nature, course, and heritability of borderline personality disorder (BPD), we argue for a reconceptualization of this disorder that would lead to its placement on Axis I. Borderline personality disorder is a prevalent and disabling condition, and yet the empirical research into its nature and treatment has not been commensurate with the seriousness of the illness. We not only review empirical evidence about the etiology, phenomenology, and course of the disorder in BPD but we also address fundamental misconceptions about BPD that we believe have contributed to misunderstanding and stigmatization of the disease. Finally, we suggest future directions for research that might permit the identification of core features of this disorder, with a focus on the importance of naturalistic assessments and of assessments through the course of development.

18272348
Cortical gray and white matter volume in unmedicated schizotypal and schizophrenia patients.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies have revealed fronto-temporal cortical gray matter volume reductions in schizophrenia. However, to date studies have not examined whether age- and sex-matched unmedicated schizotypal personality disorder (SPD) patients share some or all of the structural brain-imaging characteristics of schizophrenia patients. We examined cortical gray/white matter volumes in a large sample of unmedicated schizophrenia-spectrum patients (n=79 SPD, n=57 schizophrenia) and 148 healthy controls. MRI images were reoriented to standard position parallel to the anterior-posterior commissure line, segmented into gray and white matter tissue types, and assigned to Brodmann areas (BAs) using a postmortem-histological atlas. Group differences in regional volume of gray and white matter in the BAs were examined with MANOVA. Schizophrenia patients had significantly reduced gray matter volume widely across the cortex but more marked in frontal and temporal lobes. SPD patients had reductions in the same regions but only about half that observed in schizophrenia and sparing in key regions including BA10. In schizophrenia, greater fronto-temporal volume loss was associated with greater negative symptom severity and in SPD, greater interpersonal and cognitive impairment. Overall, our findings suggest that increased prefrontal volume in BA10 and sparing of volume loss in temporal cortex (BAs 22 and 20) may be a protective factor in SPD which reduces vulnerability to psychosis.

18075475
Irritable assault and variation in the COMT gene.
Aggression is associated with the 'low' activity allele (Met) of the functional Val158Met polymorphism among people with schizophrenia spectrum disorders relative to the 'high' activity (Val) allele. We examined this polymorphism in a sample of 112 people with axis II personality disorders. Participants completed the Buss Durkee Hostility Inventory. Two single nucleotide polymorphisms in the COMT gene were genotyped in these participants classified as 'white' according to US Census Bureau definitions. We failed to observe an association between the Val158Met allele and aggression but observed an association between self-reported aggression and the G allele of a biallelic polymorphism located in the 3'' UTR (rs16559). This allele is less prevalent among schizophrenics and is associated with lower COMT expression in the brain. These findings provide limited support for a role of COMT in modulating aggressive behavior, and are extended to people with personality disorders.

17825840
Frontolimbic structural changes in borderline personality disorder.
Frontolimbic dysfunction is observed in borderline personality disorder (BPD), with responses to emotional stimuli that are exaggerated in the amygdala and impaired in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). This pattern of altered function is consistent with animal models of stress responses and depression, where hypertrophic changes in the amygdala and atrophic changes in the ACC are observed. We tested the hypothesis that BPD patients exhibit gross structural changes that parallel the respective increases in amygdala activation and impairment of rostral/subgenual ACC activation. Twelve unmedicated outpatients with BPD by DSM-IV and 12 normal control (NC) subjects underwent a high-resolution T1-weighted structural MRI scan. Relative gray matter concentration (GMC) in spatially-normalized images was evaluated by standard voxel-based morphometry, with voxel-wise subject group comparisons by t test constrained to amygdala and rostral/subgenual ACC. The BPD group was significantly higher than NC in GMC in the amygdala. In contrast, the BPD group showed significantly lower GMC than the NC group in left rostral/subgenual ACC. This sample of BPD patients exhibits gross structural changes in gray matter in cortical and subcortical limbic regions that parallel the regional distribution of altered functional activation to emotional stimuli among these same subjects. While the histological basis for GMC changes in adult clinical populations is poorly-known at present, the observed pattern is consistent with the direction of change, in animal models of anxiety and depression, of neuronal number and/or morphological complexity in both the amygdala (where it is increased) and ACC (where it is decreased).

17601709
Fronto-limbic dysfunction in response to facial emotion in borderline personality disorder: an event-related fMRI study.
Clinical hallmarks of borderline personality disorder (BPD) include social and emotional dysregulation. We tested a model of fronto-limbic dysfunction in facial emotion processing in BPD. Groups of 12 unmedicated adults with BPD by DSM-IV and 12 demographically-matched healthy controls (HC) viewed facial expressions (Conditions) of neutral emotion, fear and anger, and made gender discriminations during rapid event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Analysis of variance of Region of Interest signal change revealed a statistically significant effect of the Group-by-Region-by-Condition interaction. This was due to the BPD group exhibiting a significantly larger magnitude of deactivation (relative to HC) in the bilateral rostral/subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) to fear and in the left ACC to fear minus neutral; and significantly greater activation in the right amygdala to fear minus neutral. There were no significant between-group differences in ROI signal change in response to anger. In voxel-wise analyses constrained within these ROIs, the BPD group exhibited significant changes in the fear minus neutral contrast, with relatively less activation in the bilateral rostral/subgenual ACC, and greater activation in the right amygdala. In the anger minus neutral contrast this pattern was reversed, with the BPD group showing greater activation in the bilateral rostral/subgenual ACC and less activation in the bilateral amygdala. We conclude that adults with BPD exhibit changes in fronto-limbic activity in the processing of fear stimuli, with exaggerated amygdala response and impaired emotion-modulation of ACC activity. The neural substrates underlying processing of anger may also be altered. These changes may represent an expression of the volumetric and serotonergic deficits observed in these brain areas in BPD.

17478083
Deficient attentional modulation of startle eyeblink is associated with symptom severity in the schizophrenia spectrum.
Patients with schizophrenia-spectrum disorders show deficient prepulse inhibition (PPI) of the startle eyeblink reflex which is thought to reflect an early stage of information processing called automatic sensorimotor gating. They also exhibit deficient attentional modulation of PPI and prepulse facilitation (PPF) of startle which is thought to reflect deficient early and later controlled attentional processing. This is the first study to assess attentional modulation of PPI and PPF in a 3-group schizophrenia-spectrum sample of age- and sex-matched unmedicated schizotypal personality disorder (SPD) and schizophrenia patients, and healthy controls. Participants performed a tone-length judgment task involving attended, ignored, and novel tone prepulses while the acoustic startle eyeblink reflex was measured. Healthy controls showed greater PPI and PPF during the attended prepulses compared with the ignored prepulses. In contrast, both the SPD and schizophrenia patient groups failed to show this pattern, indicating deficient early and later controlled attentional processing. These findings suggest abnormal attentional modulation of PPI and PPF may be a trait-like feature found in patients with schizophrenia-spectrum disorders. Among the schizophrenia-spectrum sample, more deficient PPI during the attended prepulses was associated with greater symptom severity as measured by the total 18-item Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale score.

17258691
Exaggerated affect-modulated startle during unpleasant stimuli in borderline personality disorder.
Excessive emotional responding is considered to be a hallmark of borderline personality disorder (BPD). The affect-modulated startle response is a reliable indicator of emotional processing of stimuli. The aim of this study was to examine emotional processing in BPD patients (n = 27) and healthy control subjects (n = 21). Participants viewed an intermixed series of unpleasant, borderline-salient (e.g., "hate"), and neutral (e.g., "view") words and were instructed to think about the meaning of the word for them personally while eyeblink responses were assessed. The BPD patients exhibited larger startle eyeblink during unpleasant but not neutral words, indicating exaggerated physiological affect. This finding remained significant when we controlled for comorbid diagnoses, including generalized anxiety disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder. Greater symptom severity was associated with greater affective-startle difference scores (unpleasant-neutral). Consistent with the symptom of affective dysregulation, these results suggest an abnormality in the processing of unpleasant emotional stimuli by BPD patients.

17203018
Amygdala-prefrontal disconnection in borderline personality disorder.
Abnormal fronto-amygdala circuitry has been implicated in impulsive aggression, a core symptom of borderline personality disorder (BPD). We examined relative glucose metabolic rate (rGMR) at rest and after m-CPP (meta-chloropiperazine) with (18)fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) with positron emission tomography (PET) in 26 impulsive aggressive (IED)-BPD patients and 24 controls. Brain edges/amygdala were visually traced on MRI scans co-registered to PET scans; rGMR was obtained for ventral and dorsal regions of the amygdala and Brodmann areas within the prefrontal cortex (PFC). Correlation coefficients were calculated between rGMR for dorsal/ventral amygdala regions and PFC. Additionally, amygdala volumes and rGMR were examined in BPD and controls. Correlations PFC/amygdala Placebo: Controls showed significant positive correlations between right orbitofrontal (OFC) and ventral, but not dorsal, amygdala. Patients showed only weak correlations between amygdala and the anterior PFC, with no distinction between dorsal and ventral amygdala. Correlations PFC/amygdala: m-CPP response: Controls showed positive correlations between OFC and amygdala regions, whereas patients showed positive correlations between dorsolateral PFC and amygdala. Group differences between interregional correlational matrices were highly significant. Amygdala volume/metabolism: No group differences were found for amygdala volume, or metabolism in the placebo condition or in response to meta-chloropiperazine (m-CPP). We demonstrated a tight coupling of metabolic activity between right OFC and ventral amygdala in healthy subjects with dorsoventral differences in amygdala circuitry, not present in IED-BPD. We demonstrated no significant differences in amygdala volumes or metabolism between BPD patients and controls.

