20833474
The daily impact of pain from metastatic breast cancer on spousal relationships: a dyadic electronic diary study.
Women with metastatic breast cancer (MBC) experience high levels of emotional distress and pain. Although individuals often rely on their intimate partners to provide physical and emotional support when they are in pain, the daily impact of pain on the spousal relationship in the context of advanced cancer is unclear. To understand how relationships are affected by pain, 57 MBC patients and their partners completed electronic diary assessments 6 times a day for 14 days. Patients and partners rated the patient's pain, their own mood (circumplex adjectives), the provision/receipt of social support, and the degree to which cancer interfered with their relationship. Multilevel mediation models with the couple as the unit of analysis were estimated. Partners and patients reported greater relationship interference when patients experienced more pain and less aroused (i.e., more tired, less peppy, less active) mood. Greater tired mood during the day accounted for 17% and 82% of the association between patients' morning pain and their evening ratings of emotional and physical support from their partners, respectively. Partners did not directly respond to patients' pain by providing emotional or physical support; however, they were more likely to provide support when patients experienced more tired and less active mood as a consequence of their pain. Results suggest that one way that pain may wear on couples' relationships is through its adverse effects on patients' daily mood. They also suggest that partners may base their provision of support on their perception of the adverse effects of pain on patients' aroused mood.

20230090
Dyadic coping in metastatic breast cancer.
Couples facing metastatic breast cancer (MBC) must learn to cope with stressors that can affect both partners' quality of life as well as the quality of their relationship. Common dyadic coping involves taking a "we" approach, whereby partners work together to maintain their relationship while jointly managing their shared stress. This study prospectively evaluated whether common dyadic coping was associated with less cancer-related distress and greater dyadic adjustment for female MBC patients and their male partners. Couples (N = 191) completed surveys at the start of treatment for MBC (baseline), and 3 and 6 months later. Cancer-related distress was assessed with the Impact of Events Scale; dyadic adjustment was assessed using the short-form of the Dyadic Adjustment Scale. Multilevel models using the couple as the unit of analysis showed that the effects of common positive dyadic coping on cancer-related distress significantly differed for patients and their partners. Whereas partners experienced slightly lower levels of distress, patients experienced slightly higher levels of distress. Although patients and partners who used more common negative dyadic coping experienced significantly greater distress at all times, the association was stronger for patients. Finally, using more common positive dyadic coping and less common negative dyadic coping was mutually beneficial for patients and partners in terms of greater dyadic adjustment. Our findings underscore the importance of couples working together to manage the stress associated with MBC. Future research may benefit from greater focus on the interactions between patients and their partners to address ways that couples can adaptively cope together.

