19843576
Antagonistic roles of four SR proteins in the biosynthesis of alternatively spliced tissue factor transcripts in monocytic cells.
Following recruitment to solid tissues, peripheral blood monocytes express a number of proinflammatory molecules including TF, a trigger of coagulation that also promotes cell-cell interactions and tissue remodeling. Monocytes express two forms of TF: flTF, a highly coagulant transmembrane form, and asTF, a highly proangiogenic, soluble TF form. Biosynthesis of the two TF forms occurs via alternative processing of exon 5 during pre-mRNA splicing. Its inclusion results in flTF mRNA and its exclusion, asTF mRNA. We developed a splicing reporter system recently and determined that two spliceosomal constituents, SR proteins ASF/SF2 and SRp55, play a pivotal role in exon 5 inclusion. In this report, we show for the first time that two other SR proteins expressed in human monocytes, SRp40 and SC35, antagonize ASF/SF2 and SRp55 by competing for binding to certain sites in exon 5, thereby promoting TF exon 5 exclusion, an event unique to asTF biosynthesis. We also show that the intron preceding TF exon 5 possesses characteristics rarely found in U2 introns. Our findings indicate that modulation of TF pre-mRNA splicing can be accomplished via modification of SR proteins' activity, facilitating development of novel therapeutic strategies to modulate the "TF profile" of monocytes/macrophages.

19638340
Bacillus subtilis trp Leader RNA: RNase J1 endonuclease cleavage specificity and PNPase processing.
In the presence of ample tryptophan, transcription from the Bacillus subtilis trp operon promoter terminates to give a 140-nucleotide trp leader RNA. Turnover of trp leader RNA has been shown to depend on RNase J1 cleavage at a single-stranded, AU-rich region just upstream of the 3' transcription terminator. The small size of trp leader RNA and its strong dependence on RNase J1 cleavage for decay make it a suitable substrate for analyzing the requirements for RNase J1 target site specificity. trp leader RNAs with nucleotide changes around the RNase J1 target site were more stable than wild-type trp leader RNA, showing that sequences on either side of the cleavage site contribute to RNase J1 recognition. An analysis of decay intermediates from these mutants suggested limited 3'-to-5' exonuclease processing from the native 3' end. trp leader RNAs were designed that contained wild-type or mutant RNase J1 targets elsewhere on the molecule. The presence of an additional RNase J1 cleavage site resulted in faster RNA decay, depending on its location. Addition of a 5' tail containing 7 A residues caused destabilization of trp leader RNAs. Surprisingly, addition at the 5' end of a strong stem loop structure that is known to stabilize other RNAs did not result in a longer trp leader RNA half-life, suggesting that the RNase J1 cleavage site may be accessed directly. In the course of these experiments, we found evidence that polynucleotide phosphorylase processivity was inhibited by a GCGGCCGC sequence.

19161848
Analysis of mRNA decay in Bacillus subtilis.
Studies of mRNA turnover in B. subtilis are less well known than in E. coli. Here we provide researchers who have an interest in gram-positive RNA processing with several protocols for RNA isolation, for 5'- and 3'-mapping of mRNAs and mRNA decay fragments, and we also include a comprehensive listing of B. subtilis mutants that are deficient in ribonucleases thought to be involved in mRNA decay.

18445592
Role of Bacillus subtilis RNase J1 endonuclease and 5'-exonuclease activities in trp leader RNA turnover.
The 140-nucleotide trp leader RNA, which is formed by transcription termination under conditions of high intracellular tryptophan, was used to study RNA turnover in Bacillus subtilis. We showed in vivo that the amount of endonuclease cleavage at approximately nucleotide 100 is decreased under conditions where RNase J1 concentration is reduced. In addition, under these conditions the level of 3'-terminal RNA fragments, which contain the strong transcription terminator structure, increases dramatically. These results implicated RNase J1 in the initiation of trp leader RNA decay as well as in the subsequent steps leading to complete turnover of the terminator fragment. To confirm a direct role for RNase J1, experiments were performed in vitro with various forms of trp leader RNA and 3'-terminal RNA fragments. Specific endonuclease cleavages, which were restricted to single-stranded regions not bound by protein, were observed. Degradation of the 3'-terminal fragment by the 5' to 3'-exonuclease activity of RNase J1 was also demonstrated, although the presence of strong secondary structure impeded RNase J1 processivity to some extent. These results are consistent with a model for mRNA decay in Bacillus subtilis whereby the downstream products of RNase J1 endonucleolytic cleavage become substrates for the 5' to 3'-exoribonuclease activity of the enzyme.

17507374
Initiation of decay of Bacillus subtilis trp leader RNA.
Transcription termination in the leader region of the Bacillus subtilis trp operon is regulated by binding of the 11-mer TRAP complex to nascent trp RNA, which results in formation of a terminator structure. Rapid decay of trp leader RNA, which is required to release the TRAP complex and maintain a sufficient supply of free TRAP, is mediated by polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase). Using purified B. subtilis PNPase, we showed that, when TRAP was present, PNPase binding to the 3' end of trp leader RNA and PNPase digestion of trp leader RNA from the 3' end were inefficient. These results suggested that initiation of trp leader RNA may begin with an endonuclease cleavage upstream of the transcription terminator structure. Such cleavage was observed in vivo. Mutagenesis of nucleotides at the cleavage site abolished processing and resulted in a 4-fold increase in trp leader RNA half-life. This is the first mapping of a decay-initiating endonuclease cleavage site on a native B. subtilis RNA.

18315555
SR proteins ASF/SF2 and SRp55 participate in tissue factor biosynthesis in human monocytic cells.
Human monocytes express two naturally occurring forms of circulating tissue factor (TF) - full-length TF, a membrane-spanning protein, and alternatively spliced TF, a soluble molecule. Presence of the variable exon 5 in TF mRNA determines whether the encoded TF protein is transmembrane, or soluble. Recently, an essential SR protein ASF/SF2 was implicated in TF pre-mRNA processing in human platelets. To examine molecular mechanisms governing regulated processing of TF pre-mRNA in human monocytic cells. In silico analysis of the human TF exon 5, present only in full-length TF mRNA, revealed putative binding motifs termed exonic splicing enhancers (ESE) for the SR proteins ASF/SF2 and SRp55, which were found to be abundantly expressed in monocytic cell lines THP-1 and SC, as well as monocyte-enriched peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Using a splice competent mini-gene reporter system transiently expressed in monocytic cells, it was determined that weakening of either five closely positioned ASF/SF2 ESE (bases 87-117) or a single conserved SRp55 ESE (base 39) results in severe skipping of exon 5. ASF/SF2 and SRp55 were found to physically associate with the identified ESE. SR proteins ASF/SF2 and SRp55 appear to interact with the variable TF exon 5 through ESE at bases 39 and 87-117. Weakening of the above ESE modulates splicing of TF exon 5. This study is the first to identify and experimentally characterize cis-acting splicing elements involved in regulated biosynthesis of human TF.

