20044143
Relationship between whole blood serotonin and repetitive behaviors in autism.
This study was conducted to examine the relationship between whole blood serotonin level and behavioral symptoms in 78 subjects with autism. No significant associations were found between serotonin level and the primary behavioral outcome measures. However, a significant inverse relationship between serotonin level and self-injury was demonstrated.

17894412
Autism-related routines and rituals associated with a mitochondrial aspartate/glutamate carrier SLC25A12 polymorphism.
Evidence for a genetic association between autism and two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs2056202 and rs2292813, in the mitochondrial aspartate/glutamate carrier (SLC25A12) gene led us to ask whether any of the four previously identified familial traits in autism spectrum disorders (ASD) varied by these SNPs. In 355 ASD cases from 170 sibships we examined levels of the four traits in these SNPs using ANCOVA models. The primary models selected unrelated affected cases and used age and sex as covariates. An ancillary set of models used all affected siblings and included "sibship" as a random effects independent variable. We found significantly lower levels of routines and rituals associated with the presence of the less frequent A allele in rs2056206. No other significant differences were observed. The rs2056202 polymorphism may be associated with levels of routines and rituals in autism and related disorders.

17427195
Mutation screening of the PTEN gene in patients with autism spectrum disorders and macrocephaly.
Mutations in the PTEN gene are associated with a broad spectrum of disorders, including Cowden syndrome (CS), Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, Proteus syndrome, and Lhermitte-Duclos disease. In addition, PTEN mutations have been described in a few patients with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) and macrocephaly. In this study, we screened the PTEN gene for mutations and deletions in 88 patients with ASDs and macrocephaly (defined as >or=2 SD above the mean). Mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing of all exons and flanking regions, as well as the promoter region. Dosage analysis of PTEN was carried out using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). No partial or whole gene deletions were observed. We identified a de novo missense mutation (D326N) in a highly conserved amino acid in a 5-year-old boy with autism, mental retardation, language delay, extreme macrocephaly (+9.6 SD) and polydactyly of both feet. Polydactyly has previously been described in two patients with Lhermitte-Duclos disease and CS and is thus likely to be a rare sign of PTEN mutations. Our findings suggest that PTEN mutations are a relatively infrequent cause of ASDs with macrocephaly. Screening of PTEN mutations is warranted in patients with autism and pronounced macrocephaly, even in the absence of other features of PTEN-related tumor syndromes.

