20425498
Occupational rhinosinusitis and upper airway disease: the world trade center experience.
The World Trade Center disaster and its recovery work involved a range of hazardous occupational exposures that have not been fully characterized but that can be reasonably assumed to have the potential to cause mucosal inflammation, preferentially (but not exclusively) in the upper airway. A high prevalence of rhinosinusitis and upper airway disease (UAD) symptoms was reported by several early surveys. Clinical studies demonstrated objective, clinically significant, and persistent chronic perennial rhinosinusitis and UAD-with or without seasonal exacerbation-in a large proportion of patients. Demonstration of an association between UAD and available exposure indicators has been limited. Atopy seemed to be associated with increased UAD symptom severity and to be a risk factor for upper, but not lower, airway disease. World Trade Center-related UAD is considered an irritant-induced disease but not, in many cases, of acute onset. No data thus far suggest an increased upper airway cancer incidence.

19730399
Atopy and upper and lower airway disease among former World Trade Center workers and volunteers.
A large number of workers seemed to have developed upper and lower airway disease (UAD and LAD, respectively) in relation to their occupational exposures at the World Trade Center (WTC) disaster site. This study examined atopy as a risk factor for presumably WTC-related UAD and LAD. Atopy was examined in 136 former WTC workers and volunteers by radioallergosorbent test, skin prick testing, or both. Overall prevalence of atopy was estimated, and bivariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses were conducted to examine associations of atopy with WTC-related UAD and LAD. Atopy was prevalent in 54.4% of these WTC workers. Atopy was associated with higher symptom severity scores for both WTC-related UAD and LAD. Atopy was a predictor of WTC-related UAD but not LAD. Early arrival at the WTC site, and pre-2001 asthma diagnosis were predictors of LAD. The prevalence of atopy in this population is similar to what has been described for the general U.S. population. Atopy seemed to be a risk factor for presumably WTC-related UAD but not for LAD.

18286441
Advances in approaches to the cranial base: minimizing morbidity.
The most innovative and meaningful recent advances regarding surgery of the cranial base involve the ability to perform a complete resection followed by a water- and airtight reconstruction while minimizing facial incisions and morbidity. Perhaps the first step in this direction took place when the subcranial/subfrontal approach was introduced for anterior skull base surgery. Originally developed by Raveh in 1978 for the management of severe skull base injuries, these approaches were later adapted for the treatment of congenital anomalies prior to their utilization for resection of anterior skull base tumors. The endoscopic approaches are quite practical with promising long-term efficacy for the treatment of most benign, infectious, and inflammatory disorders. The minimal recovery time, functional outcomes, and obvious aesthetic advantages are only tempered by the lack of long-term data regarding the efficacy of these approaches in the treatment of malignancies.

18213642
Vocal cord dysfunction in former World Trade Center (WTC) rescue and recovery workers and volunteers.
Vocal cord dysfunction (VCD) is a condition characterized by paradoxical partial adduction of the vocal cords on inspiration. It has been associated with exposures to irritants, as well as with psychological illnesses and conditions. Workers who participated in the recovery of the WTC disaster site were exposed to a large amount of irritants as well as considerable psychological stressors. We describe the clinical characteristics of 10 symptomatic former WTC workers diagnosed with this condition, as well as the frequency of spirometric findings suggestive of variable extrathoracic obstruction. Workers who became symptomatic after their WTC work experience have been evaluated clinically by a multidisciplinary team at an academic medical center. The evaluation included history, physical examination, chest radiograph, blood tests, and pre- and post-bronchodilator spirometry in all patients. Additional evaluations and diagnostic tests included otolaryngological evaluation with flexible rhinolaryngoscopy and stroboscopy, gastroenterological and psychiatric evaluations. A randomly selected sample of 172 spirometry results were reviewed for evidence of inspiratory flow limitation. Variable extrathoracic obstruction was found in 18.6% of the spirometries. Ten patients were diagnosed with VCD. In addition to symptoms suggestive of co-morbid conditions (particularly rhinitis and acid reflux disease), most of the 10 patients had (1) hoarseness, (2) dyspnea that was not associated with bronchial hyperreactivity, or (3) dyspnea associated with asthma, with either mild bronchial hyperreactivity and/or poor response to asthma treatment. VCD appears to be part of the spectrum of airway disorders caused by occupational exposures at the WTC disaster site. Further study of this association is warranted.

17882924
Comparison of fast-setting calcium phosphate bone cement and fat autograft in a rabbit model of frontal sinus obliteration.
Traditionally, chronic obstruction of the frontal recess is managed by frontal sinus obliteration (FSO). This often requires the harvest of abdominal fat as a filler with all of its associated morbidity. In this study, we investigate the efficacy of calcium phosphate bone cement (Craniofacial Repair System [CRS]) as a material for FSO. Eighteen New Zealand white rabbits were divided into three groups and carried out to two time periods. Six rabbits underwent FSO with fat autograft (control group) and 12 rabbits underwent FSO with CRS (study groups 1 and 2, respectively). At 52 weeks, six control and six study rabbits were killed. The remaining six rabbits were killed at 78 weeks. All specimens underwent radiological evaluation with spiral computed tomography (CT) followed by gross inspection. Histological evaluation was then performed to assess bony growth and to evaluate the interface of the sinus wall with the obliterative material. Sinuses obliterated with CRS showed complete obliteration radiographically. This was apparent at 52 weeks and remained static at 78 weeks. Histological analysis indicated persistent obliteration of the sinus cavity from 52 to 78 weeks and signs of osteoinduction. There were no complications observed as a result of the operative procedure or the materials used. CRS is an alternative to fat autograft for FSO in this noninfected animal model. Further studies are needed to evaluate its long-term efficacy as well as its behavior in chronically infected sinuses.

17786467
Occupational toxicant inhalation injury: the World Trade Center (WTC) experience.
Clinical descriptive data is presented on a group of 554 former workers and volunteers (with more than 90 different occupations) at the World Trade Center (WTC) disaster site. A subsample of 168 workers (30% of the group) was selected to examine lower airway disease risk in relation to smoking and WTC exposure variables. Five diagnostic categories clearly predominate: upper airway disease (78.5%), gastroesophageal reflux disease (57.6%), lower airway disease (48.9%), psychological (41.9%) and chronic musculoskeletal illnesses (17.8%). The most frequent pattern of presentation was a combination of the first three of those categories (29.8%). Associations were found between arrival at the WTC site within the first 48 h of the terrorist attack and lower airway and gastroesophageal reflux disease, and between past or present cigarette smoking and lower airway disease. Occupational exposures at the WTC remain consistently associated with a disease profile, which includes five major diagnostic categories. These conditions often coexist in different combinations, which (as expected) mutually enhances their clinical expression, complicates medical management, and slows recovery. Cigarette smoking and early arrival at the WTC site appear to be risk factors for lower airway disease diagnosis.

17666272
Intracranial mucocele: an unusual complication of cerebrospinal fluid leakage repair with middle turbinate mucosal graft.


17666253
Demineralized bone matrix and fat autograft in a rabbit model of frontal sinus obliteration.
In this study, we investigate the efficacy of demineralized bone matrix (DBM) as a material for frontal sinus obliteration in a rabbit model. Twenty-four New Zealand White rabbits were divided into four groups, and the study was carried out to two time periods. Twelve rabbits underwent frontal sinus obliteration with fat autograft, and 12 rabbits underwent the procedure with DBM. At 12 weeks, six control and six study rabbits were killed. The remaining 12 rabbits were killed at 36 weeks. All specimens underwent radiologic evaluation with spiral CT followed by histologic examination for evidence of bony growth. Sinuses obliterated with DBM showed replacement of the sinus cavity by trabecular bone. Histology demonstrated significant progressive replacement of DBM by cancellous bone from 12 weeks (53.3%) to 36 weeks (78.8%). There were no complications observed as a result of the materials used. DBM is a prospective material for frontal sinus obliteration. Long-term studies and human trials will further elucidate the role of this material.

