21465110
Recurrent pancreatic carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma: (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT).
Although the current literature is limited, available data suggest that (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) imaging improves the evaluation of patients with recurrent pancreatic carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma. There is evidence that PET/CT is particularly useful in the setting of elevated tumor markers and negative or equivocal CT findings. This article reviews the nature of these carcinomas in the post-therapy setting and describes the strengths and limitations of PET/CT when used for monitoring recurrence.

21415197
Role of FDG PET/CT in staging of recurrent ovarian cancer.
Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer death among women in the United States and has a high likelihood of recurrence despite aggressive treatment strategies. Detection and exact localization of recurrent lesions are critical for guiding management and determining the proper therapeutic approach, which may prolong survival. Because of its high sensitivity and specificity compared with those of conventional techniques such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, fluorine 18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET) combined with CT is useful for detection of recurrent or residual ovarian cancer and for monitoring response to therapy. However, PET/CT may yield false-negative results in patients with small, necrotic, mucinous, cystic, or low-grade tumors. In addition, in the posttherapy setting, inflammatory and infectious processes may lead to false-positive PET/CT results. Despite these drawbacks, PET/CT is superior to CT and MR imaging for depiction of recurrent disease.

21198866
Combining FDG-PET/CT with laboratory data yields superior results for prediction of relapse in multiple myeloma.
? The precise role of positron emission tomography (PET/CT) for predicting relapse/progression in multiple myeloma remains uncertain. We compared the predictive values of PET/CT, concurrent laboratory testing (labs), and their combination in prediction of 12-month progression, as determined by current International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) criteria. ? PET/CT and labs (serum chemistry, ?2-microglobulin, immunofixation, bone marrow biopsy, serum free light chains) were reviewed, and date of relapse/progression was determined by IMWG criteria. ? The median time from therapy to PET/CT imaging was 12.0?months (1.0-110) and median time to progression (TTP) was 29.8?months (1.6-130+). Overall survival and survival-without-progression at last follow-up were 84% and 49%, respectively. Sensitivity of PET/CT for predicting relapse/progression was lower than that of labs (0.67 vs. 0.89, ns), but PET/CT was more specific (0.89 vs. 0.79, ns). When labs and PET/CT data were combined, a positive result for either test was 89% sensitive and a positive result for both tests was 100% specific for predicting 12-month progression of disease. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed significantly greater TTP for those with a negative vs. positive PET/CT (P?=?0.0005), negative vs. positive labs (P?<?0.0001), and both tests negative vs. both tests positive (P?<?0.0001). ? Combining PET/CT with laboratory data improves the accuracy of prediction of relapse/progression within 12?months compared with each test alone. Thus, integration of PET/CT into myeloma follow-up is recommended, and the impact of this approach on management should be explored.

20961409
Extraperitoneal urine leak after renal transplantation: the role of radionuclide imaging and the value of accompanying SPECT/CT - a case report.
The differentiation of the nature of a fluid collection as a complication of kidney transplantation is important for management and treatment planning. Early and delayed radionuclide renography can play an important role in the evaluation of a urine leak. However, it is sometimes limited in the evaluation of the exact location and extent of a urine leak. A 71-year-old male who had sudden anuria, scrotal swelling and elevated creatinine level after cadaveric renal transplantation performed Tc-99 m MAG3 renography to evaluate the renal function, followed by an ultrasound which was unremarkable. An extensive urine leak was evident on the planar images. However, an exact location of the urine leak was unknown. Accompanying SPECT/CT images confirmed a urine leak extending from the lower aspect of the transplant kidney to the floor of the pelvic cavity, presacral region and the scrotum via right inguinal canal as well as to the right abdominal wall. Renal scintigraphy is very useful to detect a urine leak after renal transplantation. However, planar imaging is sometimes limited in evaluating the anatomical location and extent of a urine leak accurately. In that case accompanying SPECT/CT images are very helpful and valuable to evaluate the anatomical relationships exactly.

20851003
The optimized evaluation of diabetic foot infection by dual isotope SPECT/CT imaging protocol.
Sequential Tc-99m hydroxymethylene-diphosphonate (HDP) 3-phase bone (BS) and In-111 leukocyte scanning (WBCS) have been frequently used to evaluate the diabetic foot, as nonosteomyelitis BS uptake is repeatedly observed and osteomyelitis (OM) in WBCS is often uncertain without BS correlation. Additionally, both modalities are limited in lesion localization because of low resolution and lack of anatomic details. We investigated a method that combined BS/WBCS, and if needed, WBCS/bone marrow scanning (BMS) using SPECT/CT to accurately diagnose/localize infection in a practical protocol. Blood flow/pool images were obtained followed by WBC reinjection and next day dual isotope (DI) BS/WBCS planar and SPECT/CT. BMS/WBCS SPECT/CT (step 2 DI) was obtained on the following day when images were suspicious for mid/hindfoot OM. Diagnosis accuracy and confidence were judged for the various imaging combinations. Diagnosis was classified as OM, soft tissue infection (STI), both OM/STI, and other/no bony pathology by microbiology/pathology or follow-up. Distinction between various diagnostic categories and overall OM diagnostic accuracy in 213 patients were higher for DI than WBCS or BS alone, and for DI SPECT/CT than DI planar or SPECT only. Diagnostic confidence/lesion site was significantly higher for DI SPECT/CT than other comparative imaging methods. In a group of 97 patients with confirmed microbiologic/pathologic diagnosis, similar results were attained. Step 2 DI SPECT/CT performed in 67 patients further improved diagnostic accuracy/confidence. DI SPECT/CT is a highly accurate modality that considerably improves detection and discrimination of STI and OM while providing precise anatomic localization in the diabetic foot. This combined imaging technique promises to beneficially impact diabetic patient care.

20833855
FDG PET with contrast-enhanced CT: a critical imaging tool for laryngeal carcinoma.
Fluorine 18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) has evolved to be an essential imaging modality in the evaluation of laryngeal carcinoma. Although the modality has limited utility in assessing the extent of the primary tumor, FDG PET has proved to be superior to anatomic modalities in the detection of lymph node and distant metastases. The role of FDG PET in the evaluation of patients with laryngeal tumors that are clinically classified as N0 has not shown consistent usefulness because of the innate resolution limitations of the camera. In the posttherapy setting, however, FDG PET has consistently demonstrated a high negative predictive value in the identification of recurrent disease, both during the course of therapy and during long-term follow-up. In addition, contrast material-enhanced computed tomography (CT) in conjunction with FDG PET has demonstrated a complementary role by allowing for superior anatomic coregistration and therefore more definitive diagnosis. There is sufficient evidence that with further advances in PET technology, this modality will likely become more useful in the detection of small lesions and occult nodal disease, as well as in guiding the management of laryngeal carcinoma.

20833849
PET/CT evaluation of cervical cancer: spectrum of disease.
The prognosis of invasive cervical cancer is based on the stage, size, and histologic grade of the primary tumor and the status of the lymph nodes. Assessment of disease stage is essential in determining proper management in individual cases. In the posttherapy setting, the timely detection of recurrence is essential for guiding management and may lead to increased survival. However, the official clinical staging system of the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics has inherent flaws that may lead to inaccurate staging and improper management. Combined positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) represents a major technologic advance, consisting of two integrated complementary modalities whose combined strength tends to overcome their respective weaknesses. PET/CT has higher sensitivity and specificity than do conventional anatomic modalities and is valuable in determining the extent of disease and detecting recurrent or residual tumor. The combination of 2-[fluorine-18]fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose PET with intravenous contrast material-enhanced high-resolution CT has proved useful for avoiding the interpretative weaknesses associated with either modality alone and in increasing the accuracy of staging or restaging. Nonetheless, accurate PET/CT interpretation requires a knowledge of the characteristics of disease spread or recurrence and an awareness of various imaging pitfalls if false interpretations are to be avoided.

19544537
The diagnostic and prognostic utility of positron emission tomography/computed tomography-based follow-up after radiotherapy for head and neck cancer.
The detection of subclinical head and neck cancer recurrence or a second primary tumor may improve survival. In the current study, the authors investigated the clinical value of a follow-up program incorporating serial (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography integrated with computed tomography (PET/CT) in the detection of recurrent disease in patients with head and neck cancer. A total of 240 PET/CT scans were reviewed in 80 patients with head and neck cancer who were treated with radiotherapy (RT) from July, 2005 through August, 2007. All patients were followed with clinical examination, PET/CT, and correlative imaging for a minimum of 11 months (median follow-up, 21 months). The sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values of PET/CT-based follow-up for detecting locoregional recurrence were 92%, 82%, 42%, and 98%, respectively. Corresponding values for distant metastases or second primary tumors were 93%, 96%, 81%, and 98%, respectively. Eight patients (10%) developed disease recurrences or second primary tumors that were amenable to salvage surgery with negative surgical margins. The 2-year progression-free survival and 2-year overall survival rates were significantly different between patients who had a negative and those with a positive PET/CT result within 6 months of the completion of RT (93% vs 30% [P<.001] and 100% vs 32% [P<.001], respectively). Although post-therapy follow-up using PET/CT is reportedly associated with a high false-positive rate in the irradiated head and neck, PET/CT appears to be a highly sensitive technique for the detection of recurrent disease. Furthermore, negative PET/CT results within 6 months of the completion of RT offer significant prognostic value.

18258379
Correlation of positron emission tomography standard uptake value and pathologic specimen size in cancer of the head and neck.
To correlate positron emission tomography (PET) standard uptake value (SUV) with pathologic specimen size in patients with head-and-neck cancers. Eighteen patients with Stage II-IVB head-and-neck cancer with 27 tumors who underwent PET and computed tomography (CT) imaging of the head and neck followed by surgical resection were selected for this study. Various SUV thresholds were examined, including the software default (SUV(def)), narrowing the window by 1 standard deviation (SD) of the maximum (SUV-1SD), and SUV cutoff values of 2.5 or greater (SUV2.5) and 40% or greater maximum (SUV40). Volumetric pathologic data were available for 12 patients. Tumor volumes based on pathologic examination (gold standard), CT, SUV(def), SUV-1SD, SUV2.5, and SUV40 were analyzed. PET identified five tumors not seen on CT. The sensitivity of PET for identifying primary tumors was 94% (17 of 18). The Sensitivity of PET for staging the neck was 90% (9 of 10), whereas the specificity was 78% (7 of 9). The SUV2.5 method was most likely to overestimate tumor volume, whereas SUV(def) and SUV-1SD were most likely to underestimate tumor volume. The PET scan provides more accurate staging of primary tumors and nodal metastases for patients with advanced head-and-neck cancer than CT alone. Compared with the gold standard, significant variability exists in volumes obtained by using various SUV thresholds. A combination of clinical, CT, and PET data should continue to be used for optimal treatment planning. The SUV40 method appears to offer the best compromise between accuracy and reducing the risk of underestimating tumor extent.

18030049
FDG PET/CT imaging to rule out extrahepatic metastases before liver transplantation.
FDG PET/CT, an established imaging modality for staging and restaging workup of malignancies, also demonstrates increased uptake in infectious or inflammatory conditions, including both infectious and noninfectious granulomatous processes. A 65-year-old man with a history of hepatocellular carcinoma status post-wedge resection and chemoembolization of the primary tumor referred for evaluation of extrahepatic metastases for determining the surgical eligibility for a liver transplantation. The patient underwent FDG PET/CT imaging associated with a separately acquired contrast enhanced CT (CECT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. FDG PET/CT imaging revealed multiple FDG-avid pulmonary nodules that were subsequently confirmed to represent Mycobacterium avium intracellular infection on histology.

19342543
The significance and management of incidental [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose-positron-emission tomography uptake in the thyroid gland in patients with cancer.
Incidental positron-emission tomography (PET) uptake in the thyroid bed represents a diagnostic dilemma. Currently, there is no consensus regarding the significance of this finding or the most appropriate approach to management. The purpose of this study was to determine the significance of incidental fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the thyroid gland on [(18)F]FDG-positron-emission tomography (FDG-PET/CT) in patients being initially staged for lymphomas and/or cancers other than of thyroid origin. A retrospective review was conducted on patients who were incidentally found to have focal FDG uptake in the thyroid bed on initial staging for cancer. Patient records were assessed for age, sex, clinical presentation, standard uptake values (SUV(max)), on FDG-PET/CT, and CT findings in those patients undergoing FDG-PET/CT, fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology, and surgical pathologic examination. Thirty patients were identified with incidental FDG-PET uptake in the thyroid bed from 630 studies performed for evaluation of cancer between March 2004 and June 2006. Complete records were available for 18 patients (6 men, 12 women). Five (27.8%) of 18 patients with incidental focal FDG-PET/CT uptake in the thyroid gland demonstrated papillary thyroid carcinoma on final pathologic findings. The mean and SD of SUV(max) was 3.0 +/- 1.8 (range, 1.1-7.4) overall, 2.9 +/- 1.6 (range, 1.1-6.8) in the patients without malignant growth, and 3.4 +/- 2.6 (range, 1.1-7.4) in the 5 patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma. No statistical difference in SUV(max) was noted between patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma and patients with benign pathologic findings (P = .63). Incidental FDG-PET uptake in the thyroid gland in patients with cancer of nonthyroidal origin is associated with a 27.8% risk for well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma; however, there seems to be no correlation between intensity of FDG uptake and the risk for a malignant process.

18768722
High uptake in schneiderian papillomas of the maxillary sinus on positron-emission tomography using fluorodeoxyglucose.
Schneiderian papillomas are benign tumors of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses often asymptomatic in their early stages. We report a case of a maxillary sinus oncocytic schneiderian papilloma first detected by positron-emission tomography by using fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Schneiderian papillomas demonstrate increased FDG uptake, similar to that of other oncocytic tumors, making it important for otolaryngologists and radiologists to realize that high uptake of FDG does not necessarily indicate a malignant lesion.

