21455042
Hepatitis C treatment completion in individuals with psychiatric comorbidity and depression.
Hepatitis C virus is a common bloodborne pathogen. Patient, provider, and health care system factors combine to constrain access to treatment and have led to low rates of treatment initiation and continuation among medically eligible individuals. Behavioral health comorbidity, which is common in the patient population, has historically been an exclusion criterion and is one such barrier to care. We implemented an interdisciplinary nurse-managed primary care-based hepatitis C evaluation and treatment program to address behavioral health needs concurrently in an effort to increase treatment initiation and continuation rates among comorbid individuals. We found no association between having a psychiatric or substance use history and treatment discontinuation in our patient cohort. Likewise, there was no association in our cohort between becoming depressed or anxious while undergoing treatment and treatment discontinuation. The results of our study concur with others that have shown that addressing behavioral health comorbidities concurrently with hepatitis C evaluation and treatment may improve treatment continuation rates among comorbid patients, thereby helping to remove barriers to treatment of chronic hepatitis C.

20920644
Aspirin adherence, aspirin dosage, and C-reactive protein in the first 3 months after acute coronary syndrome.
Persistent elevation of inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein (CRP) has been associated with an increased risk of recurrent cardiac events after acute coronary syndromes (ACS). Conflicting evidence is available regarding whether aspirin can reduce CRP after ACS. We investigated whether the dosage and adherence to aspirin was associated with the CRP level 3 months after ACS. Adherence to aspirin was monitored for 3 months in a cohort of 105 patients enrolled within 1 week of an ACS using an electronic chip stored in the pill bottle cap. The CRP level was measured at baseline and 3 months. Logistic regression analysis was used to test whether poor adherence to aspirin and a lower aspirin dosage were associated with increased CRP levels, controlling for age, ACS type, disease co-morbidity, baseline CRP level, use of clopidogrel and statins, depressive symptoms, smoking, and adherence to other medications. Aspirin adherence was inversely correlated with the CRP level at 3 months (Spearman's r = -0.36, p < 0.001). In the adjusted model, every 10% decrease in aspirin adherence was associated with a 1.7 increased risk (95% confidence interval 1.2 to 2.4) of a CRP level of ? 3.0 mg/L at 3 months. Low-dose aspirin was associated with a 7.1 increased risk (95% confidence interval 1.5 to 33.3) of a CRP level of ? 3.0 mg/L. The Charlson co-morbidity index, depressive symptoms, and baseline CRP level were also predictive of a CRP level of ? 3.0 mg/L at 3 months. The association between aspirin adherence and CRP level was not attenuated by controlling for other risk-reducing behaviors. In conclusion, a strong association was found between aspirin adherence and the CRP level after an ACS.

19592517
Is depression after an acute coronary syndrome simply a marker of known prognostic factors for mortality?
Controversy remains over whether the association between depression and mortality in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is confounded by incomplete adjustment for measures of known prognostic markers. We assessed a) whether depression was associated with the most comprehensive empirically derived index of clinical mortality predictors: the Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE) risk score for predicting 6-month mortality after discharge for ACS; and b) whether depression remained an independent predictor of all-cause mortality after adjustment for the GRACE score and left ventricular dysfunction. We surveyed prospectively 457 patients with ACS (aged 25-92 years; 41% women, 13% black, and 11% Hispanic), hospitalized between May 2003 and June 2005. Depressive symptoms were assessed with the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) and diagnosis of major depressive disorder (MDD) was made by a structured psychiatric interview, within 1 week of hospitalization. Despite differences in individual components of the GRACE score between depressed and nondepressed participants, neither depression measure was associated with overall GRACE score. For participants with MDD, the mean +/- standard deviation GRACE score was 84 +/- 33, compared with 92 +/- 31 for those without MDD (p = .09). Using Cox proportional hazards regression analysis, MDD and depressive symptom severity each predicted mortality after controlling for GRACE score and left ventricular dysfunction (adjusted hazard ratio for MDD = 2.51; 95% Confidence Interval = 1.45-4.37). Depression is not simply a marker of clinical indicators that predict all-cause mortality after ACS. This strengthens the assertion that there is something unique in the association between depression and post-ACS prognosis, independent of known prognostic markers.

20950406
HIV and HCV health beliefs in an inner-city community.
Summary.? Chronic infection with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) is more prevalent than human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, but more public health resources are allocated to HIV than to HCV. Given shared risk factors and epidemiology, we compared accuracy of health beliefs about HIV and HCV in an at-risk community. Between 2002 and 2003, we surveyed a random patient sample at a primary care clinic in New York. The survey was organized as domains of Common Sense Model of Self-Regulation: causes ('sharing needles'), timeline/consequences ('remains in body for life', 'causes cancer') and controllability ('I can avoid this illness', 'medications may cure this illness'). We compared differences in accuracy of beliefs about HIV and HCV and used multivariable linear regression to identify factors associated with relative accuracy of beliefs. One hundred and twenty-two subjects completed the survey (response rate 42%). Mean overall health belief accuracy was 12/15 questions (80%) for HIV vs 9/15 (60%) for HCV (P?<?0.001). Belief accuracy was significantly different across all domains. Within the causes domain, 60% accurately believed sharing needles a risk factor for HCV compared to 92% for HIV (P?<?0.001). Within the timeline/consequences domain, 42% accurately believed HCV results in lifelong infection compared to 89% for HIV (P?<?0.001). Within the controllability domain, 25% accurately believed that there is a potential cure for HCV. Multivariable linear regression revealed female gender as significantly associated with greater health belief accuracy for HIV. Thus, study participants had significantly less accurate health beliefs about HCV than about HIV. Targeting inaccuracies might improve public health interventions to foster healthier behaviours and better hepatitis C outcomes.

