19825906
Serotonin function in pathological gambling: blunted growth hormone response to sumatriptan.
Pathological gambling is a disruptive behaviour and an important public health concern that is classified as an impulse control disorder, and is also conceptualized as a prototype of 'behavioural addiction'. Its phenomenology cannot be reduced to a single neurobiological dysfunction; instead, it has been conceived as a complex chain of events in which the serotonergic system (5-HT) has often been suggested as one of the most prominent involved. Acute administration of Sumatriptan, a selective 5-HT(1B/1D) agonist, has been used to investigate the functional responsivity of 5-HT(1B/1D) receptors in alcoholics, resulting in a blunted growth hormone response. These findings have been interpreted as being due to the down-regulation of these receptors. However, previous studies could not rule out the possibility that the changes in receptor function were induced by chronic substance exposure. Twenty-two pathological gamblers and 19 healthy control subjects were evaluated in response to double-blind administration of both a single dose of oral Sumatriptan (100 mg) and of placebo in a crossover design. All participants were screened to ensure that they were negative for lifetime alcohol and drug addiction, and had been free of substance abuse for at least 6 months. Outcome measures included growth hormone, prolactin, gambling severity, mood, craving and 'high' change scales. A blunted growth hormone response was observed in pathological gamblers compared with healthy controls after Sumatriptan administration. No statistically significant differences were found for prolactin or behavioural measures, except for an increase in anxiety over time in pathological gamblers. These results, together with those obtained in our previous serotoninergic challenge study, document the presence of a serotonergic dysfunction in pathological gamblers similar to that reported in alcoholics.

18312057
Escitalopram in the treatment of impulsive-compulsive internet usage disorder: an open-label trial followed by a double-blind discontinuation phase.
Isolated reports suggest that escitalopram may be effective for impulsive-compulsive Internet usage disorder (IC-IUD), an impulse-control disorder characterized by excessive time spent on the Internet at the expense of occupational, relationship, and social activities. To assess the safety and efficacy of escitalopram in IC-IUD, we conducted a 10-week, open-label trial followed by a 9-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled discontinuation phase. From December 2002 to October 2004, 19 adult subjects with IC-IUD (defined as time consuming, uncontrollable, distressing, and resulting in social, occupational, or financial difficulties) were enrolled. Escitalopram was started at 10 mg/day, then increased and maintained at 20 mg/day for 10 weeks at the end of which completers were randomly assigned to placebo or escitalopram for 9 additional weeks. Two key outcome measures were used: hours spent weekly in nonessential Internet use and overall clinical response (subjects rated "much improved" or "very much improved" on the Clinical Global Impressions-Improvement scale [CGI-I]). Fourteen subjects completed the entire study. At the end of the 10th week of open-label esci-talopram, Internet usage decreased significantly from a mean of 36.8 hours/week at baseline to 16.5 hours/week (paired t test: t = 3.58; p = .002). In addition, 64.7% of the sample (N = 11) were considered CGI-I responders. At the end of the double-blind phase, there were no significant differences in outcome measures between patients taking placebo compared to escitalopram (analysis of variance with repeated measures, p > .05). Patients showed a significant improvement of IC-IUD symptoms during the open-label escitalopram phase. There was no significant difference between the escitalopram and placebo groups at the end of the subsequent double-blind phase; both groups maintained the gains made in the initial open-label treatment. Larger controlled trials are needed to investigate the efficacy of this and other pharmacologic agents in the treatment of IC-IUD. clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00565422.

18227745
An open-label trial of venlafaxine in body dysmorphic disorder.
Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), a preoccupation with imagined ugliness, is a disabling condition that seems to respond preferentially to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. This open-label trial examines venlafaxine's efficacy in BDD and is the first known study of this serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor in BDD. A total of 17 BDD patients 16-65 years of age entered and 11 completed a 12-16 week open-label trial of venlafaxine. Participants were treated with venlafaxine until a therapeutic dose (minimum of 150 mg/day) was reached and then maintained at that dose for 8 weeks. Key outcome measures were the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale Modified for Body Dysmorphic Disorder and Clinical Global Impressions-Improvement scale. Venlafaxine was found to be effective in lessening the specific symptoms and global severity of BDD. Paired t-tests were used to compare baseline and final ratings on the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale Modified for Body Dysmorphic Disorder total, obsessions, and compulsions scores; by this measure venlafaxine significantly reduced BDD symptoms overall (P=.012), as well as obsessions (P=.034) and compulsions specifically (P=.021). A single sample t-test, comparing final Clinical Global Impressions-Improvement scale ratings to "no change" (score: 4) found significant improvement following treatment. Venlafaxine may be an effective treatment for BDD, including both obsessive and compulsive symptoms. Controlled research on venlafaxine in BDD is recommended.

19028836
Noradrenergic function in pathological gambling: blunted growth hormone response to clonidine.
The noradrenergic system has been linked to impulsive behaviour in animals and humans, yet little data on noradrenergic system exist in specific impulse control disorders. To explore the role of the noradrenergic system in pathological gamblers (PG), we assessed neuroendocrine growth hormone (GH) response to the alpha2-adrenergic receptor agonist clonidine and placebo in PG and controls. The net effects of clonidine are a decrease in neurotransmission by depressing locus coeruleus activity and stimulation of GH secretion through activation of post-synaptic alpha2-adrenergic receptors in the hypothalamus. Twenty-nine PG subjects, free of other comorbid conditions, and 27 healthy controls received a double-blinded, placebo-controlled, single dose of oral clonidine (0.15 mg/kg). Data observed included GH, clonidine levels and levels of the main noradrenergic metabolite, 3-methoxy-4-hydroxy-phenylglycol (MHPG). The area under the curve for GH response to clonidine was significantly lower (separate variance t with 44.3 df = 2.626, P = 0.012, d = 0.58) in the PG group (199.6) than in the control group (426.3). PG had significantly blunted GH responses compared with controls at 120 and 150 min post-clonidine. These results are consistent with the idea that the subsensitivity of post-synaptic alpha-2 receptors is possibly attributable to higher-than-normal noradrenergic secretion in PG. This peripheral noradrenergic dysfunction could be consistent with attenuated cortico-frontal noradrenergic function as shown in positron emission tomography (PET) studies of PG.

