19656909
Mechanoregulation of BK channel activity in the mammalian cortical collecting duct: role of protein kinases A and C.
Flow-stimulated net K secretion (J(K)) in the cortical collecting duct (CCD) is mediated by an iberiotoxin (IBX)-sensitive BK channel, and requires an increase in intracellular Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+](i)). The alpha-subunit of the reconstituted BK channel is phosphorylated by PKA and PKC. To test whether the BK channel in the native CCD is regulated by these kinases, J(K) and net Na absorption (J(Na)) were measured at slow (approximately 1) and fast (approximately 5 nl x min(-1) x mm(-1)) flow rates in rabbit CCDs microperfused in the presence of mPKI, an inhibitor of PKA; calphostin C, which inhibits diacylglycerol binding proteins, including PKC; or bisindolylmaleimide (BIM) and Gö6976, inhibitors of classic and novel PKC isoforms, added to luminal (L) and/or basolateral (B) solutions. L but not B mPKI increased J(K) in CCDs perfused at a slow flow rate; a subsequent increase in flow rate augmented J(K) modestly. B mPKI alone or with L inhibitor abolished flow stimulation of J(K). Similarly, L calphostin C increased J(K) in CCDs perfused at slow flow rates, as did calphostin C in both L and B solutions. The observation that IBX inhibited the L mPKI- and calphostin C-mediated increases in J(K) at slow flow rates implicated the BK channel in this K flux, a notion suggested by patch-clamp analysis of principal cells. The kinase inhibited by calphostin C was not PKC as L and/or B BIM and Gö6976 failed to enhance J(K) at the slow flow rate. However, addition of these PKC inhibitors to the B solution alone or with L inhibitor blocked flow stimulation of J(K). Interpretation of these results in light of the effects of these inhibitors on the flow-induced elevation of [Ca2+](i) suggests that the principal cell apical BK channel is tonically inhibited by PKA and that flow stimulation of J(K) in the CCD is PKA and PKC dependent. The specific targets of the kinases remain to be identified.

19234454
Electrochemical cues regulate assembly of the Frizzled/Dishevelled complex at the plasma membrane during planar epithelial polarization.
Dishevelled (Dsh) is a cytoplasmic multidomain protein that is required for all known branches of the Wnt signalling pathway. The Frizzled/planar cell polarity (Fz/PCP) signalling branch requires an asymmetric cortical localization of Dsh, but this process remains poorly understood. Using a genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screen in Drosophila melanogaster cells, we show that Dsh membrane localization is dependent on the Na(+)/H(+) exchange activity of the plasma membrane exchanger Nhe2. Manipulating Nhe2 expression levels in the eye causes PCP defects, and Nhe2 interacts genetically with Fz. Our data show that the binding and surface recruitment of Dsh by Fz is pH- and charge-dependent. We identify a polybasic stretch within the Dsh DEP domain that binds to negatively charged phospholipids and appears to be mechanistically important. Dsh recruitment by Fz can be abolished by converting these basic amino-acid residues into acidic ones, as in the mutant, DshKR/E. In vivo, the DshKR/E(2x) mutant with two substituted residues fails to associate with the membrane during active PCP signalling but rescues canonical Wnt signalling defects in a dsh-background. These results suggest that direct interaction between Fz and Dsh is stabilized by a pH and charge-dependent interaction of the DEP domain with phospholipids. This stabilization is particularly important for the PCP signalling branch and, thus, promotes specific pathway selection in Wnt signalling.

18579708
Effect of aldosterone on BK channel expression in mammalian cortical collecting duct.
Apical large-conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) (BK) channels in the cortical collecting duct (CCD) mediate flow-stimulated K(+) secretion. Dietary K(+) loading for 10-14 days leads to an increase in BK channel mRNA abundance, enhanced flow-stimulated K(+) secretion in microperfused CCDs, and a redistribution of immunodetectable channels from an intracellular pool to the apical membrane (Najjar F, Zhou H, Morimoto T, Bruns JB, Li HS, Liu W, Kleyman TR, Satlin LM. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 289: F922-F932, 2005). To test whether this adaptation was mediated by a K(+)-induced increase in aldosterone, New Zealand White rabbits were fed a low-Na(+) (LS) or high-Na(+) (HS) diet for 7-10 days to alter circulating levels of aldosterone but not serum K(+) concentration. Single CCDs were isolated for quantitation of BK channel subunit (total, alpha-splice variants, beta-isoforms) mRNA abundance by real-time PCR and measurement of net transepithelial Na(+) (J(Na)) and K(+) (J(K)) transport by microperfusion; kidneys were processed for immunolocalization of BK alpha-subunit by immunofluorescence microscopy. At the time of death, LS rabbits excreted no urinary Na(+) and had higher circulating levels of aldosterone than HS animals. The relative abundance of BK alpha-, beta(2)-, and beta(4)-subunit mRNA and localization of immunodetectable alpha-subunit were similar in CCDs from LS and HS animals. In response to an increase in tubular flow rate from approximately 1 to 5 nl.min(-1).mm(-1), the increase in J(Na) was greater in LS vs. HS rabbits, yet the flow-stimulated increase in J(K) was similar in both groups. These data suggest that aldosterone does not contribute to the regulation of BK channel expression/activity in response to dietary K(+) loading.

18516626
Pathways of apoptosis in human autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant polycystic kidney diseases.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a major cause of end-stage renal disease in adults. Autosomal recessive (AR) PKD affects approximately 1:20,000 live-born children with high perinatal mortality. Both diseases have abnormalities in epithelial proliferation, secretion, and cell-matrix interactions, leading to progressive cystic expansion and associated interstitial fibrosis. Cell number in a kidney reflects the balance between proliferation and apoptosis. Apoptosis results from extrinsic (ligand-induced, expression of caspase-8) and intrinsic (mitochondrial damage, expression of caspase-9) triggers. Previous studies have suggested a role for apoptosis in PKD cyst formation and parenchymal destruction. Mechanisms underlying apoptosis in human ADPKD and ARPKD were examined by quantitative immunohistochemistry and Western immunoblot analyses of age-matched normal and PKD tissues. Caspase-8 expression was significantly greater in small cysts and normal-appearing tubules than in larger cysts in ADPKD kidneys. Caspase-8 also appeared early in the disease process of ADPKD. In ARPKD, expression of caspase-8 was most pronounced in later stages of the disease and was not confined to a specific cyst size. In conclusion, apoptosis in human ADPKD is an early event, occurring predominantly in normal-appearing tubules and small cysts, and is triggered by an extrinsic factor, but it occurs later in ARPKD.

18256315
Mechanoregulation of intracellular Ca2+ in human autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease cyst-lining renal epithelial cells.
Mutations of cilia-expressed proteins are associated with an attenuated shear-induced increase in intracellular Ca(2+) concentration ([Ca(2+)](i)) in renal epithelial cell lines derived from murine models of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). We hypothesized that human ARPKD cyst-lining renal epithelial cells also exhibited dysregulated mechanosensation. To test this, conditionally immortalized cell lines derived from human fetal ARPKD cyst-lining (pool and clone 5E) cell lines with low levels of fibrocystin/polyductin expression and age-matched normal collecting tubule [human fetal collecting tubule (HFCT) pool and clone 2C] cell lines were grown in culture, loaded with a Ca(2+) indicator dye, and subjected to laminar shear. Clonal cell lines were derived from single cells present in pools of cells from cyst-lining and collecting tubules, microdissected from human kidney. Resting and peak [Ca(2+)](i) were similar between ARPKD 5E and pool, and HFCT 2C and pool; however, the flow-induced peak [Ca(2+)](i) was greater in ARPKD 5E (700 +/- 87 nM, n = 21) than in HFCT 2C (315 +/- 58 nM, n = 12; P < 0.01) cells. ARPKD 5E cells treated with Gd(3+), an inhibitor of nonselective cation channels, inhibited but did not abolish the shear-induced [Ca(2+)](i) transient. Cilia were approximately 20% shorter in ARPKD than HFCT cells, but no difference in ciliary localization or total cellular expression of polycystin-2, a mechanosenory Gd(3+)-sensitive cation channel, was detected between ARPKD and HFCT cells. The intracellular Ca(2+) stores were similar between cells. In summary, human ARPKD cells exhibit an exaggerated Gd(3+)-sensitive mechano-induced Ca(2+) response compared with controls; whether this represents dysregulated polycystin-2 activity in ARPKD cells remains to be explored.

17553929
Multiple receptor interactions trigger release of membrane and intracellular calcium stores critical for herpes simplex virus entry.
Herpes simplex viruses (HSV) harness cellular calcium signaling pathways to facilitate viral entry. Confocal microscopy and small interfering RNA (siRNA) were used to identify the source of the calcium and to dissect the requisite viral-cell interactions. Binding of HSV to human epithelial cells induced no calcium response, but shifting the cells to temperatures permissive for penetration triggered increases in plasma membrane calcium followed by a global release of intracellular calcium. Transfection with siRNA targeting the proteoglycan syndecan-2 blocked viral binding and abrogated any calcium response. Transfection with siRNA targeting nectin-1, a glycoprotein D receptor, also prevented both membrane and intracellular calcium responses. In contrast, the membrane response was preserved after transfection with siRNA targeting integrinalphav, a novel glycoprotein H receptor. The membrane response, however, was not sufficient for viral entry, which required interactions with integrinalphav and release of inositol-triphosphate receptor-dependent intracellular calcium stores. Thus, calcium plays a critical, complex role in HSV entry.

17389680
Ca2+ dependence of flow-stimulated K secretion in the mammalian cortical collecting duct.
Apical low-conductance SK and high-conductance Ca(2+)-activated BK channels are present in distal nephron, including the cortical collecting duct (CCD). Flow-stimulated net K secretion (J(K)) in the CCD is 1) blocked by iberiotoxin, an inhibitor of BK but not SK channels, and 2) associated with an increase in [Ca(2+)](i), leading us to conclude that BK channels mediate flow-stimulated J(K). To examine the Ca(2+) dependence and sources of Ca(2+) contributing to flow-stimulated J(K), J(K) and net Na absorption (J(Na)) were measured at slow (approximately 1) and fast (approximately 5 nl.min(-1).mm(-1)) flow rates in rabbit CCDs microperfused in the absence of luminal Ca(2+) or after pretreatment with BAPTA-AM to chelate intracellular Ca(2+), 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2-APB), to inhibit the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP(3)) receptor or thapsigargin to deplete internal stores. These treatments, which do not affect flow-stimulated J(Na) (Morimoto et al. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 291: F663-F669, 2006), inhibited flow-stimulated J(K). Increases in [Ca(2+)](i) stimulate exocytosis. To test whether flow induces exocytic insertion of preformed BK channels into the apical membrane, CCDs were pretreated with 10 microM colchicine (COL) to disrupt microtubule function or 5 microg/ml brefeldin-A (BFA) to inhibit delivery of channels from the intracellular pool to the plasma membrane. Both agents inhibited flow-stimulated J(K) but not J(Na) (Morimoto et al. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 291: F663-F669, 2006), although COL but not BFA also blocked the flow-induced [Ca(2+)](i) transient. We thus speculate that BK channel-mediated, flow-stimulated J(K) requires an increase in [Ca(2+)](i) due, in part, to luminal Ca(2+) entry and ER Ca(2+) release, microtubule integrity, and exocytic insertion of preformed channels into the apical membrane.

17333000
Potassium transport in the maturing kidney.
The distal nephron and colon are the primary sites of regulation of potassium (K(+)) homeostasis, responsible for maintaining a zero balance in adults and net positive balance in growing infants and children. Distal nephron segments can either secrete or reabsorb K(+) depending on the metabolic needs of the organism. In the healthy adult kidney, K(+) secretion predominates over K(+) absorption. Baseline K(+) secretion occurs via the apical low-conductance secretory K(+) (SK) channel, whereas the maxi-K channel mediates flow-stimulated net urinary K(+) secretion. The K(+) retention characteristic of the neonatal kidney appears to be due not only to the absence of apical secretory K(+) channels in the distal nephron but also to a predominance of apical H-K-adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase), which presumably mediates K(+) absorption. Both luminal and peritubular factors regulate the balance between K(+) secretion and absorption. Perturbation in any of these factors can lead to K(+) imbalance. In turn, these factors may serve as effective targets for the treatment of both hyper-and hypokalemia. The purpose of this review is to present an overview of recent advances in our understanding of mechanisms of K(+) transport in the maturing kidney.

17194699
Angiotensin II inhibits the ROMK-like small conductance K channel in renal cortical collecting duct during dietary potassium restriction.
Base-line urinary potassium secretion in the distal nephron is mediated by small conductance rat outer medullary K (ROMK)-like channels. We used the patch clamp technique applied to split-open cortical collecting ducts (CCDs) isolated from rats fed a normal potassium (NK) or low potassium (LK) diet to test the hypothesis that AngII directly inhibits ROMK channel activity. We found that AngII inhibited ROMK channel activity in LK but not NK rats in a dose-dependent manner. The AngII-induced reduction in channel activity was mediated by AT1 receptor (AT1R) binding, because pretreatment of CCDs with losartan but not PD123319 AT1 and AT2 receptor antagonists, respectively, blocked the response. Pretreatment of CCDs with U73122 and calphostin C, inhibitors of phospholipase C (PLC) and protein kinase C (PKC), respectively, abolished the AngII-induced decrease in ROMK channel activity, confirming a role of the PLC-PKC pathway in this response. Studies by others suggest that AngII stimulates an Src family protein-tyrosine kinase (PTK) via PKC-NADPH oxidase. PTK has been shown to regulate the ROMK channel. Inhibition of NADPH oxidase with diphenyliodonium abolished the inhibitory effect of AngII or the PKC activator phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate on ROMK channels. Suppression of PTK by herbimycin A significantly attenuated the inhibitory effect of AngII on ROMK channel activity. We conclude that AngII inhibits ROMK channel activity through PKC-, NADPH oxidase-, and PTK-dependent pathways under conditions of dietary potassium restriction.

