17703413
alpha-Defensin inhibits influenza virus replication by cell-mediated mechanism(s).
The innate immune system mounts the first host response to pathogens. Because alpha-defensins, which are cationic antimicrobial peptides of polymorphonuclear neutrophils and other leukocytes, are important effectors of the innate immune system, we studied the antiviral activity of human alpha-defensin-1 (also known as "human neutrophil peptide-1" [HNP-1]) against influenza virus in vitro. Treatment of cell cultures with HNP-1 soon after infection resulted in marked inhibition of influenza virus replication and viral protein synthesis. This effect was not due to cytotoxicity or to a direct effect on the virus. Treatment of cells with HNP-1 followed by its removal before infection also inhibited viral replication, suggesting that the inhibition was due to the modulation of cellular pathways. HNP-1 treatment inhibited protein kinase C (PKC) activation in infected cells, suggesting the involvement of the PKC pathway. Our data expand the previously known activity of alpha -defensins against influenza virus. Characterizing the mechanism of action of alpha -defensins may lead to the identification of new strategies for prevention and therapy.

18846115
Enhanced oncolytic potency of vesicular stomatitis virus through vector-mediated inhibition of NK and NKT cells.
Recombinant oncolytic viruses represent a promising alternative option for the treatment of malignant cancers. We have reported earlier the safety and efficacy of recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) vectors in a rat model of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the full potential of VSV therapy is limited by a sudden decline in intratumoral virus replication observed early after viral administration, a phenomenon that coincides with an accumulation of inflammatory cells within infected lesions. To overcome the antiviral function of these cells, we present a recombinant virus, rVSV-UL141, which expresses a protein from human cytomegalovirus known to downregulate the natural killer (NK) cell-activating ligand CD155. The modified vector resulted in an inhibition of NK cell recruitment in vitro, as well as decreased intratumoral accumulations of NK and NKT cells in vivo. Administration of rVSV-UL141 through hepatic artery infusion in immune-competent Buffalo rats harboring orthotopic, multi-focal HCC lesions resulted in a one-log elevation of intratumoral virus replication over a control rVSV vector, which translated to enhance tumor necrosis and substantial prolongation of survival. Moreover, these results were achieved in the absence of apparent toxicities. The present study suggests the applicability of this strategy for the development of effective and safe oncolytic agents to treat multi-focal HCC, and potentially a multitude of other cancers, in the future.

