21598272
New academic partnerships in global health: innovations at mount sinai school of medicine.
Global health has become an increasingly important focus of education, research, and clinical service in North American universities and academic health centers. Today there are at least 49 academically based global health programs in the United States and Canada, as compared with only one in 1999. A new academic society, the Consortium of Universities for Global Health, was established in 2008 and has grown significantly. This sharp expansion reflects convergence of 3 factors: (1) rapidly growing student and faculty interest in global health; (2) growing realization-powerfully catalyzed by the acquired immune deficiency syndrome epidemic, the emergence of other new infections, climate change, and globalization-that health problems are interconnected, cross national borders, and are global in nature; and (3) rapid expansion in resources for global health. This article examines the evolution of the concept of global health and describes the driving forces that have accelerated interest in the field. It traces the development of global health programs in academic health centers in the United States. It presents a blueprint for a new school-wide global health program at Mount Sinai School of Medicine. The mission of that program, Mount Sinai Global Health, is to enhance global health as an academic field of study within the Mount Sinai community and to improve the health of people around the world. Mount Sinai Global Health is uniting and building synergies among strong, existing global health programs within Mount Sinai; it is training the next generation of physicians and health scientists to be leaders in global health; it is making novel discoveries that translate into blueprints for improving health worldwide; and it builds on Mount Sinai's long and proud tradition of providing medical and surgical care in places where need is great and resources few. Mt Sinai J Med 78:471-483, 2011. © 2011 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

20005491
Antiretroviral medications: adverse effects on the kidney.
The widespread introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in the mid-1990s dramatically altered the course of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, with improvements in survival and reductions in the incidence of AIDS-defining illnesses. Although antiretroviral therapy has been shown to reduce the incidence of both AIDS-defining and non-AIDS conditions, long-term exposure to HAART may also be associated with significant toxicity. This article reviews the potential nephrotoxicity of specific antiretroviral agents and the impact of antiretroviral therapy on related metabolic disorders. The antiretroviral agents most strongly associated with direct nephrotoxicity include the nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor, tenofovir, and the protease inhibitor indinavir, although other agents have been implicated less frequently. Tenofovir and related nucleotide analogs have primarily been associated with proximal tubular dysfunction and acute kidney injury, whereas indinavir is known to cause nephrolithiasis, obstructive nephropathy, and interstitial nephritis. Kidney damage related to antiretroviral therapy is typically reversible with early recognition and timely discontinuation of the offending agent, and nephrologists should be familiar with the potential toxicity of these agents to avoid delays in diagnosis.

19716765
Severe pandemic (H1N1) 2009 influenza with false negative direct fluorescent antibody assay: case series.
Between May and June of 2009 we observed 4 patients that presented with severe influenza-like symptoms and respiratory failure. All cases tested negative for influenza A and B by direct fluorescent antibody assay. Further investigation revealed all cases to be positive for pandemic (H1N1) 2009 influenza virus by real-time RT-PCR. This article includes a description of these cases and the characteristics associated with them.

