21311222
Kelch repeat proteins control yeast PKA activity in response to nutrient availability.
Regulation of protein kinase A (PKA) by binding of cAMP to the regulatory subunit and the resulting release of the active catalytic subunit is a very well established mechanism of kinase activation. We have shown recently that PKA in budding yeast is also subject to an additional level of regulation that that modulates its activity in response to nutrient availability. Nutrient regulation of PKA activity requires a pair of proteins, Gpb1 and Gpb2, that contain several kelch repeats, a sequence motif that predicts that they fold into a ?-propeller structure. The regulatory process mediated by Gpb1 and Gpb2 causes an increase in the stability and phosphorylation of the PKA regulatory subunit Bcy1 in response to low extracellular glucose concentrations. Phosphorylation of serine-145 of Bcy1 controls its stability, and other phosphorylation events at the cluster of serines at positions 74-84 correlate with changes in nutrient availability. Here we present data consistent with a model in which the effects of Gpb1 and Gpb2 on Bcy1 are an indirect consequence of their primary effects on the PKA catalytic subunits.

20826609
Nutrient control of yeast PKA activity involves opposing effects on phosphorylation of the Bcy1 regulatory subunit.
GPB1 and GPB2 encode kelch repeat-containing proteins that regulate protein kinase A (PKA) in yeast by a cAMP-independent process. Here we show that Gpb1 and Gpb2 stimulate phosphorylation of PKA regulatory subunit Bcy1 in low glucose concentrations, thereby promoting the inhibitory function of Bcy1 when nutrients are scarce and PKA activity is expected to be low. Gpb1 and Gpb2 stimulate Bcy1 phosphorylation at an unknown site, and this modification stabilizes Bcy1 that has been phosphorylated by PKA catalytic subunits at serine-145. The BCY1(S145A) mutation eliminates the effect of gpb1? gpb2? on Bcy1 stability but maintains their effect on phosphorylation and signaling, indicating that modulation of PKA activity by Gpb1 and Gpb2 is not solely due to increased levels of Bcy1. Inhibition of PKA catalytic subunits that are ATP analog-sensitive causes increased Bcy1 phosphorylation at the unknown site in high glucose. When PKA is inhibited, gpb1? gpb2? mutations have no effect on Bcy1 phosphorylation. Therefore, Gpb1 and Gpb2 oppose PKA activity by blocking the ability of PKA to inhibit Bcy1 phosphorylation at a site other than serine-145. Stimulation of Bcy1 phosphorylation by Gpb1 and Gpb2 produces a form of Bcy1 that is more stable and is a more effective PKA inhibitor.

17584745
Kelch repeat protein interacts with the yeast Galpha subunit Gpa2p at a site that couples receptor binding to guanine nucleotide exchange.
The kelch repeat-containing proteins Krh1p and Krh2p are negative regulators of the Gpa2p signaling pathway that directly interact with the G protein alpha-subunit Gpa2p in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. A screen was carried out to identify Gpa2p variants that are defective in their ability to bind Krh1p but retain the ability to bind another Gpa2p-interacting protein, Ime2p. This screen identified amino acids Gln-419 and Asn-425 as being important for the interaction between Gpa2p and Krh1p. Gpa2p variants with changes at these positions are defective for Krh1p binding in vivo. Cells containing these forms of Gpa2p display decreased heat shock resistance and increased expression of a gene required for pseudohyphal growth. These findings indicate that the substitutions at positions 419 and 425 confer a degree of constitutive activity to the Gpa2p alpha-subunit. Residues Gln-419 and Asn-425 are located in the beta6-alpha5 loop and alpha5 helix of Gpa2p, which is the region that couples receptor binding to guanine nucleotide exchange. The results suggest that binding of Gpa2p to Krh1p does not resemble the binding of Galpha subunits to either Gbeta subunits or effectors, but it instead represents a novel type of functional interaction.

