21181517
Introduction to the special edition of keynote addresses and master lectures presented at the 2010 annual meeting of the society of behavioral medicine.


20538186
Presurgery psychological factors predict pain, nausea, and fatigue one week after breast cancer surgery.
Before scheduled surgery, breast cancer surgical patients frequently experience high levels of distress and expect a variety of postsurgery symptoms. Previous literature has supported the view that presurgery distress and response expectancies are predictive of postsurgery outcomes. However, the contributions of distress and response expectancies to postsurgical side effect outcomes have rarely been examined together within the same study. Furthermore, studies on the effects of response expectancies in the surgical setting have typically focused on the immediate postsurgical setting rather than the longer-term setting. The purpose of the present study was to test the contribution of presurgery distress and response expectancies to common postsurgery side effects (pain, nausea, and fatigue). Female patients (n=101) undergoing breast cancer surgery were recruited to a prospective study. Results indicated that presurgery distress uniquely contributed to patients' postsurgery pain severity (P<0.05) and fatigue (P<0.003) one week after surgery. Response expectancies uniquely contributed to pain severity (P<0.001), nausea (P<0.012), and fatigue (P<0.010) one week after surgery. Sobel tests indicated that response expectancies partially mediated the effects of distress on pain severity (P<0.03) and fatigue (P<0.03). Response expectancies also mediated the effects of age on pain severity, nausea, and fatigue. Results highlight the contribution of presurgery psychological factors to postsurgery side effects, the importance of including both emotional and cognitive factors within studies as predictors of postsurgery side effects, and suggest presurgical clinical targets for improving patients' postoperative experiences of side effects.

17882657
Regret of treatment decision and its association with disease-specific quality of life following prostate cancer treatment.
We examined decisional regret among prostate cancer patients and its association with disease-specific quality of life. Patients (N = 793) completed questionnaires at diagnosis, at 6 months, and 12 months thereafter. Although levels of decisional regret were low, regret increased significantly between 6 and 12 months after diagnosis. The increase was substantial for patients treated with prostatectomy compared to patients treated with external beam radiation or brachytherapy. Cross-sectional, significant, and positive associations among regret, activity limitation attributed to urinary dysfunction, and bother with sexual and urinary dysfunction emerged. Longitudinally, the change in the level of regret was significantly associated with treatment modality and with the change in bother with sexual dysfunction over the first 6 months after diagnosis. Extensive discussions about disease-specific quality of life should be included when physicians counsel patients about treatment options.

