17694552
Assessing symptom burden using the M. D. Anderson symptom inventory in patients with chemotherapy-induced anemia: results of a multicenter, open-label study (SURPASS) of patients treated with darbepoetin-alpha at a dose of 200 microg every 2 weeks.
Patients with cancer who are receiving chemotherapy often experience chemotherapy-induced anemia (CIA), which is associated with symptoms that reduce quality of life. The M. D. Anderson Symptom Inventory (MDASI) is a brief, self-rating assessment scale that measures the severity of core symptoms and symptom interference with function. The current study used the MDASI to prospectively assess the correlation between hemoglobin and self-perceived cancer-related symptoms in a large patient population with CIA who were receiving darbepoetin-alpha at a dose of 200 mug every 2 weeks. Eligible patients enrolled in this multicenter, open-label study were age > or =18 years, had a nonmyeloid malignancy, were receiving multicycle chemotherapy, and were anemic (hemoglobin < or = 11 g/dL). Hemoglobin was measured every 2 weeks; the MDASI was administered weekly. For hemoglobin-based endpoints, patients were stratified by baseline hemoglobin (< 10 g/dL or > or =10 g/dL). Of 2422 enrolled patients, 2401 received > or =1 dose of darbepoetin-alpha. Eighty percent of patients (95% confidence limit, 78-82 patients) achieved target hemoglobin levels (> or =11 g/dL) during the study. Patients with a baseline hemoglobin < 10 g/dL had a greater increase in hemoglobin, took longer to achieve the target hemoglobin, and received more red blood cell transfusions than patients with a baseline hemoglobin > or =10 g/dL. The percentage of patients with moderate to severe MDASI scores (> or =5 points) for fatigue, distress, loss of appetite, disturbed sleep, and interference with function was reduced during the study. Improvement in symptom burden was associated with an increase in hemoglobin concentration. Treatment with darbepoetin-alpha at a dose of 200 mug every 2 weeks is associated with improvement in symptom burden as measured by the MDASI, a simple tool that may improve symptom management for cancer patients with CIA.

17379160
An analysis of current neutropenia therapies, including pegfilgrastim.
Currently, 2 granulocyte colony-stimulating factors are available in the United States--filgrastim and pegfilgrastim. In patients receiving chemotherapy for solid tumors, lymphoma, and acute myelogenous leukemia, these agents reduce the duration of severe neutropenia, decrease the incidence of febrile neutropenia, and facilitate on-time delivery of scheduled doses of chemotherapy. In addition, substantial data document the benefits of using these agents in patients undergoing peripheral blood progenitor cell mobilization and in patients who have undergone bone marrow transplantation or peripheral blood progenitor cell transplantation. Recent studies suggest that for all of these indications, the efficacy of pegfilgrastim, the newest agent, is comparable to or greater than that of filgrastim. Like filgrastim, pegfilgrastim is generally well tolerated. An important advantage of pegfilgrastim, however, is its once-per-cycle schedule of administration. Patients and health care providers are likely to prefer the administration schedule of pegfilgrastim to the daily administration schedule required with the use of filgrastim. Furthermore, the more convenient schedule of pegfilgrastim may be associated with greater treatment adherence and increased patient quality of life.

19454381
The polycystic ovary unraveled.


17669719
Concomitant secretion of glucocorticoid, androgens, and mineralocorticoid by an adrenocortical carcinoma: case report and review of literature.
To present a case of concomitant secretion of cortisol, androgens, and 11-deoxycorticosterone (DOC) by an adrenocortical carcinoma and review the literature in an attempt to identify similar cases. The patient's medical history, physical examination, laboratory data, computed tomographic scan, and histopathologic results were analyzed and summarized in a case report, and an extensive review of the literature was performed. Endocrinologic data showed excess cortisol production, substantially elevated testosterone and androstenedione levels, and profoundly increased DOC in the setting of suppressed aldosterone. An abdominal computed tomographic scan showed a left adrenal tumor. A left adrenalectomy was performed, and the histopathologic diagnosis was stage II adrenocortical carcinoma. The review of the pertinent literature revealed the absence of any identical cases in the past. Our patient presented with a rare case of cosecretion of cortisol, testosterone, androstenedione, and DOC by an adrenocortical carcinoma, resulting in a clinical picture consistent with Cushing's syndrome, hyperandrogenism, and primary hypermineralocorticoidism. We recommend the routine performance of a DOC assay in the setting of mineralocorticoid excess in association with low plasma aldosterone levels.

