20883899
Acute elbow dislocations in athletes.
Elbow dislocation in the athletic population is not an uncommon injury. The literature does not clearly establish treatment guidelines, with treatment being extrapolated from the experience in the general population. A short period of immobilization with early range of motion exercises limits disability and allows return to sports participation within 6 weeks.

20655763
Does slower rehabilitation after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair lead to long-term stiffness?
Conservative rehabilitation after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair does not result in long-term stiffness and improves rates of tendon healing. We retrospectively evaluated 43 patients with full-thickness rotator cuff tears who underwent a standardized, conservative protocol of full-time sling immobilization without formal therapy for 6 weeks after arthroscopic repair. At 6 to 8 weeks of follow-up, we categorized patients as "stiff" if they demonstrated forward elevation of less than 100° and external rotation of less than 30° passively; all others were designated "nonstiff." Active range of motion in forward elevation, external rotation, and internal rotation was assessed at 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year. American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) and Constant-Murley scores were assessed at 1 year. Follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was obtained in all patients to assess tendon healing. Ten patients (23%) were considered stiff after rotator cuff surgery. At 1 year, there was no difference in mean forward elevation (166° vs 161°, P = .2), external rotation (62° vs. 58.4°, P = .5), or internal rotation (T7.4 vs T8.2, P = .07) between the stiff and nonstiff groups, respectively. There were no differences in final ASES (83 vs 79, P = .57) and Constant-Murley scores (77 vs. 74, P = .5). Repeat MRI suggested a trend toward a lower retear rate among the stiff patients (70% intact in stiff group vs 36% in nonstiff group, P = .079). Two clinically significant cuff retears occurred in the nonstiff cohort. Concerns for recalcitrant stiffness have led some to favor early postoperative therapy. We found that early restriction of motion did not lead to long-term stiffness after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair, even in patients who were clinically stiff in the early postoperative period. Sling immobilization for 6 weeks after arthroscopic rotator cuff repair does not result in increased long-term stiffness and may improve the rate of tendon healing.

20415383
Surgical management of traumatic anterior glenohumeral instability: an international perspective.
The treatment of traumatic anterior glenohumeral instability has evolved considerably in recent years. The results of arthroscopic repair have considerably improved, and, for many surgeons, arthroscopic techniques have supplanted traditional open techniques. Although a scoring system and other assessment tools can be useful, the choice of a surgical treatment for glenohumeral stabilization requires a careful assimilation of the patient's expectations and the surgeon's experience as well as an understanding of the relevant individual pathoanatomy. Pathoanatomy, nonsurgical and surgical treatment of shoulder instability, bone loss, unsuccessful stabilization treatment, and review of recent literature are important factors.

19208487
Optimal rotation and screw positioning for initial glenosphere baseplate fixation in reverse shoulder arthroplasty.
Critical to the longevity of the reverse shoulder arthroplasty is initial rigid fixation of the glenosphere, determined in part by baseplate screw fixation. We studied screw fixation in baseplates placed in several different orientations. Twelve, lightly-embalmed adult scapulae were implanted using a variable-angle and a fixed-angle baseplate. Baseplates were placed in three rotational positions: 1) 12/6 o'clock, 2) 20 degrees rotation toward the coracoid, and 3) 20 degrees rotation toward the scapular spine. Superiorly, perpendicular screws for the variable-angle baseplate in the 12 o'clock (39.7 mm) and coracoid (37.7 mm) position and angled screws in the coracoid position (37.5 mm) were found to be the longest. Inferiorly, screws holes made perpendicular to the baseplate yielded the longest screw lengths (37.4 mm), while inferiorly angled screws were shorter, especially in the anterior-inferior glenoid (16.8 mm). Overall, baseplate rotation toward the spine yielded the lowest mean screw lengths. Proper initial rotation of the baseplate and screw orientation can optimize initial fixation of the glenosphere in reverse shoulder arthroplasty. Level IV, Case Series, Treatment Study.

18841435
Arthroscopically assisted coronoid fracture fixation: a preliminary report.
We investigated the feasibility of arthroscopically assisted reduction and fixation of small coronoid fractures and the anterior capsule for treatment of patients with Regan and Morrey Types I and II (O'Driscoll Types I and II) coronoid fractures with instability of the ulnohumeral joint. Four consecutive patients with this fracture type underwent arthroscopically assisted treatment and were evaluated at a minimum of 1 year (mean, 76 weeks; range, 58-92 weeks). All patients achieved a functional range of motion with an average flexion/extension arc of 2.5 degrees to 140 degrees and full pronation and supination. No patient had recurrent elbow instability. One patient had removal of a prominent suture over the subcutaneous border of the ulna. Arthroscopically assisted management of coronoid fractures can provide excellent observation, enabling anatomic repair without extensive soft tissue dissection. Preservation of the soft tissue attachments of small coronoid fragments and repair of the capsule are possible with this technique. Level of Evidence: Level IV, therapeutic study. See the Guidelines for Authors for a complete description of levels of evidence.

17878776
Arthroscopically-assisted treatment of pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures.
Pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures are common injuries. Current treatment recommendations include nonoperative treatment for nondisplaced Milch type 1 fractures; however, truly nondisplaced fractures may be rare. Although closed reduction and percutaneous pinning under arthrographic visualization are most commonly used, anatomical reconstitution of the articular surface may require a lateral Kocher approach. This approach may compromise the vascularity of the distal fragment. To avoid this catastrophic complication while still obtaining anatomical articular surface reduction, we have investigated a new technique in which the lateral condyle fracture is reduced arthroscopically, allowing visualization of the articular surface without the soft tissue dissection required with open approaches. The fracture is then percutaneously pinned and immobilized as previously recommended. Six skeletally immature patients with lateral humeral condyle fractures underwent arthroscopic reduction and percutaneous pinning. The mean age of the patients was 48 months (range, 21-69 months). There were 2 girls and 4 boys. Surgery was performed on 4 left and 2 right elbows. The mean follow-up was 32 weeks (range, 21-44 weeks). Postoperatively, all patients were placed in a long arm cast for 4 weeks. Pins and casts were removed at 4 weeks, and motion was begun. Elbow radiographs were evaluated for fracture healing, articular congruity, malunion, growth disturbance, and presence of avascular necrosis. Range of motion, function, pain, and cosmetic deformity were recorded. All patients had full active and passive range of motion. There was no difference in range of motion compared with the contralateral side (P < 0.05). All fractures healed radiographically by 4 weeks. There were no cases of nonunion or malunion. No patients developed cubitus varus. One patient developed radiolucency of the capitellum. There were no other complications. Arthroscopic reduction and percutaneous fixation of pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures may offer a safe and effective alternative to open treatment with decreased soft tissue stripping and a possibly decreased risk of malunion or avascular necrosis. Level IV.

17509901
Islandized hemipectoralis muscle flap for sternoclavicular defect.


