21504717
Development of t(8;21) and RUNX1-RUNX1T1 in the Philadelphia-positive clone of a patient with chronic myelogenous leukemia: additional evidence for multiple steps involved in disease progression.
A 65-year-old patient with a high hemoglobin and hematocrit was treated for 14 months with therapeutic phlebotomy when cytogenetics of bone marrow revealed 100% cells with the Ph chromosome and 45% of the Ph+ cells contained trisomy 8. Treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors did not reduce the BCR-ABL1 fusion positive clone. Instead, the Ph positive cells acquired further the t(8;21)/RUNX1-RUNX1T1, del(4q) and trisomy 15 chromosomal abnormalities which were resistant to further treatment. Literature review revealed eight other patients who either had t(9;22) and t(8;21) simultaneously or developed t(8;21) in the Ph positive clone. We conclude that there are rare patients with CML who either present in blast crisis with coexistence of t(9;22) and t(8;21) with or without +8, or progress to blast crisis with acquiring RUNX1-RUNX1T1 in the BCR-ABL1 clone which may or may not be therapy related and represent a later event in a multistep pathogenesis.

20858855
Sequential treatment of CD34+ cells from patients with primary myelofibrosis with chromatin-modifying agents eliminate JAK2V617F-positive NOD/SCID marrow repopulating cells.
Because primary myelofibrosis (PMF) originates at the level of the pluripotent hematopoietic stem cell (HSC), we examined the effects of various therapeutic agents on the in vitro and in vivo behavior of PMF CD34(+) cells. Treatment of PMF CD34(+) cells with chromatin-modifying agents (CMAs) but not hydroxyurea, Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) inhibitors, or low doses of interferon-? led to the generation of greater numbers of CD34(+) chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor (CXCR)4(+) cells, which were capable of migrating in response to chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand (CXCL)12 and resulted in a reduction in the proportion of hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) that were JAK2V617F(+). Furthermore, sequential treatment of PMF CD34(+) cells but not normal CD34(+) cells with decitabine (5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine [5azaD]), followed by suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA; 5azaD/SAHA), or trichostatin A (5azaD/TSA) resulted in a higher degree of apoptosis. Two to 6 months after the transplantation of CMAs treated JAK2V617F(+) PMF CD34(+) cells into nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient (SCID)/IL-2R?(null) mice, the percentage of JAK2V617F/JAK2(total) in human CD45(+) marrow cells was dramatically reduced. These findings suggest that both PMF HPCs, short-term and long-term SCID repopulating cells (SRCs), are JAK2V617F(+) and that JAK2V617F(+) HPCs and SRCs can be eliminated by sequential treatment with CMAs. Sequential treatment with CMAs, therefore, represents a possible effective means of treating PMF at the level of the malignant SRC.

20649984
Ring chromosome 18 abnormality in acute myelogenous leukemia: the clinical dilemma.
The ring chromosome is a circular, structural abnormality composed of either multiple chromosomes or a single chromosome with loss of genetic material at one or both ends. This chromosomal rearrangement is often unstable with frequent recombinations and may be accompanied by either loss or amplification of genetic material[1]. Considering that ring chromosomes are rare in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), it is difficult to risk stratify patient prognosis, particularly when the ring chromosome occurs as the sole abnormality. Here we report a case of a ring chromosome 18 abnormality in a patient with newly diagnosed AML with monocytic differentiation. Cytogenetic analysis demonstrated 46, XY, r(18)(p11q21) karyotype in 19 of 34 evaluated metaphase cells. The patient received induction chemotherapy and subsequent allogeneic cord blood transplant from a sex-matched donor, and remained in hematologic and cytogenetic remission for 120 days post transplant. Soon after, he developed post transplant lymphoproliferative disorder and died of multi-organ failure. Although r(18) chromosomal abnormalities were not classified in the recent updated evidence-and expert opinion-based recommendations for the diagnosis and management of AML (likely due to the small number of reported cases), the patient was treated as high risk with stem cell transplantation. This was based on the unstable nature of the ring chromosome and the poor outcomes described in the literature of patients with sole ring 18 abnormalities.

19659677
Long-term storage does not alter functionality of in vitro generated human erythroblasts: implications for ex vivo generated erythroid transfusion products.
Cultured human erythroid cells derived in vitro may represent alternative transfusion products. It is unknown, however, if these ex vivo expanded erythroid cells remain functional or develop genetic abnormalities after storage. Using mononuclear cells from four adult blood donors, erythroblasts were generated ex vivo in expansion cultures supplemented with stem cell factor, interleukin-3, erythropoietin (EPO), dexamethasone, and estradiol. The viability and in vitro function of freshly expanded or short (1-2 months)- and long (8 years)-term-stored erythroblasts cryopreserved in dimethyl sulfoxide were compared. Erythroblast function was defined as ability to proliferate in expansion media and mature in response to EPO. Cell number was determined manually and expressed as fold increase. Viability was assessed by trypan blue and propidium iodide exclusion. Maturation was evaluated by morphologic analyses and CD36/CD235a expression profiling. Cytogenetic evaluation included karyotype and multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses. Equivalent numbers (>80%) of erythroblasts were viable after short- and long-term storage. Freshly expanded and short- and long-term-stored erythroblasts equally doubled in number (fold increase, 2.4) retaining an immature phenotype (23% of the cells were CD36(high)CD235a(neg)) when cultured for 4 days under expansion conditions. The numbers of freshly expanded and short-term-stored erythroblasts that matured when exposed for 4 days to EPO were also similar (approx. 22% of the cells became CD36(neg)CD235a(high)). In spite of the massive amplification, ex vivo generated erythroblasts demonstrated a normal (46,XY) karyotype with no obvious genomic rearrangements. Ex vivo expanded erythroblasts remain functional and genetically normal after long-term storage.

19100510
Duplication and triplication of der(21)t(8;21)(q22;q22) in acute myeloid leukemia.
We report on two patients with complicons resulting in duplication der(21)t(8;21)(q22;q22), triplication in the form of isochromosome of der(21)t(8;21), and four copies of ETO-AML1 fusion. Duplication of der(21) was present at diagnosis as a minor cell population in one patient, while the presence of isoderivative (21)t(8;21) characterized the relapse cells of the second patient. Due to the rarity of these cases, literature search of other reported cases of complicons may be taken as evidence that duplication and triplication of ETO-AML1 may be a poor prognostic indicator, regardless of whether it is present at diagnosis or relapse.

18614999
HIV-1 Vpr inhibits cytokinesis in human proximal tubule cells.
Transgenic mouse models of HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) show that expression of HIV-1 genes in kidney cells produces collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and microcystic tubular disease typical of the human disease. HIV-1 vpr plays an important role in the glomerulosclerosis of HIVAN, especially when it is associated with nef expression in podocytes. Further, Vpr is reported to exacerbate tubular pathology. Here we determined effects of vpr expression on renal tubular epithelial cell function by transducing them with a pseudotyped lentivirus vector carrying HIV-1 vpr and control genes. Vpr expression in the cultured cells impaired cytokinesis causing cell enlargement and multinucleation. This profound in vitro phenotype caused us to reexamine the HIVAN mouse model and human HIVAN biopsies to see if similar changes occur in vivo. Both showed abundant hypertrophic tubule cells similar to the in vitro finding that represents a previously unappreciated aspect of the human disease. Additionally, multinucleated tubular cells were identified in the murine HIVAN model and increased chromosome number was detected in tubular cells of human HIVAN biopsies. Our study provides evidence of a new clinical phenotype in HIVAN that may result from the ability of Vpr to impair cytokinesis.

17976519
Numerical gain and structural rearrangements of JAK2, identified by FISH, characterize both JAK2617V>F-positive and -negative patients with Ph-negative MPD, myelodysplasia, and B-lymphoid neoplasms.
Current evidence suggests that the JAK2617V>F point mutation is implicated in the pathogenesis of >90% of polycythemia vera (PV) patients, and in approximately 50% of primary myelofibrosis (PMF) and essential thrombocythemia patients. Novel JAK2 mutations were recently described in 5% to 15% of patients that are JAK2617V>F-negative. Additionally, JAK2 is reported to form fusion hybrids with three different genes. We, therefore, hypothesized that patients with 9p24 chromosomal rearrangements or patients with Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-negative myeloproliferative disorders (MPDs), with or without +9/+9p chromosomal abnormalities, might demonstrate additional and/or cryptic JAK2 structural rearrangements. Metaphase and interphase cells were retrospectively investigated from 39 patients using two JAK2 BAC fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) probes on archived fixed cell suspensions. Of the 39 patients, 8 had PV with chromosome 9 abnormalities, 7 had PMF/MPD showing an abnormal karyotype, 10 PV patients were cytogenetically normal, and 14 patients had 9p24 chromosomal abnormalities. FISH studies revealed 11 JAK2617V>F-positive patients with JAK2 numerical and structural abnormalities. Trisomy through hexasomy as well as JAK2 amplification (15-20 copies) was observed in nine patients (PV, 6; non-Hodgkin lymphoma [NHL], 1; multiple myeloma, 1; and MDS, 1), while JAK2 structural abnormalities were seen in two patients (MDS and NHL). Among the seven patients negative for JAK2617V>F mutation, two patients with MDS were observed with JAK2 rearrangements involving NF-E2 and AML1. The status of JAK2617V>F mutation could not be determined in 13 patients, but FISH studies revealed both gain and rearrangements in three patients. They include one patient with PV and +9p with three copies of JAK2 and two patients with MDS and JAK2 relocations: one with NF-E2, while the other patient with a TEL/ETV6 rearrangements also had tetrasomy for JAK2. JAK2 FISH studies revealed two types of JAK2 rearrangements among patients with Ph-negative MPDs and non-MPDs: gain and/or structural rearrangements. Gain and amplification of JAK2 was primarily observed in patients that were JAK2617V>F-positive (9 of 11), irrespective of the diagnosis, while rearrangements of JAK2 were frequently seen in patients who lacked the JAK2617V>F mutation with either MDS or AML (5 of 6). Three different JAK2 abnormalities were identified in one clone for the first time in two patients with PV. The data also identified a myriad of JAK2 rearrangements, including a novel JAK2-NF-E2 interaction, JAK2 translocation to chromosomes 3, 4, 12, 14, and 21 and detection of the previously described rare TEL/ETV6-JAK2 translocation. These observations suggest that JAK2 attracts multiple gene partners and may contribute to disease progression in patients with MDS and B-cell malignancies, while the JAK2 copy number appears to be important in pathogenesis of Ph-negative MPDs.

