20152966
Sex chromosome micromosaicism in infertile men with normal karyotypes.
To define the prevalence of low-level sex chromosome mosaicism in a cohort of infertile men. Prospective cohort study of infertile men. Tertiary university infertility center. One hundred one consecutive men who presented with primary infertility for evaluation. Fluorescent in situ hybridization for X and Y was performed on 200 cells, and if an aberrant sex chromosome complement was noted, 400 cells were counted. For this study, any abnormality in sex chromosome complement was defined as micromosaicism. Low-level sex chromosome mosaicism. Sixty-seven of these men (67%) had no mosaicism, and 34 men (34%) had micromosaicism. The median percentage of abnormal chromosomes in these men was 2%. The mean age of the men without micromosaicism was lower than for men with micromosaicism (31.1 years vs. 35.2 years). A trend toward higher FSH levels in men with low-level mosaicism was seen. Median sperm density and percent motility were higher in normal men. Percent normal morphology was identical between groups. We found low-level sex chromosome mosaicism in 34% of infertile men who presented for evaluation. Men with low-level mosaicism were significantly older. Low-level mosaicism may emerge with advancing age and may therefore help to explain the decline in fertility potential seen in older men.

17543721
Medical and surgical management male infertility.
Male infertility is the result of a variety of highly treatable conditions. The critical step in treating male infertility is to evaluate properly every male partner of an infertile couple and to generate the proper treatment strategy. There are many medical and surgical options that can help most couples overcome male factor infertility. Male infertility can most easily be broken down into problems of sperm production (testicular dysfunction) and problems of sperm transport (obstruction). When applicable, medical therapies are used as an initial strategy to improve sperm production or as a preliminary therapy to boost production transiently in anticipation of a surgical sperm retrieval attempt. A range of surgical options is available to correct varicoceles, reconstruct the obstructed system, or retrieve sperm for assisted reproduction.

21227046
Inhibition of vascular endothelial cell growth factor suppresses the in vivo growth of human prostate tumors.
The LNCaP human prostate cancer cell line is androgenand stromal-dependent for in vivo growth. We co-inoculated LNCaP cells with human fetal fibroblasts, isolated from prostate, bone (male), and lung (male and female) derived from 18- to 22-week-old human fetal tissue, into non-castrate male nude mice. Co-inoculation of LNCaP with fetal prostatic fibroblasts resulted in high tumor take rates (27 of 30, or 90%) 6 to 8 weeks after subcutaneous co-inoculation. Serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) values correlated strongly with wet tumor weight (r=0.86). The fetal fibroblast enhancement of tumor take rates in vivo was neither gender- nor organ-specific. Fetal fibroblast-conditioned medium (CM) did not have a significant proliferative effect on LNCaP cell growth in vitro. Areas of angiogenesis were demonstrable in all tumors, with blood vessels arising at the interface between stromal and tumor cells. The fetal fibroblasts, but not the LNCaP cells, expressed significant amounts of the mRNA and protein for vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF). Treatment of tumor-bearing animals with neutralizing antibodies to VEGF resulted in significant tumor growth suppression. These findings indicate that VEGF is an important mediator of stromal-induced enhancement of human prostate cancer cell growth in vivo.

