21150871
Role of the retinoic acid receptor-? in HIV-associated nephropathy.
All-trans retinoic acid protects against the development of HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) in HIV-1 transgenic mice (Tg26). In vitro, all-trans retinoic acid inhibits HIV-induced podocyte proliferation and restores podocyte differentiation markers by activating its receptor-? (RAR?). Here, we report that Am580, a water-soluble RAR?-specific agonist, attenuated proteinuria, glomerosclerosis, and podocyte proliferation, and restored podocyte differentiation markers in kidneys of Tg26 mice. Furthermore, RAR?-/- Tg26 mice developed more severe kidney and podocyte injury than did RAR?+/- Tg26 mice. Am580 failed to ameliorate kidney injury in RAR?-/- Tg26 mice, confirming our hypothesis that Am580 acts through RAR?. Although the expression of RAR?-target genes was suppressed in the kidneys of Tg26 mice and of patients with HIVAN, the expression of RAR? in the kidney was not different between patients with HIVAN and minimal change disease. However, the tissue levels of retinoic acid were reduced in the kidney cortex and isolated glomeruli of Tg26 mice. Consistent with this, the expression of two key enzymes in the retinoic acid synthetic pathway, retinol dehydrogenase type 1 and 9, and the overall enzymatic activity for retinoic acid synthesis were significantly reduced in the glomeruli of Tg26 mice. Thus, a defect in the endogenous synthesis of retinoic acid contributes to loss of the protection by retinoic acid in HIVAN. Hence, RAR? agonists may be potential agents for the treatment of HIVAN.

20562105
Up-regulation of the homophilic adhesion molecule sidekick-1 in podocytes contributes to glomerulosclerosis.
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a leading cause of nephrotic syndrome and end-stage renal disease worldwide. Although the mechanisms underlying this important disease are poorly understood, the glomerular podocyte clearly plays a central role in disease pathogenesis. In the current work, we demonstrate that the homophilic adhesion molecule sidekick-1 (sdk-1) is up-regulated in podocytes in FSGS both in rodent models and in human kidney biopsy samples. Transgenic mice that have podocyte-specific overexpression of sdk-1 develop gradually progressive heavy proteinuria and severe FSGS. We also show that sdk-1 associates with the slit diaphragm linker protein MAGI-1, which is already known to interact with several critical podocyte proteins including synaptopodin, alpha-actinin-4, nephrin, JAM4, and beta-catenin. This interaction is mediated through a direct interaction between the carboxyl terminus of sdk-1 and specific PDZ domains of MAGI-1. In vitro expression of sdk-1 enables a dramatic recruitment of MAGI-1 to the cell membrane. Furthermore, a truncated version of sdk-1 that is unable to bind to MAGI-1 does not induce podocyte dysfunction when overexpressed. We conclude that the up-regulation of sdk-1 in podocytes is an important pathogenic factor in FSGS and that the mechanism involves disruption of the actin cytoskeleton possibly via alterations in MAGI-1 function.

20005487
The pathogenesis of HIV-associated nephropathy.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is one of the leading causes of ESRD in HIV-1-seropositive patients. Patients typically present with heavy proteinuria and chronic renal failure with pathologic findings of collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). The disease is caused by direct infection of renal epithelial cells by HIV-1 in a genetically susceptible host. The genetic factors responsible for the susceptibility to HIVAN among blacks include a noncoding variant in the podocyte-expressed gene nonmuscle myosin, heavy chain 9 (MYH9) as well as other genes yet to be identified. Podocyte and tubular dysfunction results from the expression of viral genes, in particular nef and vpr, and the subsequent dysregulation of numerous host factors, including critical signaling pathways, inflammatory mediators, and others. The identification of these factors has the potential to provide novel therapeutic targets to prevent and treat this important disease.

