21150871
Role of the retinoic acid receptor-? in HIV-associated nephropathy.
All-trans retinoic acid protects against the development of HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) in HIV-1 transgenic mice (Tg26). In vitro, all-trans retinoic acid inhibits HIV-induced podocyte proliferation and restores podocyte differentiation markers by activating its receptor-? (RAR?). Here, we report that Am580, a water-soluble RAR?-specific agonist, attenuated proteinuria, glomerosclerosis, and podocyte proliferation, and restored podocyte differentiation markers in kidneys of Tg26 mice. Furthermore, RAR?-/- Tg26 mice developed more severe kidney and podocyte injury than did RAR?+/- Tg26 mice. Am580 failed to ameliorate kidney injury in RAR?-/- Tg26 mice, confirming our hypothesis that Am580 acts through RAR?. Although the expression of RAR?-target genes was suppressed in the kidneys of Tg26 mice and of patients with HIVAN, the expression of RAR? in the kidney was not different between patients with HIVAN and minimal change disease. However, the tissue levels of retinoic acid were reduced in the kidney cortex and isolated glomeruli of Tg26 mice. Consistent with this, the expression of two key enzymes in the retinoic acid synthetic pathway, retinol dehydrogenase type 1 and 9, and the overall enzymatic activity for retinoic acid synthesis were significantly reduced in the glomeruli of Tg26 mice. Thus, a defect in the endogenous synthesis of retinoic acid contributes to loss of the protection by retinoic acid in HIVAN. Hence, RAR? agonists may be potential agents for the treatment of HIVAN.

20631733
JAK/STAT signaling in renal diseases.
The Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway is a pleiotropic cascade essential to cytokine and growth hormone receptor signaling. Signaling through the JAK/STAT pathway is important for the kidney's response to injury in disease. Pang et al. confirm that activation of STAT3 mediates renal fibrosis in the unilateral ureteral obstruction experimental model.

19357722
Knockdown of Stat3 activity in vivo prevents diabetic glomerulopathy.
Recent studies suggest that Stat3, a transcription factor that mediates cytokine signaling, plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy. Complete Stat3 gene knockout is embryonic lethal; therefore, we crossed Stat3+/- mice with Stat3 mutant mice (SA/SA) that lack full Stat3 activity. This strategy generated Stat3SA/- mice (25% activity) and Stat3SA/+ mice (75% activity), which were made diabetic using streptozotocin in order to define the role of Stat3 in diabetic kidney disease. While the glomerular number was not different between these two groups of mice, the diabetic SA/- mice had significantly less proteinuria, mesangial expansion, glomerular cell proliferation, and macrophage infiltration than the diabetic SA/+ mice. The reduction in Stat3 activity did not affect glomerular hyperfiltration seen after the induction of diabetes, as it was increased to the same degree in both groups of mice. Phosphorylation of Stat3 was markedly increased in the glomeruli of diabetic SA/+ mice compared to diabetic SA/- mice. The expression of inflammatory markers, IL-6, MCP-1, and activated NF-kappaB; type IV collagen, TGF-beta, and ICAM-1 mRNA; or type IV collagen and TGF-beta protein, were all found to be significantly less in glomeruli isolated from diabetic SA/- mice, as compared with diabetic SA/+ mice. Our study shows that Stat3 plays a critical role in the regulation of inflammation and abnormal matrix synthesis at an early stage of DN.

19142027
Signaling in regulation of podocyte phenotypes.
The kidney podocyte is a terminally differentiated and highly specialized cell. The function of the glomerular filtration barrier depends on the integrity of the podocyte. Podocyte injury and loss have been observed in human and experimental models of glomerular diseases. Three major podocyte phenotypes have been described in glomerular diseases: effacement, apoptosis, and proliferation. Here, we highlight the signaling cascades that are responsible for the manifestation of these pathologic phenotypes. The integrity of the podocyte foot process is determined by the interaction of nephrin with proteins in the slit diaphragm complex, the regulation of actin dynamics by the Rho family of GTPases, and the transduction of extracellular signals through focal adhesion complexes. Activation of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and transforming growth factor-beta1 causes podocyte apoptosis. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase and its downstream target AKT protect podocytes from apoptosis. In human immunodeficiency virus-associated nephropathy, Src-dependent activation of Stat3, mitogen-activated protein kinase 1,2, and hypoxia-inducible factor 2alpha is an important driver of podocyte proliferation. At the level of intracellular signaling, it appears that different extracellular signals can converge onto a few pathways to induce changes in the phenotype of podocytes.

17667983
Advanced glycation endproducts induce podocyte apoptosis by activation of the FOXO4 transcription factor.
Advanced glycation endproducts (AGEs) and a receptor for AGEs (RAGE) have been linked in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy. RAGE is usually localized to podocytes and is increased in diabetes. RAGE activation increases reactive oxygen species production, which mediates hyperglycemia-induced podocyte apoptosis in early diabetic nephropathy. Here, we examined the interaction of AGE and RAGE on podocyte apoptosis. When we exposed murine cultured podocytes to bovine serum albumin (BSA) that was modified by AGEs or to carboxymethyl-lysine BSA, more apoptosis was found when compared with unmodified BSA. Similarly, more podocytes underwent detachment and apoptosis when cultured on AGE-modified collagen IV than on native collagen IV. AGEs isolated from sera of patients with chronic kidney disease also caused apoptosis of podocytes. Apoptosis was diminished by small interference RNA (siRNA) for RAGE in podocytes exposed to AGE-BSA, but not to AGE-modified collagen IV. Both AGE- and carboxymethyl-lysine modified-BSA activated p38MAP kinase and inhibition of this kinase reduced the apoptotic effect of AGE-BSA. Exposure to AGE-BSA was associated with Akt dephosphorylation and FOXO4 transcriptional activation leading to an increase in the expression of an effector protein of apoptosis, Bim. siRNA for FOXO4 abolished AGE-BSA-induced apoptosis of podocytes. Our study suggests that an AGE-RAGE interaction contributes to podocyte apoptosis by activation of the FOXO4 transcription factor.

