21549847
Complex loading affects intervertebral disc mechanics and biology.
BACKGROUND: Complex loading develops in multiple spinal motions and in the case of hyperflexion is known to cause intervertebral disc (IVD) injury. Few studies have examined the interacting biologic and structural alterations associated with potentially injurious complex loading, which may be an important contributor to chronic progressive degeneration. OBJECTIVE: This study tested the hypothesis that low magnitudes of axial compression loading applied asymmetrically can induce IVD injury affecting cellular and structural responses in a large animal IVD ex-vivo model. METHODS: Bovine caudal IVDs were assigned to either a control or wedge group (15°) and placed in organ culture for 7 days under static 0.2MPa load. IVD tissue and cellular responses were assessed through confined compression, qRT-PCR, histology and structural and compositional measurements, including Western blot for aggrecan degradation products. RESULTS: Complex loading via asymmetric compression induced cell death, an increase in caspase-3 staining (apoptosis), a loss of aggrecan and an increase in aggregate modulus in the concave annulus fibrosis. While an up-regulation of MMP-1, ADAMTS4, IL-1?, and IL-6 mRNA, and a reduced aggregate modulus were induced in the convex annulus. CONCLUSION: Asymmetric compression had direct deleterious effects on both tissue and cells, suggesting an injurious loading regime that could lead to a degenerative cascade, including cell death, the production of inflammatory mediators, and a shift towards catabolism. This explant model is useful to assess how injurious mechanical loading affects the cellular response which may contribute to the progression of degenerative changes in large animal IVDs, and results suggest that interventions should address inflammation, apoptosis, and lamellar integrity.

21503869
Genipin-crosslinked fibrin hydrogels as a potential adhesive to augment intervertebral disc annulus repair.
Treatment of damaged intervertebral discs is a significant clinical problem and, despite advances in the repair and replacement of the nucleus pulposus, there are few effective strategies to restore defects in the annulus fibrosus. An annular repair material should meet three specifications: have a modulus similar to the native annulus tissue, support the growth of disc cells, and maintain adhesion to tissue under physiological strain levels. We hypothesized that a genipin crosslinked fibrin gel could meet these requirements. Our mechanical results showed that genipin crosslinked fibrin gels could be created with a modulus in the range of native annular tissue. We also demonstrated that this material is compatible with the in vitro growth of human disc cells, when genipin:fibrin ratios were 0.25:1 or less, although cell proliferation was slower and cell morphology more rounded than for fibrin alone. Finally, lap tests were performed to evaluate adhesion between fibrin gels and pieces of annular tissue. Specimens created without genipin had poor handling properties and readily delaminated, while genipin crosslinked fibrin gels remained adhered to the tissue pieces at strains exceeding physiological levels and failed at 15-30%. This study demonstrated that genipin crosslinked fibrin gels show promise as a gap-filling adhesive biomaterial with tunable material properties, yet the slow cell proliferation suggests this biomaterial may be best suited as a sealant for small annulus fibrosus defects or as an adhesive to augment large annulus repairs. Future studies will evaluate degradation rate, fatigue behaviors, and long-term biocompatibility.

