21575861
High-Frequency Canonical Wnt Activation in Multiple Sarcoma Subtypes Drives Proliferation through a TCF/?-Catenin Target Gene, CDC25A.
Wnt canonical signaling is critical for normal development as well as homeostasis of several epithelial tissues, and constitutive activation of this pathway is commonly observed in carcinomas. We show here that 50% of human sarcomas (n = 45) and 65% of sarcoma cell lines (n = 23) of diverse histological subtypes exhibit upregulated autocrine canonical Wnt signaling. Furthermore, in Wnt autocrine cell lines, we identify alterations including overexpression or gene amplification of Wnt ligands and/or LRP5/6 coreceptors and epigenetic silencing of different cell surface Wnt antagonists. Mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene were observed in two nonautocrine Wnt-positive sarcoma cell lines. Finally, downregulation of the activated Wnt pathway inhibited sarcoma cell proliferation both in vitro and in vivo by a mechanism involving the downregulation of CDC25A.

21078818
Canonical and noncanonical Wnts use a common mechanism to activate completely unrelated coreceptors.
Wnt ligands signal through ?-catenin and are critically involved in cell fate determination and stem/progenitor self-renewal. Wnts also signal through ?-catenin-independent or noncanonical pathways that regulate crucial events during embryonic development. The mechanism of noncanonical receptor activation and how Wnts trigger canonical as opposed to noncanonical signaling have yet to be elucidated. We demonstrate here that prototype canonical Wnt3a and noncanonical Wnt5a ligands specifically trigger completely unrelated endogenous coreceptors-LRP5/6 and Ror1/2, respectively-through a common mechanism that involves their Wnt-dependent coupling to the Frizzled (Fzd) coreceptor and recruitment of shared components, including dishevelled (Dvl), axin, and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3). We identify Ror2 Ser 864 as a critical residue phosphorylated by GSK3 and required for noncanonical receptor activation by Wnt5a, analogous to the priming phosphorylation of low-density receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6) in response to Wnt3a. Furthermore, this mechanism is independent of Ror2 receptor Tyr kinase functions. Consistent with this model of Wnt receptor activation, we provide evidence that canonical and noncanonical Wnts exert reciprocal pathway inhibition at the cell surface by competition for Fzd binding. Thus, different Wnts, through their specific coupling and phosphorylation of unrelated coreceptors, activate completely distinct signaling pathways.

19349579
Canonical Wnts function as potent regulators of osteogenesis by human mesenchymal stem cells.
Genetic evidence indicates that Wnt signaling is critically involved in bone homeostasis. In this study, we investigated the functions of canonical Wnts on differentiation of adult multipotent human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) in vitro and in vivo. We observe differential sensitivities of hMSCs to Wnt inhibition of osteogenesis versus adipogenesis, which favors osteoblastic commitment under binary in vitro differentiation conditions. Wnt inhibition of osteogenesis is associated with decreased expression of osteoblastic transcription factors and inhibition of c-Jun N-terminal kinase and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase activation, which are involved in osteogenic differentiation. An hMSC subpopulation exhibits high endogenous Wnt signaling, the inhibition of which enhances osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation in vitro. In an in vivo bone formation model, high levels of Wnt signaling inhibit de novo bone formation by hMSCs. However, hMSCs with exogenous expression of Wnt1 but not stabilized beta-catenin markedly stimulate bone formation by naive hMSCs, arguing for an important role of a canonical Wnt gradient in hMSC osteogenesis in vivo.

17575141
Androgen-induced Wnt signaling in preosteoblasts promotes the growth of MDA-PCa-2b human prostate cancer cells.
The high morbidity and mortality associated with prostate cancer (PCa) result from its tendency to metastasize to bone where it produces predominantly osteoblastic lesions. The Wnt signaling pathway plays an important role in embryogenesis, tumorigenesis, osteoblast development, and bone formation. Androgen signaling via the androgen receptor (AR) is critical in both PCa and bone cell growth. We examined the effects of androgens on cell growth and Wnt signaling in the AR-positive MDA-PCa-2b cell line and MC3T3 preosteoblasts, grown alone and in coculture. We show that the potent androgen dihydrotestosterone increases AR expression and transcriptional activity only in the preosteoblasts. Although dihydrotestosterone induced an 80% increase in PCa cell growth when the cells were grown alone, dihydrotestosterone had a more significant effect on MDA-PCa-2b cell proliferation (3.2-fold increase) when the PCa cells were cocultured with preosteoblasts. Dihydrotestosterone addition to preosteoblasts promoted Wnt-dependent transcriptional reporter activity associated with GSK3beta(S-9) phosphorylation and accumulation of nuclear beta-catenin as well as elevated Runx2 expression. In addition, the increased proliferation of PCa cells in coculture with MC3T3 cells in response to dihydrotestosterone was abrogated by the addition of either exogenous DKK-1 or sFRP-1 protein, two naturally occurring Wnt antagonists. Finally, we show that the paracrine growth-promoting effect of androgens is limited to MDA-PCa-2b cells. These data imply that Wnt signaling is involved in the androgen-regulated crosstalk between preosteoblasts and PCa cells and suggest that androgens may stimulate growth of some prostate tumor cells indirectly, via up-regulation of Wnt signaling in bone cells.

