18329487
Thoracoscopic lobectomy: report on safety, discharge independence, pain, and chemotherapy tolerance.
Controversies regarding the safety, morbidity, and mortality of thoracoscopic lobectomy have prevented the widespread acceptance of the procedure. This series analyzed the safety, pain, analgesic use, and discharge disposition in patients who underwent thoracoscopic lobectomy and segmentectomy at a single institution. We collected data from 153 consecutive patients who underwent thoracoscopic (video-assisted thoracic surgery) lobectomy and assessed the perioperative outcomes, postoperative pain, and chemotherapy course. A total of 111 of 127 patients with lung cancer had stage I non-small cell lung cancer. The operative technique required 2 ports and an access incision (5-8 cm), individual hilar ligation, and lymph node dissection performed without rib-spreading devices. There were 9 major complications (6%), including 1 perioperative death (0.7%). Conversion to thoracotomy occurred in 14 patients (9.2%). Blood transfusion was required in 11 patients (7%). The median chest tube time was 3 days, and the length of hospital stay was 4 days; 94.4% of patients went home at the time of discharge, and 5.6% of patients required a rehabilitation facility. At a median postsurgical follow-up time of 2 weeks, the mean postoperative pain score was 0.6 (0-3), 73% of patients did not use narcotics for pain control, and 47% of patients did not use any pain medication. Of patients receiving chemotherapy (N = 26), 73% completed a full course on schedule and 85% received all intended cycles. Thoracoscopic (video-assisted thoracic surgery) lobectomy can be performed safely. Discharge independence and low pain estimates in the early postoperative period suggest that this approach may be beneficial. Furthermore, there is a trend toward improved tolerance of chemotherapy.

18222201
Video-assisted thoracoscopic lobectomy: state of the art and future directions.
Thoracoscopic lobectomy is performed with increasing frequency for early-stage lung cancer. Several published reports suggest thoracoscopic resection is safe, with the potential advantage of shorter hospital stay, quicker recovery, and comparable oncologic results. Data on 180 video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) patients who underwent thoracoscopic lobectomy or sublobar anatomic resection at our institution between January 2002 and December 2006 were reviewed. The conversion rate to thoracotomy, complications, length of stay, and duration of chest tube drainage were determined. Similar variables were evaluated for patients aged older than 80 years, those with a forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) that was less than 50% predicted, those who had undergone preoperative neoadjuvant therapy, and those who had undergone lung-sparing anatomic resections. Thoracoscopic anatomic lung resection was performed successfully in 166 patients. One of 180 patients (0.6%) died, and 14 patients (9.2%) underwent conversions. Overall median length of stay was 4 days (range, 1 to 98; interquartile range [IQR], 3), and median duration of chest tube drainage was 3 days (range, 0 to 35 days; IQR, 2). The median length of hospital stay and median chest tube duration for the group aged 80 years and older was 5 and 3 days; for the segmental resection group, 4 and 3 days; for the chemotherapy or radiotherapy induction group, 3.5 and 3 days; and for the FEV1 less than 50% group, 5.5 and 4 days, respectively. No patients died in any of these groups. Thoracoscopic lung resection can be performed safely in selected patients aged 80 years and older, in those with marginal pulmonary function, and in those with pathologic response to neoadjuvant therapy.

