20886049
BAMBI is expressed in endothelial cells and is regulated by lysosomal/autolysosomal degradation.
BAMBI (BMP and Activin Membrane Bound Inhibitor) is considered to influence TGF? and Wnt signaling, and thereby fibrosis. Surprisingly data on cell type-specific expression of BAMBI are not available. We therefore examined the localization, gene regulation, and protein turnover of BAMBI in kidneys. By immunofluorescence microscopy and by mRNA expression, BAMBI is restricted to endothelial cells of the glomerular and some peritubular capillaries and of arteries and veins in both murine and human kidneys. TGF? upregulated mRNA of BAMBI in murine glomerular endothelial cells (mGEC). LPS did not downregulate mRNA for BAMBI in mGEC or in HUVECs. BAMBI mRNA had a half-life of only 60 minutes and was stabilized by cycloheximide, indicating post-transcriptional regulation due to AU-rich elements, which we identified in the 3' untranslated sequence of both the human and murine BAMBI gene. BAMBI protein turnover was studied in HUVECs with BAMBI overexpression using a lentiviral system. Serum starvation as an inducer of autophagy caused marked BAMBI degradation, which could be totally prevented by inhibition of lysosomal and autolysosomal degradation with bafilomycin, and partially by inhibition of autophagy with 3-methyladenine, but not by proteasomal inhibitors. Rapamycin activates autophagy by inhibiting TOR, and resulted in BAMBI protein degradation. Both serum starvation and rapamycin increased the conversion of the autophagy marker LC3 from LC3-I to LC3-II and also enhanced co-staining for BAMBI and LC3 in autolysosomal vesicles. 1. BAMBI localizes to endothelial cells in the kidney and to HUVECs. 2. BAMBI mRNA is regulated by post-transcriptional mechanisms. 3. BAMBI protein is regulated by lysosomal and autolysosomal degradation. The endothelial localization and the quick turnover of BAMBI may indicate novel, yet to be defined functions of this modulator for TGF? and Wnt protein actions in the renal vascular endothelium in health and disease.

19465643
Renal gene and protein expression signatures for prediction of kidney disease progression.
Although chronic kidney disease (CKD) is common, only a fraction of CKD patients progress to end-stage renal disease. Molecular predictors to stratify CKD populations according to their risk of progression remain undiscovered. Here we applied transcriptional profiling of kidneys from transforming growth factor-beta1 transgenic (Tg) mice, characterized by heterogeneity of kidney disease progression, to identify 43 genes that discriminate kidneys by severity of glomerular apoptosis before the onset of tubulointerstitial fibrosis in 2-week-old animals. Among the genes examined, 19 showed significant correlation between mRNA expression in uninephrectomized left kidneys at 2 weeks of age and renal disease severity in right kidneys of Tg mice at 4 weeks of age. Gene expression profiles of human orthologs of the 43 genes in kidney biopsies were highly significantly related (R(2) = 0.53; P < 0.001) to the estimated glomerular filtration rates in patients with CKD stages I to V, and discriminated groups of CKD stages I/II and III/IV/V with positive and negative predictive values of 0.8 and 0.83, respectively. Protein expression patterns for selected genes were successfully validated by immunohistochemistry in kidneys of Tg mice and kidney biopsies of patients with IgA nephropathy and CKD stages I to V, respectively. In conclusion, we developed novel mRNA and protein expression signatures that predict progressive renal fibrosis in mice and may be useful molecular predictors of CKD progression in humans.

