21347441
Role of cell-to-cell variability in activating a positive feedback antiviral response in human dendritic cells.
In the first few hours following Newcastle disease viral infection of human monocyte-derived dendritic cells, the induction of IFNB1 is extremely low and the secreted type I interferon response is below the limits of ELISA assay. However, many interferon-induced genes are activated at this time, for example DDX58 (RIGI), which in response to viral RNA induces IFNB1. We investigated whether the early induction of IFNBI in only a small percentage of infected cells leads to low level IFN secretion that then induces IFN-responsive genes in all cells. We developed an agent-based mathematical model to explore the IFNBI and DDX58 temporal dynamics. Simulations showed that a small number of early responder cells provide a mechanism for efficient and controlled activation of the DDX58-IFNBI positive feedback loop. The model predicted distributions of single cell responses that were confirmed by single cell mRNA measurements. The results suggest that large cell-to-cell variation plays an important role in the early innate immune response, and that the variability is essential for the efficient activation of the IFNB1 based feedback loop.

20511549
A common polymorphism in the caspase recruitment domain of RIG-I modifies the innate immune response of human dendritic cells.
Infection of human dendritic cells (DCs) by negative-strand RNA viruses, such as Newcastle disease virus, leads to the induction of the IFNbeta gene, IFNB1, through the activation of the RNA helicase RIG-I, which is encoded by DDX58. Expression levels of IFNB1 and DDX58 in infected DCs showed positive correlations at the population and the single-cell levels. DDX58 has a common and potentially functional single nucleotide polymorphism, rs10813831 (A/G), encoding an Arg7Cys amino acid change in the RIG-I protein caspase recruitment domain (CARD). Quantitative RT-PCR analysis on Newcastle disease virus-infected primary DCs from 130 individuals revealed a significant association of the Arg7Cys single nucleotide polymorphism with increased IFNB1 and DDX58 transcription. Allelic imbalance analysis ruled out allele-specific DDX58 message levels and suggested that the observed association between Arg7Cys and IFNB1 and DDX58 transcription originated from a functional change in RIG-I due to the amino acid substitution in the CARD. DDX58 transfection experiments in 293T cells confirmed a biological functional difference between RIG-I 7Cys and the more common RIG-I 7Arg. Taken together, these data indicate that the innate immune response to viral infection of human cells is modified by a functional polymorphism in the RIG-I CARD.

20298589
Coregulation mapping based on individual phenotypic variation in response to virus infection.
Gene coregulation across a population is an important aspect of the considerable variability of the human immune response to virus infection. Methodology to investigate it must rely on a number of ingredients ranging from gene clustering to transcription factor enrichment analysis. We have developed a methodology to investigate the gene to gene correlations for the expression of 34 genes linked to the immune response of Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV) infected conventional dendritic cells (DCs) from 145 human donors. The levels of gene expression showed a large variation across individuals. We generated a map of gene co-expression using pairwise correlation and multidimensional scaling (MDS). The analysis of these data showed that among the 13 genes left after filtering for statistically significant variations, two clusters are formed. We investigated to what extent the observed correlation patterns can be explained by the sharing of transcription factors (TFs) controlling these genes. Our analysis showed that there was a significant positive correlation between MDS distances and TF sharing across all pairs of genes. We applied enrichment analysis to the TFs having binding sites in the promoter regions of those genes. This analysis, after Gene Ontology filtering, indicated the existence of two clusters of genes (CCL5, IFNA1, IFNA2, IFNB1) and (IKBKE, IL6, IRF7, MX1) that were transcriptionally co-regulated. In order to facilitate the use of our methodology by other researchers, we have also developed an interactive coregulation explorer web-based tool called CorEx. It permits the study of MDS and hierarchical clustering of data combined with TF enrichment analysis. We also offer web services that provide programmatic access to MDS, hierarchical clustering and TF enrichment analysis. MDS mapping based on correlation in conjunction with TF enrichment analysis represents a useful computational method to generate predictions underlying gene coregulation across a population.

19767614
Demonstration of all-or-none loss of imprinting in mRNA expression in single cells.
Loss of imprinting (LOI) is the reactivation of the silenced allele of an imprinted gene, leading to perturbation of monoallelic expression. We tested the hypothesis that LOI of PLAGL1, a representative maternally imprinted gene, occurs through an all-or-none process leading to a mixture of fully imprinted and nonimprinted cells. Herein using a quantitative RT-PCR-based experimental approach, we measured LOI at the single cell level in human trophoblasts and demonstrated a broad distribution of LOI among cells exhibiting LOI, with the mean centered at approximately 100% LOI. There was a significant (P < 0.01) increase in expression after 2 days of 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (AZA) treatment and a significant (P < 0.01) increase in LOI after both 1 and 2 days of AZA treatment, while the distribution remained broad and centered at approximately 100% LOI. We propose a transcriptional pulsing model to show that the broadness of the distribution reflects the stochastic nature of expression between the two alleles in each cell. The mean of the distribution of LOI in the cells is consistent with our hypothesis that LOI occurs by an all-or-none process. All-or-none LOI could lead to a second distinct cell population that may have a selective advantage, leading to variation of LOI in normal tissues, such as the placenta, or in neoplastic cells.

17675303
Chromosome-specific and noisy IFNB1 transcription in individual virus-infected human primary dendritic cells.
The induction of interferon beta (IFNB1) is a key event in the antiviral immune response. We studied the role of transcriptional noise in the regulation of the IFNB1 locus in primary cultures of human dendritic cells (DCs), which are important 'first responders' to viral infection. In single cell assays, IFNB1 mRNA expression in virus-infected DCs showed much greater cell-to-cell variation than that of a housekeeping gene, another induced transcript and viral RNA. We determined the contribution of intrinsic noise by measuring the allelic origin of transcripts in each cell and found that intrinsic noise is a very significant part of total noise. We developed a stochastic model to investigate the underlying mechanisms. We propose that the surprisingly high levels of IFNB1 transcript noise originate from the complexity of IFNB1 enhanceosome formation, which leads to a range up to many minutes in the differences within each cell in the time of activation of each allele.

19804729
Power-laws in interferon-B mRNA distribution in virus-infected dendritic cells.
Interferon-beta (IFNB1) mRNA shows very large cell-to-cell variability in primary human dendritic cells infected by Newcastle disease virus, with copy numbers varying from a few to several thousands. Analysis of data from the direct measurement of the expression of this gene in its natural chromatin environment in primary human cells shows that the distribution of mRNA across cells follows a power law with an exponent close to -1, and thus encompasses a range of variation much more extensive than a Gaussian. We also investigate the single cell levels of IFNB1 mRNA induced by infection with Texas influenza A mutant viruses, which vary in their capacity to inhibit the signaling pathways responsible for activation of this gene. Here as well we observe power-law behavior for the distribution of IFNB1 mRNA, albeit over a truncated range of values, with exponents similar to the one for cells infected by Newcastle disease virus. We propose a model of stochastic enhanceosome and preinitiation complex formation that incorporates transcriptional pulsing. Analytical and numerical results show good agreement with the observed power laws, and thus support the existence of transcriptional pulsing of an unmodified, intact gene regulated by a natural stimulus.

