21366546
Effect of a 1-Week Clinical Rotation in Palliative Medicine on Medical School Graduates' Knowledge of and Preparedness in Caring for Seriously Ill Patients.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effect of a required 1-week clinical rotation in palliative medicine during a 12-week internal medicine-geriatrics clerkship on graduating medical students' knowledge and self-assessed preparedness in caring for seriously ill patients. DESIGN: Historical control trial. SETTING: Mount Sinai School of Medicine (MSSM), New York, New York. PARTICIPANTS: Students from the MSSM classes of 2007 (MS07) and 2008 (MS08). INTERVENTION: MS08 was the first class to complete the required clinical rotation in palliative medicine. MS07 served as a historical control, having received only didactics in palliative care but no clinical rotation. MEASUREMENTS: Both classes were invited to complete an anonymous online survey designed to assess experiences and preparedness in caring for seriously ill patients and a 30-question multiple choice knowledge examination. RESULTS: Fifty-eight (55%) students from MS07 and 59 (51%) students from MS08 completed the survey. Students from MS08 rated their skill level in several areas of pain management and communication more favorably than did students from MS07. Mean scores on the knowledge portion of the survey were not significantly different between the two classes. CONCLUSION: Graduating medical students who had a 1-week clinical rotation in palliative medicine had higher self-assessed skills in pain management and communication than students who received no clinical exposure. A brief clinical experience in palliative care should be considered for integration into the curriculum at all medical schools.

21241038
Audit and feedback: an intervention to improve discharge summary completion.
Discharge summaries (DS) communicate important clinical information from inpatient to outpatient settings. Previous studies noted increased adverse events and rehospitalization due to poor DS quality. We postulated that an audit and feedback intervention of DS completed by geriatric medicine fellows would improve the completeness of their summaries. We conducted a preintervention post intervention study. In phase 1 (AUDIT #1 and FEEDBACK) we scored all DS (n = 89) completed by first year fellows between July 2006 to December 2006 using a 21-item checklist. Individual performance scores were reviewed with each fellow in 30-minute feedback sessions. In phase 2 (AUDIT #2) we scored all DS (n = 79) completed after the first phase between February 2007 to July 2007 using the same checklist. Data were analyzed using generalized estimating equations. Fellows were more likely to complete all required DS data after feedback when compared with prior to feedback (91% vs. 71%, P < 0.001). Feedback was also associated with improved admission (93% vs. 70%, P < 0.001), duration of hospitalization (93% vs 78%, P < 0.001), discharge planning (93% vs. 18%, P < 0.02) and postdischarge care (83% vs. 57%., P < 0.001) section-specific information. In conclusion, audit and feedback sessions were associated with better DS completeness in areas of particular importance to geriatric care.

21099393
Regulation of medical student work hours: a national survey of deans.
Because of the impact of resident duty hours on resident and medical student education, it is important to determine curriculum deans' opinions toward and current status of student work hours regulations. In 2008, the authors electronically surveyed the curriculum deans at the 126 U.S. medical schools accredited by the Liaison Committee on Medical Education (LCME) regarding student work hours at their schools. Sixty-six respondents (82%) had a written policy restricting their students' work hours, and in 63% of these, the policy also extended to students visiting their institution. Policies applied to mandatory and elective (84%) or only mandatory (16%) rotations. About half the respondents supported a universal policy across medical schools, but of those who supported a policy, there was an equal split between whether individual schools or the LCME should create the policy. Deans felt strongly (>80%) that student well-being would be improved by work hours regulation, yet 48% noted that it would negatively affect scheduling required clerkship activities. Fifty-four percent supported the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education work hours policy for students, and most (82%) felt that students should work no more than 80 hours/week. Students are always supervised, yet extended work hours can affect learning and patient and team interactions. Without a mandate, many schools have created policies to restrict student work hours. This study describes the current status and offers an opportunity for consensus building around this important issue.

20853065
Update in medical education.


20104622
Predictors of serious injury among hospitalized patients evaluated for falls.
Inpatient falls are common and result in significant patient morbidity. To identify predictors of serious injury being found on imaging studies of inpatients evaluated after a fall. Retrospective study. : An 1171-bed urban academic medical center. All inpatients who fell on thirteen medical and surgical units from January 1 to December 31, 2006. Patient characteristics, circumstances surrounding falls, fall-related injuries, and length of stay were collected through review of incident reports and computerized medical records. Primary outcome of fall-related injury was determined by evidence of injury on imaging studies within two weeks of the fall. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression were used to calculate adjusted odds ratios (ORs) for injury after an inpatient fall. A total of 513 patients had 636 falls during the study time period. Fall incidence rate was 1.97 falls per 1,000 patient days. 95 patients (19%) fell multiple times (range, 2-6 events); 74% of the falls occurred in patients who were previously assessed as being "at risk" by the nursing staff. Multivariate analysis, adjusting for age and sex, found evidence of trauma after a fall (OR = 24.6, P < 0.001) and ambulatory status (OR = 7.3, P < 0.01) to be independent predictors of injury being found on imaging studies. Inpatient falls are common despite high-risk patients being identified. After adjusting for age and sex, evidence of trauma and ambulatory status were independent predictors of an injury being found on imaging studies after an inpatient fall.

19642157
Medical student documentation in the medical record: is it a liability?
Medical students have routinely documented patient encounters in both inpatient and outpatient care venues. This hands-on experience has provided a way for students to reflect on patient encounters, learn proper documentation skills, and attain a sense of being actively involved in and responsible for the care of patients. Over the last several years, the practice of student note writing has come into question. Institutional disincentives to student documentation include insurance regulations that restrict student documentation from substantiating billing claims, concerns about the legal status of student notes, and implementation of electronic medical records that do not allow or restrict student access. The increased scrutiny of the medical record from pay-for-performance programs and other quality measures will likely add to the pressure to exclude students from writing notes. This trend in limiting medical student documentation may have wide-ranging consequences for student education, from delaying the learning of proper documentation skills to limiting training opportunities. This article reviews the educational value of student note writing, the factors that have made student documentation problematic, and the potential educational impact of limiting student documentation. In addition, it offers some suggestions for future research to guide policy in this area.

18800205
Update in medical education 2007.


