20922584
Is intraoperative CT of posterior cervical spine instrumentation cost-effective and does it reduce complications?
Symptomatic multilevel cervical myelopathy is often addressed using posterior decompression using two-dimensional fluoroscopy. Intraoperative three-dimensional fluoroscopy provides more accurate information on the position of instrumentation to prevent screw-related complications. We documented the incidence of hardware-related complications and evaluate cost-effectiveness when using intraoperative three-dimensional fluoroscopy (ISO-C CT) in posterior cervical spine surgery. Records from 87 patients who underwent posterior cervical decompression and instrumented fusion for multilevel cervical spondylosis with myelopathy were retrospectively reviewed. Patients in whom a lateral mass, pars, or pedicle screw was removed or revised based on intraoperative ISO-C CT was recorded. Cost analysis was performed using 2008 Medicare reimbursements and was compared against cost estimates for ISO-C CT. Seven patients (8%) had screws changed based on the results of the three-dimensional fluoroscopy: 0.5% of lateral mass screws, 3.1% of thoracic pedicle screws, and 15% of C2 pars screws. No patients who had evaluation of hardware with the ISO-C CT required a return to surgery for complications secondary to hardware failure, malposition, or cutout. Cost savings are achieved if use of intraoperative ISO-C CT prevents eight patients from requiring a return to the operating room. If every malpositioned screw has the potential to be symptomatic, then 240 patients must have screws placed to be cost-effective. ISO-C CT can safely replace postoperative CT as the standard of care in patients undergoing posterior cervical spinal fusion. Level III, economic and decision analyses. See Guidelines for Authors for a complete description of levels of evidence.

20506945
The importance of plain radiography in the evaluation of radiculopathy after failed diskectomy.
Herniated disks in the lumbar spine are the leading cause of patient visits to spinal surgeons in the United States. Although magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the diagnostic test of choice in patients with a herniated disk, plain radiographs can provide important information and should remain a standard part of the diagnostic workup in any patient indicated for revision spine surgery. This article describes a case of a 36-year-old man with a >6-month history of worsening lumbar radiculopathy who was diagnosed with lumbar disk herniations based on MRI alone and underwent 2 unsuccessful attempts at microdiskectomy at another institution. Further workup by the senior author (A.C.H.), which included initial plain radiographs followed by computed tomography, demonstrated a large disk herniation with a markedly calcified annulus as the continuing source of neurologic compression. The patient underwent revision lumbar decompression with attention being paid to the removal of the calcified annulus and disk material that resulted in complete resolution of his symptoms. Although MRI is the diagnostic test of choice in the evaluation of spinal pathology, plain radiographs can provide important additional information that can be vital to the successful outcome of patients undergoing revision spinal surgery.

20445364
Lumbar spinous process avulsion fracture in an adolescent dancer.


19956037
Novel fluoroscopic technique for localization at cervicothoracic levels.
To use a novel modified intraoperative fluoroscopic view for spinal level localization. To evaluate the safety and utility of the modified oblique fluoroscopic technique for intraoperative localization of distal cervical and proximal thoracic spinal levels. SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND INFORMATION: Operative radiographic localization of the cervicothoracic spine using standard anterior-posterior and lateral views is made difficult by its anatomic relationship to the shoulder and upper chest, which produce radiographic shadowing obscuring the spine. Additional image degradation can be caused by muscular patients or those with a high body mass index. An oblique modification of the standard cross table lateral can be used to accurately identify pathologic levels at or across the cervicothoracic junction. This method distinctly demonstrates the bony lamina, which can then be used to count spinal levels. The unique feature of this technique is that the oblique angle removes the shoulder and the majority of the ribs from the active field of view, thereby producing a cleaner and more distinct image. When the gantry angle of the fluoroscope is parallel to the plane of the opposite lamina, it gives a type of "target sign" similar to the trans-pedicular image commonly used in pedicle screw placement. This radiographic sign can be easily identified and recognized across the cervicothoracic junction, even in those patients with a large body mass index or large musculature. Spinal level was determined intraoperatively through our oblique technique and confirmed in the same patient through standard views with retrograde counting. Postoperative imaging confirmed correct level surgery. Correct spinal level identification was achieved in the distal cervical and proximal thoracic spine by implementation of our novel oblique fluoroscopy technique. The modified oblique cross table fluoroscopy technique allows accurate operative localization across the cervicothoracic junction and well into the thoracic spine.

19800298
Synovial sarcoma of the thoracic spine.
Synovial sarcoma is an uncommon malignant neoplasm occurring chiefly in young adults. It often presents as a solid well-circumscribed soft-tissue mass in the extremities of young adults. Despite its proximity to joints, it has been well established that the tumor cells do not display features of synovial differentiation but instead appear to have a primitive epithelial phenotype. There is no report of a lower thoracic paravertebral synovial sarcoma in an adult male. To describe our management in a patient with a synovial sarcoma of the thoracic spine and to review previously published cases. Case report. A 60-year-old man presented with a 5-month history of right upper quadrant abdominal pain radiating to his back in a band-like fashion; shortness of breath on exertion; and increasing pain when standing, sitting, or walking. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a large right-sided paraspinal mass sitting on the eighth and ninth ribs, pressing on the T9 vertebrae and abutting the T7 and T8 vertebral level exhibiting "Triple Intensity." Plain films demonstrated a right-sided paraspinal mass extending from the T7-T8 level to T10. Bone scintigraphy showed increased uptake on the right thoracic spine at T7-T8 to T10. Computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed a right paraspinal mass with lytic changes in the T9 vertebral bodies. A right-sided thoracotomy was performed, and the patient underwent subsequent radiation therapy. Absence of the tumor was shown by an MRI scan after the operation. Complete resolution of the patient's complaints was achieved. The diagnosis is supported by plain radiographs, bone scintigraphy, magnetic resonance and CT imaging studies, and histologic and immunohistochemical evidence. Synovial sarcomas are rarely present in the paravertebral region of the thoracic spine. A careful radiographic study of the tumor permitted early preliminary diagnosis, confirmed upon histopathologic analysis. Despite lytic changes, removal of a periosteal layer permitted sparing of the vertebral bodies.

