21425272
Bed rest in pregnancy.
The use of bed rest in medicine dates back to Hippocrates, who first recommended bed rest as a restorative measure for pain. With the formalization of prenatal care in the early 1900s, maternal bed rest became a standard of care, especially toward the end of pregnancy. Antepartum bed rest is a common obstetric management tool, with up to 95% of obstetricians utilizing maternal activity restriction in some way in their practice. Bed rest is prescribed for a variety of complications of pregnancy, from threatened abortion and multiple gestations to preeclampsia and preterm labor. Although the use of bed rest is pervasive, there is a paucity of data to support its use. Additionally, many well-documented adverse physical, psychological, familial, societal, and financial effects have been discussed in the literature. There have been no complications of pregnancy for which the literature consistently demonstrates a benefit to antepartum bed rest. Given the well-documented adverse effects of bed rest, disruption of social relationships, and financial implications of this intervention, there is a real need for scientific investigation to establish whether this is an appropriate therapeutic modality. Well-designed randomized, controlled trials of bed rest versus normal activity for various complications of pregnancy are required to lay this debate to rest once and for all.

20014413
Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis: past, present, and future.
The presence of fetal cells in the maternal circulation was first noted by Georg Schmorl when he documented the presence of multinucleated syncytial giant cells of placental origin in the lung tissue of women who had died from complications of eclampsia. In the intervening century, advances in cellular and molecular biology further elucidated both the physiology and pathophysiology of communication within the fetomaternal unit. This concept is at the foundation of the rapidly expanding field of noninvasive prenatal diagnosis. However, the clinical utility of this phenomenon had been limited until the presence of cell-free fetal DNA circulating in the maternal plasma was reported in 1997 and fetal messenger RNA was demonstrated to circulate in the maternal plasma in 2000. These circulating nucleic acids are found free-floating in the maternal plasma, unencumbered by a surrounding fetal cell. The analysis of these 3 fetal markers (fetal cells, cell-free fetal DNA, and fetal messenger RNA) for diagnostic and screening purposes is now being developed. The scope of noninvasive prenatal diagnosis is not limited to only the diagnosis of fetal genetic traits and aneuploidies. Recently, researchers have focused their investigations on the role of cell-free fetal DNA and fetal messenger RNA in preeclampsia, intrauterine growth restriction, and preterm labor. These biomarkers, the result of inherent placental dysfunction or the byproducts of placental trophoblastic apoptosis, may allow for improvements in the diagnosis and management of high-risk pregnancies.

19495946
Approaching NIH guideline recommended care for maternal-infant health: clinical failures to use recommended antenatal corticosteroids.
To assess the use of antenatal corticosteroids in clinical circumstances for which both the NIH Guideline and local experts recommend their use and to describe characteristics associated with failure to use recommended antenatal steroids. We convened local experts to adapt the NIH statement by identifying clinical circumstances for which they agree antenatal steroids should always be used. We conducted a retrospective chart review on a cohort study of mothers who delivered premature (24-34 weeks) infants between 2000 and 2002 at three New York City hospitals and investigated the association of failure to treat with antenatal steroids with characteristics of the mother, pregnancy, delivery, and hospital. Twenty percent (101/515) of eligible mothers failed to receive indicated antenatal corticosteroid therapy. Of these, 43% delivered more than 2 h after admission, and 33% delivered more than 4 h after admission, indicating sufficient time to have treated them. Lack of prenatal care, longer gestation, advanced cervical exam, and intact membranes at admission were associated with failure to receive the recommended therapy. Antenatal steroids were under-utilized in our sample. If our results our generalizable, opportunities for quality improvement in the antenatal management of mothers in preterm labor exist.

18928991
Contemporary outcomes with the latest 1000 cases of multifetal pregnancy reduction (MPR).
This study was undertaken to report on the outcome of multifetal pregnancy reduction in the most up-to-date largest single center experience with this procedure, and compare the outcome to the first 1000 cases performed at the same institution. 1000 consecutive cases of multifetal pregnancy reduction performed at the Mount Sinai Medical Center between the years 1999-2006 were identified. Pregnancy outcomes were retrieved from a large database as well as chart review. Differences in means and proportions were evaluated by analysis of variance, chi-square, Cochran-Armitage test for trend or 2-tailed Fisher exact test as appropriate. Outcomes were available on 841 cases, for a follow-up rate of 84.1%; 95.2% of patients delivered after 24 weeks, for a complete loss rate of 4.7%. There was a significant trend toward decreasing loss rates with decreasing starting numbers. Mean gestational age at delivery was later, and birthweights greater, for reduction to singletons vs twins. Loss rates after multifetal pregnancy reduction have remained stable at 4.7%. The lowest loss rate occurred in the patients reducing from twins to a singleton (2.1%). Reduction to a singleton was also associated with higher birthweights and lower rates of preterm deliveries.

18639217
Chorionic villus sampling and the risk of adverse outcome in patients undergoing multifetal pregnancy reduction.
The objective of the study was to determine whether patients undergoing chorionic villus sampling (CVS) prior to MPR are at increased risk for adverse outcome compared to those who did not. We retrospectively identified multifetal pregnancy reduction (MPR) patients from an established database. Maternal demographic data were collected. Outcomes including complete pregnancy loss prior to 24 weeks' gestation, gestational age at delivery, and birthweight were analyzed. There was no significant difference in pregnancy loss between the 2 groups (CVS [4%] vs no CVS [7%], P = .098). When stratified by finishing number, there was a significantly lower loss rate in the singleton CVS group (2% vs 9%, P = .025) and no significant difference in reduced twins. There was no significant difference in the average gestational age of delivery or birthweight. CVS prior to MPR does not increase the risk of pregnancy loss. Our data suggest that CVS prior to singleton reduction may decrease the risk of adverse outcome.

17972236
Differences in fetal growth, discordancy, and placental pathology in reduced versus nonreduced twins.
This study evaluated the effect of multifetal pregnancy reduction on the incidence of small for gestational age (SGA) and discordance in reduced versus nonreduced twins and differences in placental pathology. A computerized ultrasound database was used to identify diamniotic-dichorionic twins who delivered at our institution. Reduced (n = 36) versus nonreduced twins (n = 243) were compared for differences in rates of SGA and discordancy (>or= 20%.) The groups were compared for differences in maternal and neonatal characteristics, as well as differences in placental pathology. Chi-square tests were used to compare differences in means. Stepwise logistic regression was used to adjust for potential confounders including placental pathology. The rate of SGA in either twin A or B remained nonsignificant after adjustment for the use of assisted reproductive technology and gestational age at delivery in the stepwise logistic model (odds ratio, 1.7 95%; confidence interval, 0.5, 5.2). The average discordance at delivery was 12.4% in reduced versus 11.4% in the nonreduced twins ( P = 0.54). We found no overall differences in placental pathology between the two groups. Reduced and nonreduced twins have no significant differences in SGA fetuses, growth discordancy, or placental pathology.

17904974
Evolving trends in 2000 cases of multifetal pregnancy reduction: a single-center experience.
The purpose of this study was to examine changes in multifetal pregnancy reduction (MPR) procedures in 2000 cases and to evaluate evolving trends within the last 1000 MPRs. Two thousand patients who underwent MPR were identified. Data were collected from a computerized database. Comparisons were made between the first 1000 patients (group 1) and the second 1000 patients (group 2). In addition, changing trends within group 2 were also analyzed. Differences in proportions were evaluated by chi-square test and Fisher's exact test, as appropriate. There was a significant difference in the starting and finishing number of fetuses and a significant increase in the use of chorionic villus sampling before MPR in group 2 vs group 1 (43.7% vs 1.5%; P < .0001). The incidence of monochorionicity was significantly higher in group 2 (5.7%), compared with group 1 (2.1%; P < .001). Recent trends in MPR demonstrates significant increases in overall reductions to a singleton fetus, the use of chorionic villus sampling, and the presence of monochorionicity.

18759865
PTPN11 analysis for the prenatal diagnosis of Noonan syndrome in fetuses with abnormal ultrasound findings.
Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by short stature, congenital heart defects and distinctive facies. The disorder is genetically heterogeneous with approximately 50% of patients having PTPN11 mutations. Prenatally, the diagnosis of NS has been suspected following certain ultrasound findings, such as cystic hygroma, increased nuchal translucency (NT) and hydrops fetalis. Studies of fetuses with cystic hygroma have suggested an NS prevalence of 1-3%. A retrospective review was performed to assess the utility of PTPN11 testing based on prenatal sonographic findings (n = 134). The most commonly reported indications for testing were increased NT and cystic hygroma. Analysis showed heterozygous missense mutations in 12 fetuses, corresponding to a positive test rate of 9%. PTPN11 mutations were identified in 16% and 2% of fetuses with cystic hygroma and increased NT, respectively. Among fetuses with isolated cystic hygroma, PTPN11 mutation prevalence was 11%. The mutations observed in the three fetuses with hydrops fetalis had previously been reported as somatic cancer mutations. Prenatal PTPN11 testing has diagnostic and possible prognostic properties that can aid in risk assessment and genetic counseling. As NS is genetically heterogeneous, negative PTPN11 testing cannot exclude the diagnosis and further study is warranted regarding the other NS genes.

