21164355
Adeno-associated virus serotype 8 ApoA-I gene transfer reduces progression of atherosclerosis in ApoE-KO mice: comparison of intramuscular and intravenous administration.
Apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I)/high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-raising treatments are effective antiatherosclerotic strategies. We have compared the antiatherogenic effects of human ApoA-I (hApoA-I) overexpression by intraportal and intramuscular gene transfer in atherosclerotic ApoE-knockout mice. Atherosclerotic lesions were induced by atherogenic diet. After atherosclerosis induction, a group of animals was killed and served as atherosclerosis baseline-control group. The remaining animals were randomized into the following groups: (1) atherosclerosis-progression-control, (2) intraportal/vector administration, and (3) intramuscular/vector administration. Aortas and hearts were processed for atherosclerotic quantification by en face Sudan IV and Oil Red-O, respectively. Liver and muscle specimens were processed for protein/gene expression analysis. A sustained increase in hApoA-I/HDL plasma levels was observed in both transduced groups. hApoA-I overexpression abolished plaque progression versus progression-control group. hApoA-I overexpression significantly reduced lesion macrophage, feature indicative of plaque stabilization. Scavenger receptor class-B type I (SR-BI), but not ATP-binding cassette, sub-family A (ABCA), member 1 (ABCA-1), was significantly upregulated in treated groups versus progression-controls. The results of this study show a similar effect of hApoA-I/HDL overexpression on plaque progression/stabilization by 2 different routes of administration. Our results showing similar effects using either intramuscular administration and intraportal route of administration may have significant clinical implications, given the reduced medical risk to patient and cost of intramuscular injections.

19701094
Safe and sustained overexpression of functional apolipoprotein A-I/high-density lipoprotein in apolipoprotein A-I-null mice by muscular adeno-associated viral serotype 8 vector gene transfer.
High levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) have protective effects against atherosclerosis and cardiovascular diseases. The postulated mechanism of action for these benefits is an enhanced reverse cholesterol transport. Apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I) is the major protein of HDL. The clinical benefits of raising ApoA-I/HDL have been clearly established by clinical and epidemiological studies. Despite these observations, there are not very effective pharmacological means for raising HDL. ApoA-I gene delivery by viral vectors seems a promising strategy to raise ApoA-I/HDL levels. Sustained gene expression in animals and humans has been attained using adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors. The aim of the present study was to determine the efficiency, safety, and biological activity of human ApoA-I intramuscularly delivered using an AAV vector in mice. AAV serotype 8 vectors encoding for human ApoA-I transgene were administered intraportally and intramuscularly in ApoA-I- deficient animals. ApoA-I levels were measured every 2 weeks post administration. The effectiveness of the generated HDL was tested in vitro in cholesterol-loaded macrophages. The administration of the vectors resulted in a significant and sustained increase in ApoA-I and HDL plasma levels for up to 16 weeks at similar extent by both routes of administration. Activity of the generated HDL in removal of cholesterol from cholesterol-loaded macrophages was similar in both groups. Our data suggest that intramuscular AAV8-mediated gene transfer of human ApoA-I results in a significant and maintained increase in ApoA-I and functional HDL.

19232422
Chimeric AAV Cap sequences alter gene transduction.
Recombinant adeno-associated viruses (rAAV) are vectors for gene delivery. rAAVs occur in several serotypes shown to have different transduction capabilities. Capsid sequences of the serotypes are different suggesting that differences in gene delivery are in large part due to capsid structure. Since the available serotypes are inefficient transducers of cell lines on a particle per cell basis and inefficiently transduce desired target cells in vivo there have been numerous attempts to create better vectors by modifying the capsids. A question of interest is whether natural selection has led, and whether laboratory-based selection methods will lead, to viruses with a sharply defined optimal specificity. Here we created multiple randomly recombined capsid species using the known AAV serotype capsid sequences by STEP and shuffling methods. We then used selection to identify a viral capsid better adapted to Hep G2 cells than the known serotypes. This capsid was then tested with other cells to determine whether the selection produced a virus specifically tailored by the selection methodology or one of wider applicability. The selected virus turned out to be surprisingly limited by its target cell and method of selection.

16445862
Intrathecal long-term gene expression by self-complementary adeno-associated virus type 1 suitable for chronic pain studies in rats.
Intrathecal (IT) gene transfer is an attractive approach for targeting spinal mechanisms of nociception but the duration of gene expression achieved by reported methods is short (up to two weeks) impairing their utility in the chronic pain setting. The overall goal of this study was to develop IT gene transfer yielding true long-term transgene expression defined as > or = 3 mo following a single vector administration. We defined "IT" administration as atraumatic injection into the lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) modeling a lumbar puncture. Our studies focused on recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV), one of the most promising vector types for clinical use. Conventional single stranded rAAV2 vectors performed poorly after IT delivery in rats. Pseudotyping of rAAV with capsids of serotypes 1, 3, and 5 was tested alone or in combination with a modification of the inverted terminal repeat. The former alters vector tropism and the latter allows packaging of self-complementary rAAV (sc-rAAV) vectors. Combining both types of modification led to the identification of sc-rAAV2/l as a vector that performed superiorly in the IT space. IT delivery of 3 x 10e9 sc-rAAV2/l particles per animal led to stable expression of enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) for > or = 3 mo detectable by Western blotting, quantitative PCR, and in a blinded study by confocal microscopy. Expression was strongest in the cauda equina and the lower sections of the spinal cord and only minimal in the forebrain. Microscopic examination of the SC fixed in situ with intact nerve roots and meninges revealed strong EGFP fluorescence in the nerve roots. sc-rAAVl mediates stable IT transgene expression for > or = 3 mo. Our findings support the underlying hypothesis that IT target cells for gene transfer lack the machinery for efficient conversion of the single-stranded rAAV genome into double-stranded DNA and favor uptake of serotype 1 vectors over 2. Experiments presented here will provide a rational basis for utilizing IT rAAV gene transfer in basic and translational studies on chronic pain.

19493018
Factor VIII prophylaxis for adult patients with severe haemophilia A: results of a US survey of attitudes and practices.
The emergence of a population of relatively healthy adults with severe haemophilia A presents a unique challenge for haemophilia care in the 21st century. Understanding how best to continue, restart, initiate or modify prophylaxis in younger and older adult patients is essential to optimizing their care. To elucidate practice and outcome data, a survey was sent to 23 US hemophilia treatment centers (HTCs); 10 centers responded, providing data concerning up to 145 adults (mean age of 34 years). Forty-eight patients (33%) were on regular prophylaxis when first seen at the HTC; the prophylactic regimen was modified for 22/48 (46%), often because of breakthrough bleeding. Five of 21 patients (24%) for whom data were available discontinued prophylaxis. Three of those five patients (60%) experienced increased bleeding episodes and the other two (40%) subsequently resumed regular prophylactic infusions because of the increased bleeding. Of the 77 patients not initially receiving prophylaxis for whom data were available, prophylaxis was started or resumed in all. The prophylactic regimen was modified in 57/77 patients (74%) at some point during treatment, often because of breakthrough bleeding. Of the 55 patients whose prophylactic regimens were modified for whom data were available, 22 (40%) discontinued prophylaxis. Thirteen of 20 patients (65%) for whom data were available experienced an increase in bleeding episodes and 7/18 patients (39%) who had discontinued prophylaxis and for whom data were available subsequently resumed regular prophylactic infusions because of bleeding. These findings suggest that prophylaxis prevents bleeding in adults with severe haemophilia A and that discontinuation of the prophylactic regimen is associated with increased bleeding events.

