18500713
Impact of September 11 World Trade Center disaster on children and pregnant women.
BACKGROUND: Children are uniquely sensitive to toxic exposures in the environment. This sensitivity reflects children's disproportionately heavy exposures coupled with the biologic vulnerability that is a consequence of their passage through the complex transitions of early development. METHODS AND RESULTS: To assess effects on children's health associated with the attacks on the World Trade Center (WTC) of September 11, 2001, research teams at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine and other academic health centers in New York City launched a series of clinical and epidemiologic studies. Mount Sinai investigators undertook a prospective analysis of pregnancy outcomes in 182 women who were pregnant on September 11, 2001, and who had been either inside or within 0.5 miles of the WTC at the time of the attacks; they found a doubling in incidence of intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) among infants born to exposed mothers as compared to infants born to unexposed women in northern Manhattan. A Columbia research team examined pregnancy outcomes in 329 women who lived, worked or gave birth in lower Manhattan in the 9 months after September 11; they found that these women gave birth to infants with significantly lower birth weight and shorter length than women living at greater distances from Ground Zero. NYU investigators documented increased numbers of new asthma cases and aggravations of preexisting asthma in children living in lower Manhattan. Mount Sinai mental health researchers documented a significant increase in mental health problems in children who directly witnessed the attacks and subsequent traumatic events; these problems were most severe in children with a past history of psychological trauma. The New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene established a WTC Registry that has enrolled over 70,000 persons of all ages in lower Manhattan and will follow the health of these populations to document on a continuing basis the health consequences of September 11.

18479682
Environmental exposures and puberty in inner-city girls.
Hormonally active environmental exposures are suspected to alter onset of puberty in girls, but research on this question has been very limited. We investigated pubertal status in relation to hormonally active environmental exposures among a multiethnic group of 192 healthy 9-year-old girls residing in New York City. Information was collected on breast and pubic hair stages, weight and height. Phytoestrogen intake was estimated from a food-frequency questionnaire. Three phytoestrogens and bis-phenolA (BPA) were measured in urine. In a subset, 1,1'-dichloro-2,2'-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethylene (DDE), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) were measured in blood plasma and lead (Pb) in blood. Associations of exposures with pubertal stages (present=stage 2+ vs absent=stage 1) were examined using t-tests and Poisson multivariate regression to derive prevalence ratios (PR, 95%-confidence limits [CI]). Breast development was present in 53% of girls. DDE, Pb, and dietary intakes of phytoestrogens were not significantly associated with breast stage. Urinary phytoestrogen biomarker concentrations were lower among girls with breast development compared with no development. In multivariate models, main effects were strongest for two urinary isoflavones, daidzein (PR 0.89 [0.83-0.96] per ln microg/g creatinine) and genistein (0.94 [0.88-1.01]). Body mass index (BMI) is a hormonally relevant, strong risk factor for breast development. Therefore, BMI-modification of exposure effects was examined, and associations became stronger. Delayed breast development was observed among girls with below-median BMI and third tertile (high exposure) of urinary daidzein (PR 0.46 [0.26-0.78]); a similar effect was seen with genistein, comparing to girls >or= median BMI and lowest two tertiles (combined) of these isoflavones. With urinary enterolactone a phytoestrogen effect was seen only among girls with high BMI, where breast development was delayed among those with high urinary enterolactone (PR 0.55 [0.32-0.96] for the upper tertile vs lower two combined). There was no main effect of PCBs on breast stage, but girls with below-median BMI and >or= median PCB levels had reduced risk for breast development (any vs none) compared with other BMI-PCB groups. No biomarkers were associated with hair development, which was present in 31% of girls. Phytoestrogens and PCBs are environmental exposures that may delay breast development, especially in conjunction with BMI, which governs the endogenous hormonal milieu. Further research to confirm these findings may improve our understanding of the role of early life development in breast cancer risk and other chronic diseases related to obesity.

17938724
The ambulatory pediatric association fellowship in pediatric environmental health: a 5-year assessment.
Evidence is mounting that environmental exposures contribute to causation of disease in children. Yet few pediatricians are trained to diagnose, treat, or prevent disease of environmental origin. To develop a cadre of future leaders in pediatric environmental health (PEH), the Ambulatory Pediatric Association (APA) launched a new 3-year fellowship in 2001-the world's first formal training program in PEH. Sites were established at Boston Children's Hospital, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, George Washington University, University of Cincinnati, and University of Washington. Fellows are trained in epidemiology, biostatistics, toxicology, risk assessment, and preventive medicine. They gain clinical experience in environmental pediatrics and mentored training in clinical research, policy development, and evidence-based advocacy. Thirteen fellows have graduated. Two sites have secured follow-on federal funding to enable them to continue PEH training. To assess objectively the program's success in preparing fellows for leadership careers in PEH, we conducted a mailed survey in 2006 with follow-up in 2007. Fifteen (88%) of 17 fellows and graduates participated; program directors provided information on the remaining two. Nine graduates are pursuing full-time academic careers, and two have leadership positions in governmental and environmental organizations. Ten have published one or more first-authored papers. Seven graduates are principal investigators on federal or foundation grants. The strongest predictors of academic success are remaining affiliated with the fellowship training site and devoting < 20% of fellowship time to clinical practice. The APA fellowship program is proving successful in preparing pediatricians for leadership careers in PEH.

17306682
Effective risk communication in children's environmental health: lessons learned from 9/11.
In situations with visible threats to children's health, pediatric health care providers must be prepared to communicate the health risks of environmental exposures. Several factors influence the effectiveness of such discussions: whether the individual providing the information is considered a reliable source, the familiarity of the physician and parent/guardian with these issues, and the limited research specifically assessing risk of exposure in childhood. This article describes the theory behind effective risk communication using examples from events following September 11, 2001. It shares lessons learned and provides a template for risk communication that can guide pediatric providers.

