21419576
Exposure to smoking cues: Cardiovascular and autonomic effects.
Laboratory exposures to smoking cues have been shown to reliably induce self-reported cigarette cravings among smokers, a model of environmentally triggered urges to smoke that can contribute to poorer cessation success. Several studies have also demonstrated that cue exposures give rise to changes in heart rate and blood pressure. Few studies, however, have investigated possible cue effects on heart rate and blood pressure variability (HRV and BPV). Particularly intriguing in this regard are cardiac oscillations in the low (i.e., 0.04-0.15Hz), and high (i.e., 0.15-0.50Hz) frequency range, which are thought to reflect components of autonomic control and response to environmental challenges. A closer examination of cardiovascular reactivity may thus help characterize the autonomic response to smoking cue exposure. To that end, an experimental study was conducted in which nicotine dependent daily smokers (n=98) were exposed to guided imagery of neutral and smoking situations, while continuous, noninvasive, beat-to-beat cardiovascular data were collected. Consistent with previous research, the findings revealed significant increases in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure during smoking imagery, relative to neutral imagery. In addition, power spectral density analyses of heart rate and blood pressure variability revealed elevated HRV and BPV in both the low- and high-frequency ranges during the smoking imagery. The results suggest the presence of an autonomic component to smoking cue reactivity, and also raise the possibility of long-term negative cardiac consequences for smokers who ubiquitously encounter cues in their daily environments.

20538186
Presurgery psychological factors predict pain, nausea, and fatigue one week after breast cancer surgery.
Before scheduled surgery, breast cancer surgical patients frequently experience high levels of distress and expect a variety of postsurgery symptoms. Previous literature has supported the view that presurgery distress and response expectancies are predictive of postsurgery outcomes. However, the contributions of distress and response expectancies to postsurgical side effect outcomes have rarely been examined together within the same study. Furthermore, studies on the effects of response expectancies in the surgical setting have typically focused on the immediate postsurgical setting rather than the longer-term setting. The purpose of the present study was to test the contribution of presurgery distress and response expectancies to common postsurgery side effects (pain, nausea, and fatigue). Female patients (n=101) undergoing breast cancer surgery were recruited to a prospective study. Results indicated that presurgery distress uniquely contributed to patients' postsurgery pain severity (P<0.05) and fatigue (P<0.003) one week after surgery. Response expectancies uniquely contributed to pain severity (P<0.001), nausea (P<0.012), and fatigue (P<0.010) one week after surgery. Sobel tests indicated that response expectancies partially mediated the effects of distress on pain severity (P<0.03) and fatigue (P<0.03). Response expectancies also mediated the effects of age on pain severity, nausea, and fatigue. Results highlight the contribution of presurgery psychological factors to postsurgery side effects, the importance of including both emotional and cognitive factors within studies as predictors of postsurgery side effects, and suggest presurgical clinical targets for improving patients' postoperative experiences of side effects.

18977604
Script-guided imagery of social drinking induces both alcohol and cigarette craving in a sample of nicotine-dependent smokers.
Laboratory exposure to alcoholic beverage cues has been demonstrated to elicit urges to drink. Less well examined is the possibility that imaginal cues also elicit such urges, providing a model of conditioned effects not dependent on the presence of physical stimuli associated with alcohol. Studies of possible cross-reactivity between smoking and drinking cues are also scarce. To that end, nicotine-dependent nonalcoholic smokers (n=54) were exposed to social drinking-relevant, and for comparison, neutral and smoking-relevant standardized script-guided imagery. Cravings were measured before and after each imaginal exposure. As hypothesized, the drinking script induced alcohol and cigarette cravings, providing support for both direct and cross-cue reactivity effects. Further validating the social-drinking script, craving reactions were significantly stronger among participants who reported frequent drinking in social situations. Finally, smoking imagery induced both cigarette and alcohol cravings, providing further support for the cross-cue-induced craving phenomenon. Results suggest that the present alcohol script may be a useful tool for eliciting craving responses under laboratory conditions, and provide an additional means for better understanding addiction.

17725931
Smoking-related videos for use in cue-induced craving paradigms.
Environmental cues (e.g., the sight of a cigarette) have long been recognized as important triggers for craving in smokers. Available imaging technologies (e.g., fMRI) allow investigation of the neural mechanisms for cue-induced craving, but there stands a need for a cue-delivery system compatible with an MRI environment. We developed a standardized set of 24 high-resolution videos, 12 containing cigarette smoking scenes (e.g., lighting up), and 12 containing neutral scenes (e.g., reading a book), each 30 s long, with comparable lighting, visual complexity, and background filmed by a professional cinematographer. Study participants were 20 smokers (mean age=37.7 years, 50% female). Each was exposed to the 24 videos in a random order under laboratory conditions. Dependent measures included heart rate, blood pressure, skin conductance, skin temperature, and self-reported craving (0-100) following each video. Overall findings indicated that smokers had greater reactivity to the smoking videos than to neutral videos (p<.01). Follow-up univariate analyses revealed significant cue effects on self-reported craving, galvanic skin response, and skin temperature. Interestingly, exploratory examination of gender revealed that men had higher blood pressure and skin temperature responses than women, and that women had higher responses when viewing videos of women smoking than when viewing men smoking. Results support this set of videos as an effective tool for investigation of cue-elicited craving, and raise the possibility of unique gender effects in cue reactivity.

17029702
Poor sleep the night before an experimental stressor predicts reduced NK cell mobilization and slowed recovery in healthy women.
Sleep is important for health; however, poor sleep is a growing problem in many Western societies, particularly among women. Alterations in immune function following poor sleep (defined by duration and disruption) may be linked to ill health. Not yet investigated are the possible effects on stress-induced mobilization of lymphocytes. As natural killer (NK) cells are particularly responsive to acute stress, the present study examined whether sleep period duration and percentage of time awake after sleep onset (WASO) the night before a laboratory stressor would predict reduced NK cell mobilization. Sleep was monitored by actigraphy in 39 healthy women. NK cell peripheral blood numbers were determined at baseline (post-20 min rest), 4 min into a Stroop task, immediately post-task and 30 min after task completion. Participants with high WASO had significantly less NK cell mobilization to the stressor and failed to return to baseline levels after 30 min compared to women with low WASO. No effects were found for sleep period duration. Findings raise the possibility that inadequate NK cell mobilization to, and poor recovery from acute stress may be one pathway by which sleep could impact health.

17011693
Poor sleep the night before an experimental stress task is associated with reduced cortisol reactivity in healthy women.
Sleep disruption is a growing problem that may have serious health effects. As stress-induced increases in cortisol are thought to be a key adaptive process it is important to examine how this response is affected by sleep. The current study investigated the association of four sleep parameters (objective/subjectively measured sleep quality and quantity) and subsequent salivary cortisol reactivity (maximal change from baseline) to an experimental stressor in 53 healthy women. Objective actigraphy monitoring and self-report diaries were used to assess sleep. Results revealed that individuals with lower objective sleep quality (wake percentage during sleep) had a blunted response to the experimental stressor. No associations were found between cortisol reactivity and actigraphy-derived sleep quantity, or either of the self-reported sleep variables. Results are discussed with regard to the possible adverse health effects that may result from poor sleep quality and a blunted cortisol response to stress.

20390044
Is hoping the same as expecting? Discrimination between hopes and response expectancies for nonvolitional outcomes.
Despite the large literature on response expectancy effects, it is not clear to what degree individuals' hopes are associated with their response expectancies for nonvolitional outcomes. Indeed, it is not clear whether these two constructs are separate. The present study sought to: (1) determine if participants can distinguish between expectancies and hopes; and (2) examine the relations between expectancies and hopes in regard to non-volitional outcomes. Seventy-three volunteers completed items regarding 10 non-volitional outcomes, as well as measures of dispositional traits (i.e. optimism, pessimism, suppression). The results revealed significant differences between expectancies and hopes (P<0.001), and that these constructs were also correlated. Dispositional traits and prior experience were also found to contribute to hopes and expectancies.

