21093684
Role and impact of cognitive rehabilitation.
Cognitive rehabilitation interventions are theoretically based and empirically validated treatments designed to ameliorate the cognitive, behavioral, and emotional impairments commonly experienced by individuals with traumatic brain injury (TBI). Cognitive rehabilitation can play many roles in facilitating recovery after TBI, such as improving impaired cognitive functions, increasing awareness of injury-related deficits, improving mood, facilitating vocational and community involvement, and reducing the probability of secondary disability. The considerable evidence documenting the impact of cognitive rehabilitation on improving the day-to-day function of individuals with TBI is described.

20159116
Perspectives on rehabilitation research.
Gordon WA. Perspectives on rehabilitation research. The author provides his perspectives on both the methodologic and funding challenges faced by rehabilitation researchers. His concerns are conveyed about the devaluing of rehabilitation research by federal funding agencies and Congress.

19892068
Clinical trials in rehabilitation research: balancing rigor and relevance.


19702428
The relationship between employment-related self-efficacy and quality of life following traumatic brain injury.
This study examines the relative contribution of employment-related and general self-efficacy to perceptions of quality of life (QoL) for individuals with traumatic brain injury. Correlational. Community-based research and training center. 427 individuals with self-reported TBI under the age of 65 were included in analysis. Employment-related self-efficacy, general self-efficacy, perceived quality of life (PQoL), unmet important needs (UIN). Significant correlations were found between income, injury severity, age at injury, and employment and the QoL variables. In addition, employment-related and general self-efficacy correlated positively with both PQoL and UIN. Employment-related and general self-efficacy accounted for 16% of the variance in PQoL and 9.5% of the variance in UIN, over and above other variables traditionally associated with QoL. These findings highlight the importance of including subjective appraisals of employment, such as perceived self-efficacy at the workplace, in assessing QoL and successful return to work following TBI.

19406291
A randomized controlled trial of sertraline for the treatment of depression in persons with traumatic brain injury.
To examine the efficacy of sertraline in the treatment of depression after traumatic brain injury (TBI). Double-blind, randomized controlled trial. Research center at a major urban medical center. Subjects were a referred and volunteer sample of 52 participants with TBI, a diagnosis of major depression disorder (MDD), and a score on the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D) of 18 or greater. The majority of the sample was male (58%), had less than 14 years of education (73%), had incomes below $20,000 (82%), and were from minority backgrounds (75%). Approximately one third of the sample had mild brain injuries, and two thirds had moderate to severe brain injuries. The mean age was 47+/-11, and the mean time since injury was 17+/-14 years. One participant withdrew from the study because of side effects. Daily oral sertraline in doses starting at 25mg and increasing to therapeutic levels (up to 200mg) or placebo for 10 weeks. The HAM-D, the Beck Anxiety Inventory, and the Life-3 quality of life (QOL). No statistically significant differences were found at baseline between drug and placebo groups on baseline measures of depression (24.8+/-7.3 vs 27.7+/-7.0), anxiety (16.4+/-12.3 vs 24.0+/-14.9), or QOL (2.96+/-1.0 vs 2.9+/-0.9). The income level of those receiving placebo was significantly lower than those participants receiving medication. Analyses of covariance revealed significant changes from preintervention to posttreatment for all 3 outcome measures (P<.001) but no group effects. Random-effects modeling did not find any significant difference in patterns of scores of the outcome measures between the placebo and medication groups. Both groups showed improvements in mood, anxiety, and QOL, with 59% of the experimental group and 32% of the placebo group responding to the treatment, defined as a reduction of a person's HAM-D score by 50%.

19306374
Cognitive rehabilitation following traumatic brain injury: assessment to treatment.
Cognitive rehabilitation refers to a set of interventions that aim to improve a person's ability to perform cognitive tasks by retraining previously learned skills and teaching compensatory strategies. Cognitive rehabilitation begins with a thorough neuropsychological assessment to identify cognitive strengths and weaknesses and the degree of change in cognitive ability following a brain injury. The conclusions of the assessment are used to formulate appropriate treatment plans. Common interventions for improvements in attention, memory, and executive function, as well as the nature of comprehensive programs, which combine treatment modalities, are reviewed. Cognitive rehabilitation is effective for mild-to-severe injuries and beneficial at any time post-injury. Sufficient evidence exists supporting the efficacy and effectiveness of cognitive rehabilitation, which has become the treatment of choice for cognitive impairments and leads to improvements in cognitive and psychosocial functioning.

18520427
Cognitive functioning among individuals with traumatic brain injury, Alzheimer's disease, and no cognitive impairments.
To compare patterns of cognitive functioning in older adults with traumatic brain injury (TBI), Alzheimer's disease (AD), and no neurological disorder (ND). Group comparison. Outpatient setting of a large urban tertiary care medical center. Older adults: 56 with TBI, 64 with AD, and 50 with neurological disorder. None. Older adults with AD and TBI had lower scores in most areas of cognitive functioning examined than the individuals with neurological disorder. Individuals with AD had lower scores in memory, processing speed, and verbal fluency than did individuals with TBI. Specifically, individuals with AD did not retain learned information over time. Cognitive impairments were present in older adults with AD and TBI. However, individuals with TBI were better able to learn and retain new information than were individuals with AD.

18520426
A comparison of cognitive functioning in older adults with and without traumatic brain injury.
Cognitive impairments are common sequelae of traumatic brain injury (TBI) and are often associated with the natural process of aging. Few studies have examined the effect of both age and TBI on cognitive functioning. The purpose of this study was to compare cognitive functioning between older adults who sustained a TBI to an age-matched group of individuals without a brain injury and to determine whether the presence or absence of a genetic marker apolipoprotein epsilon (APOEepsilon4 allele) accounts for additional cognitive decline in both groups examined. Cognitive performance was measured by 11 neuropsychological tests, in 54 adults with TBI aged 55 and older and 40 age-matched control participants. All participants were reexamined 2 to 5 years later. Community volunteer-based sample examined at a large, urban medical center. California Verbal Learning Test; Wechsler Memory Scale-III (Logical Memory I & II; Visual Reproduction I & II); Grooved Pegboard; Woodcock-Johnson Test of Cognitive Ability (Visual Matching and Cross-out); Wisconsin Card Sorting Test; Trail Making Test A & B; Conners' Continuous Performance Task; Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-III (Vocabulary); Controlled Oral Word Association Test; and Boston Naming Test. Participants with TBI had lower scores on tests of attention and verbal memory than did participants with no disability. Neither group exhibited a significant decline in cognitive function over time. The presence of the APOEepsilon4 allele did not account for additional decline in cognitive function in either group. The findings suggest that older adults with TBI may not be at increased risk for cognitive decline over short time periods (2 to 5 years) even if they are carriers of the APOEepsilon4 allele.

18219233
Objective measurement of fatigue following traumatic brain injury.
To quantify posttraumatic brain injury (post-TBI) mental fatigue objectively by documenting changes in performance on neuropsychological tests as a result of sustained mental effort and to examine the relationship between objectively measured mental fatigue and self-reported situational and day-to-day fatigue. The study included 202 community-dwelling individuals with mild-severe TBI and 73 noninjured controls. Measures included Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery, Global Fatigue Index, and situational fatigue rating. Subjects were administered a 30-minute computerized neuropsychological test battery 3 times. The second and third administrations of the battery were separated by approximately 2 hours of interviews and administration of self-report measures. The neuropsychological test scores were factor analyzed, yielding 3 subscales: speed, accuracy, and executive function. Situational fatigue and day-to-day fatigue were significantly higher in individual with TBI group than in individuals without TBI and were associated with speed subscale scores. Individuals with TBI evidenced a significant decline in performance on the accuracy subscale score. These declines in performance related to sustained mental effort were not associated with subjective fatigue in the TBI group. While practice effects on the speed and accuracy scores were observed in non-brain-injured individuals, they were not evidenced in individuals with TBI. Findings were largely consistent with previous literature and indicated that while subjective fatigue is associated with poor performance in individuals with TBI, it is not associated with objective decline in performance of mental tasks.

17362145
Cognitive impairment associated with toxigenic fungal exposure: a response to two critiques.
Fox, Greiffenstein, and Lees-Haley (2005) and McCaffrey and Yantz (2005) criticized our 2004 article that reported neuropsychological evidence of cognitive impairment in a sample of individuals exposed to toxic molds who complained of cognitive difficulties (Gordon et al., 2004). They critiqued the study's justification, design, analyses, and conclusions and characterized it as poor epidemiology. This article is a rebuttal to their comments. It documents that both sets of negative comments are based on frequent inaccuracies, mischaracterizations of our findings, and red herrings. Furthermore, they failed to refute the implications of the study's main findings.

