20034942
The role of anatomic factors in predicting success of endovascular repair of thoracic aortic aneurysms.
We evaluated the results of thoracic endovascular aneurysm repair (TEVAR) to determine what anatomic factors influenced the clinical outcomes. Preoperative computed tomography (CT) angiograms of 65 patients who underwent TEVAR were analyzed using 3-dimensional imaging. The proximal and distal neck, thoracic aneurysm, and iliac arteries were measured for angulation, diameter, length, calcification, and tortuosity. Immediate technical success and clinical success were measured. Immediate technical success was achieved in 91% (59 of 65) of the patients analyzed. One patient died in the operating room during treatment of rupture. Clinical success was achieved in 83% (54 of 65) of patients at follow-up. Four patients had small endoleaks with no sac enlargement at follow-up. One patient was converted to open repair. Severe iliac calcification was found to be significant for deployment failure. The mean follow-up is 8 months (1-36 months). Increased iliac calcification and increased iliac tortuosity correlate with an inability to successfully deploy the device.

18083340
Endovascular stent-graft repair of failed endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair.
Despite high initial technical success, the long-term durability of endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) continues to be a concern. Following EVAR, patients can experience endoleaks, device migration, device fractures, or aneurysm growth that may require intervention. The purpose of this study was to review all patients treated with secondary endovascular devices at our institution for failed EVAR procedures. Over an 8-year period, 988 patients underwent EVAR, of whom 42 (4.3%) required secondary interventions involving placement of additional endovascular devices. Data regarding patient characteristics, aneurysm size, initial device type, time until failure, failure etiology, secondary interventions, and outcomes were reviewed. The mean time from initial operation until second operation was 34.1 months. Failures included type I endoleaks in 38 patients (90.5%), type III endoleaks in two patients (4.8%), and enlarging aneurysms without definite endoleaks in two patients (4.8%). The overall technical success rate for secondary repair was 92.9% (39/42). Perioperative complications occurred in nine patients (21.4%), including wound complications (n = 6), cerebrovascular accident (CVA) (n = 1), foot drop (n = 1), and death (n = 1). Mean follow-up following secondary repair was 16.4 months (range 1-50). Eighty-six percent of patients treated with aortouni-iliac devices had successful repairs compared to 45% of patients treated with proximal cuffs. Ten patients (23.8%) had persistent or recurrent type I or type III endoleaks following revision. Of these, four had tertiary interventions, including two patients who had additional devices placed. Failures following EVAR occur in a small but significant number of patients. When anatomically possible, endovascular revision offers a safe means of treating these failures. Aortouni-iliac devices appear to offer a more durable repair than the proximal cuff for treatment of proximal type I endoleaks. Midterm results indicate that these patients may require additional procedures but have a low rate of aneurysm-related mortality. Longer-term follow-up is necessary to determine the durability of these endovascular revisions.

17574175
Establishing an international training program for surgical residents.


17160570
Acute ischemic proctitis: report of four cases.
Acute ischemic proctitis is an extremely rare clinical entity. It is mainly described in patients with significant atherosclerotic and cardiac risk factors who present with lower gastrointestinal symptoms in the setting of hemodynamic instability. Previous reports of ischemic proctitis suggest that rectal resection is not necessary in the treatment of this disease. We present four cases of acute ischemic proctitis that required complete proctectomy. All patients had large vessel atherosclerosis with rectal bleeding and sepsis as the presenting signs and symptoms. Three of four patients underwent complete proctectomy as the initial procedure. The fourth patient underwent complete proctectomy five days after the initial intervention. Two of four patients survived and were ultimately discharged from the hospital. A third patient recovered from surgery but ultimately died of respiratory complications. Only the patient who was initially treated by subtotal proctectomy died as the result of the disease. Although ischemic necrosis of the rectum is rare, complete proctectomy may be necessary to save the patient's life.

