21587231
Transcription factor IRF8 directs a silencing programme for T(H)17 cell differentiation.
T(H)17 cells are recognized as a unique subset of T helper cells that have critical roles in the pathogenesis of autoimmunity and tissue inflammation. Although ROR?t is necessary for the generation of T(H)17 cells, the molecular mechanisms underlying the functional diversity of T(H)17 cells are not fully understood. Here we show that a member of interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of transcription factors, IRF8, has a critical role in silencing T(H)17-cell differentiation. Mice with a conventional knockout, as well as a T cell-specific deletion, of the Irf8 gene exhibited more efficient T(H)17 cells. Indeed, studies of an experimental model of colitis showed that IRF8 deficiency resulted in more severe inflammation with an enhanced T(H)17 phenotype. IRF8 was induced steadily and inhibited T(H)17-cell differentiation during T(H)17 lineage commitment at least in part through its physical interaction with ROR?t. These findings define IRF8 as a novel intrinsic transcriptional inhibitor of T(H)17-cell differentiation.

21074754
Potentiation of Th17 cytokines in aging process contributes to the development of colitis.
Th17 cells, which produce IL-17 and IL-22, promote autoimmunity in mice and have been implicated in the pathogenesis of autoimmune/inflammatory diseases in humans. However, the Th17 immune response in the aging process is still not clear. In the present study, we found that the induction of IL-17-producing CD4(+) T cells was significantly increased in aged individuals compared with young healthy ones. The mRNA expression of IL-17, IL-17F, IL-22, and RORC2 was also significantly increased in aged people. Similar to humans, Th17 cells as well as mRNAs encoding IL-17, IL-22 and ROR?t were dramatically elevated in naïve T cells from aged mouse compared to young ones. In addition, CD44 positive IL-17-producing CD4(+) T cells were significantly higher in aged mice, suggesting that memory T cells are an important source of IL-17 production. Furthermore, the percentage of IL-17-producing CD4(+) T cells generated in co-culture with dendritic cells from either aged or young mice did not show significant differences, suggesting that dendritic cells do not play a primary role in the elevation of Th17 cytokines in aged mouse cells. Importantly, transfer of CD4(+)CD45Rb(hi) cells from aged mice induced more severe colitis in RAG(-/-) mice compared to cells from young mice, Taken together, these results suggest that Th17 immune responses are elevated in aging humans and mice and may contribute to the increased development of inflammatory disorders in the elderly.

20676093
The transmembrane activator TACI triggers immunoglobulin class switching by activating B cells through the adaptor MyD88.
BAFF and APRIL are innate immune mediators that trigger immunoglobulin G (IgG) and IgA class-switch recombination (CSR) in B cells by engaging the receptor TACI. The mechanism that underlies CSR signaling by TACI remains unknown. Here we found that the cytoplasmic domain of TACI encompasses a conserved motif that bound MyD88, an adaptor that activates transcription factor NF-kappaB signaling pathways via a Toll-interleukin 1 (IL-1) receptor (TIR) domain. TACI lacks a TIR domain, yet triggered CSR via the DNA-editing enzyme AID by activating NF-kappaB through a Toll-like receptor (TLR)-like MyD88-IRAK1-IRAK4-TRAF6-TAK1 pathway. TACI-induced CSR was impaired in mice and humans lacking MyD88 or the kinase IRAK4, which indicates that MyD88 controls a B cell-intrinsic, TIR-independent, TACI-dependent pathway for immunoglobulin diversification.

20363923
Induction of diabetes in aged C57B6 mice results in severe nephropathy: an association with oxidative stress, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and inflammation.
Kidney aging is a slowly progressive process that is postulated to be accelerated by intervening diseases, such as diabetes, due in part to the addition of excessive stress and inflammation from the intervening disease to the underlying aging process. This hypothesis was tested by inducing diabetes with streptozotocin in 18-month-old, aging mice. After 4 months of diabetes, these mice developed severe albuminuria, elevated creatinine levels, and renal lesions including extensive apoptotic cell death, glomerulosclerosis, afferent and efferent hyalinosis, and tubulointerstitial inflammation and fibrosis. These symptoms were associated with elevated oxidative stress. The presence of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in 22-month-old diabetic kidneys resulted in up-regulation of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), which may play a role in increasing kidney lesions because CHOP-deficient proximal tubular cells were resistant to ER stress-induced cell death, and CHOP-deficient mice were protected from diabetic nephropathy. Moreover, CHOP-deficient mice did not develop albuminuria as they aged. Inflammation, another key component of progressive diabetic nephropathy, was prominent in 22-month-old diabetic kidneys. The expression of tumor-necrosis factor-alpha in 22-month-old diabetic kidneys may play a role in inflammation, ER stress, and apoptosis. Thus, diabetes may accelerate the underlying kidney aging process present in old mice.

19592489
AP-1 activated by toll-like receptors regulates expression of IL-23 p19.
Interleukin (IL)-23, a new member of the IL-12 family, plays a central role in the Th17 immune response and in autoimmune diseases. It is clear that activated macrophages and dendritic cells produce IL-23, but the molecular mechanisms whereby inflammatory signals stimulate IL-23 expression are not fully understood. We demonstrate that induction of IL-23 p19 gene expression by LPS depends on the TLR4 and MyD88 pathways. All three MAPK pathways (ERK, JNK, and p38) that are activated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation were shown to exert a positive effect on p19 expression. We cloned a 1.3-kb putative p19 promoter and defined its transcription initiation sites by the 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends method. By analyzing IL-23 p19 promoter mutants, we have identified a promoter region (-413 to +10) that contains several important elements, including NF-kappaB and AP-1. In addition to NF-kappaB, we have demonstrated that the proximal AP-1 site is important for p19 promoter activation. Mutation of the AP-1 site resulted in the loss of p19 promoter activation. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) analysis showed that c-Jun and c-Fos bind to the AP-1 site, which was confirmed by a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Furthermore, co-transfection of c-Jun and ATF2 synergistically induced p19 promoter activation, and c-Jun and ATF2 formed a protein complex, demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation. Finally, LPS-stimulated peritoneal macrophages from IL-10-deficient mice expressed significantly higher IL-23 p19 than macrophages from wild type mice, and the addition of recombinant IL-10 strongly inhibited LPS-induced p19 expression. Thus, this study suggests that MyD88-dependent Toll-like receptor signaling induces IL-23 p19 gene expression through both MAPKs and NF-kappaB.

19357722
Knockdown of Stat3 activity in vivo prevents diabetic glomerulopathy.
Recent studies suggest that Stat3, a transcription factor that mediates cytokine signaling, plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy. Complete Stat3 gene knockout is embryonic lethal; therefore, we crossed Stat3+/- mice with Stat3 mutant mice (SA/SA) that lack full Stat3 activity. This strategy generated Stat3SA/- mice (25% activity) and Stat3SA/+ mice (75% activity), which were made diabetic using streptozotocin in order to define the role of Stat3 in diabetic kidney disease. While the glomerular number was not different between these two groups of mice, the diabetic SA/- mice had significantly less proteinuria, mesangial expansion, glomerular cell proliferation, and macrophage infiltration than the diabetic SA/+ mice. The reduction in Stat3 activity did not affect glomerular hyperfiltration seen after the induction of diabetes, as it was increased to the same degree in both groups of mice. Phosphorylation of Stat3 was markedly increased in the glomeruli of diabetic SA/+ mice compared to diabetic SA/- mice. The expression of inflammatory markers, IL-6, MCP-1, and activated NF-kappaB; type IV collagen, TGF-beta, and ICAM-1 mRNA; or type IV collagen and TGF-beta protein, were all found to be significantly less in glomeruli isolated from diabetic SA/- mice, as compared with diabetic SA/+ mice. Our study shows that Stat3 plays a critical role in the regulation of inflammation and abnormal matrix synthesis at an early stage of DN.

18625721
Retinoic acid utilizes CREB and USF1 in a transcriptional feed-forward loop in order to stimulate MKP1 expression in human immunodeficiency virus-infected podocytes.
Nef-induced podocyte proliferation and dedifferentiation via mitogen-activated protein kinase 1,2 (MAPK1,2) activation plays a role in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nephropathy pathogenesis. All-trans retinoic acid (atRA) reverses the HIV-induced podocyte phenotype by activating cyclic AMP (cAMP)/protein kinase A (PKA) and inhibiting MAPK1,2. Here we show that atRA, through cAMP and PKA, triggers a feed-forward loop involving CREB and USF1 to induce biphasic stimulation of MKP1. atRA stimulated CREB and USF1 binding to the MKP1 gene promoter, as shown by gel shifting and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. CREB directly mediated the early phase of atRA-induced MKP1 stimulation; whereas the later phase was mediated by CREB indirectly through induction of USF1. These findings were confirmed by a reporter gene assay using the MKP1 promoter with mutation of CRE or Ebox binding sites. Consistent with these findings, the biological effects of atRA on podocytes were inhibited by silencing either MKP1, CREB, or USF1 with small interfering RNA. atRA also induced CREB phosphorylation and MKP1 expression and reduced MAPK1,2 phosphorylation in kidneys of HIV type 1-infected transgenic mice. We conclude that atRA induces sustained activation of MKP1 to suppress Nef-induced activation of the Src-MAPK1,2 pathway, thus returning the podocyte to a more differentiated state. The mechanism involves a feed-forward loop where activation of one transcription factor (TF) (CREB) leads to induction of a second TF (USF1).

18506885
Interleukin 10 suppresses Th17 cytokines secreted by macrophages and T cells.
IL-17 and IL-22 are typical cytokines produced by the Th17 T cell subset, but it is unclear if Th17 cytokines can be produced by other cell types. We demonstrate that IL-10-deficient and IL-10R-deficient macrophages stimulated with lipopolysaccharide produce high levels of IL-17 and IL-22. Addition of exogenous IL-10 to IL-10-deficient macrophages abolished IL-17 production. When IL-10-deficient and IL-10R-deficient splenocytes were cultured under Th17 polarizing conditions, the population of IL-17-producing cells was increased and the cultures produced significantly higher levels of IL-17 and IL-22. The addition of recombinant IL-10 to IL-10-deficient splenocytes significantly decreased the percentage of IL-17-producing CD4(+) T cells. Finally, the mRNA for the Th17 transcription factor retinoic acid-related orphan receptor (ROR)gammat was significantly elevated in IL-10-deficient spleen cells and macrophages. These data demonstrate that Th17 cytokines and RORgammat are also expressed in macrophages and that IL-10 negatively regulates the expression of Th17 cytokines and RORgammat by both macrophages and T cells.

18054562
Allergen-IgE complexes trigger CD23-dependent CCL20 release from human intestinal epithelial cells.
In food allergic individuals, exposure to food allergens by the oral route can trigger immediate (within minutes) local hypersensitivity reactions in the intestine followed by a late-phase inflammatory response. Previous work has shown that CD23 is constitutively expressed by human intestinal epithelial cells and mediates the uptake of allergen-IgE complexes. We hypothesized that allergen-IgE complexes could also signal via CD23 to trigger an inflammatory cascade in the local environment. Caco-2 monolayers were stimulated with human IgE-antigen (Ag) complexes. IL-8 and CCL20 mRNA and protein were determined by RT-PCR and ELISA, respectively. Signaling pathways were assessed by immunoblotting. Endogenous CD23 expression was knocked down by stable transfection with CD23 shRNA retroviral plasmid. Migration assays were performed using human monocyte-derived dendritic cells. Stimulation of Caco-2 cells with IgE-Ag complexes triggered upregulation of IL-8 and CCL20 at the mRNA and protein level. Allergen complexes induced phosphorylation of ERK and JNK, but not p38 MAP kinase or NK-kappaB, and resulted in AP-1 activation. Cross-linking of CD23 replicated the findings with IgE-Ag complexes, and silencing of CD23 expression abrogated the response to allergen-IgE complexes. Supernatant from IgE-Ag-stimulated epithelial cells induced migration of dendritic cells in a CCL20-dependent manner. Finally, immunostaining of duodenal biopsies demonstrated that CCL20 was constitutively expressed by epithelial cells in vivo. Signaling via epithelial CD23 may participate in the late-phase inflammatory response by the release of chemokines capable of recruiting antigen presenting cells and effector cells of allergic inflammation.

