20690553
Needlestick.


20671464
Challenging traditional premedical requirements as predictors of success in medical school: the Mount Sinai School of Medicine Humanities and Medicine Program.
Students compete aggressively as they prepare for the MCAT and fulfill traditional premedical requirements that have uncertain educational value for medical and scientific careers and limit the scope of their liberal arts and biomedical education. This study assessed the medical school performance of humanities and social science majors who omitted organic chemistry, physics, and calculus, and did not take the MCAT. The authors compared and contrasted the academic outcomes of 85 Humanities and Medicine Program (HuMed) students at Mount Sinai School of Medicine with those of their 606 traditionally prepared classmates for the 2004-2009 graduating classes. The authors analyzed basic science knowledge, clerkship performance, humanism, leadership, community service, research fellowships, distinctions, and honors. There were no statistically significant differences between the groups in clerkship honors other than psychiatry (HuMed students outperformed their peers, P < .0001) or in commencement distinctions or honors. Although HuMed students were significantly more likely to secure a scholarly-year mentored project (P = .001), there was no difference in graduating with distinction in research (P = .281). HuMed students were more likely to have lower United States Medical Licensing Examination Step 1 scores (221 +/- 20 versus 227 +/- 19, P = .0039) and to take a nonscholarly leave of absence (P = .0001). There was a trend among HuMed students toward residencies in primary care and psychiatry and away from surgical subspecialties and anesthesiology. Students without the traditional premedical preparation performed at a level equivalent to their premedical classmates.

20107360
The role of social and community service in medical education: the next 100 years.
Abraham Flexner's focus on science in medical school curricula was not intended to exclude or marginalize the importance of service in training American physicians. The erosion of service in academic medicine in the century after his report was the result of forces as wide ranging as research priorities, health care financing, and industry's influence. The authors review the historical context of these changes and make the case that reintroducing service into medical school curricula has never been more important. They describe the impact that neglecting service has had on society, patients, the medical profession, medical students, and medical education. After defining what is meant by social, public, or community service, they go on to detail signature programs at University of Texas Medical Branch, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, and Mount Sinai School of Medicine, focusing on the two major categories of health care delivery and education. These examples, in geographically and demographically disparate schools of medicine, demonstrate that it is possible to successfully reintegrate service into the missions of academic medical centers and medical schools.

19642152
Mission-based budgeting for education: ready for prime time?
Mission-based budgeting has been touted as the preferred method of assessing and assigning departmental budgets in academic medical centers. Mission-based budgeting in its simplest form is a methodology that allows an institution's finance department to align costs with actual activities (typically clinical care, administration, research, and teaching). Despite its intuitive appeal, a minority of the academic medical centers across the country have embraced it. Mount Sinai School of Medicine was among the first to incorporate this approach, and we have almost a decade of experience with its risks and benefits. This article focuses on the education component of mission-based budgeting. We review all aspects of mission-based budgeting, including (1) the many variables that must be factored into a metric and how those variables differ among institutions, (2) the metric itself and how it reflects institutional philosophy, (3) the impact of mission-based budgeting on faculty and chairs of departments, (4) existing processes that ensure the quality, reliability, and validity of the different mission-based budgeting systems, and (5) a comparative perspective.

19174682
Resilience in the third year of medical school: a prospective study of the associations between stressful events occurring during clinical rotations and student well-being.
In the third year of medical school students are exposed to many stressful and potentially traumatic events, including witnessing patient suffering or death, personal mistreatment, and poor role modeling by physicians. These experiences may explain increases in anxiety and depression during medical school. However, to date this has not been studied. The present study prospectively measured stressful clerkship events occurring during the 2006-2007 academic year in third-year medical students of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine (n = 125), using surveys completed monthly. Students labeled stressful events traumatic if they met the trauma criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition. The authors measured anxiety, depression, and posttraumatic stress symptoms at the beginning and end of the year and twice during the year. At year's end they also measured students' personal growth. Class participation varied from 106 (85%) at baseline to 82 (66%) at endpoint. Most students (101; 81%) completed at least one monthly survey. Many students reported exposure to trauma as well as personal mistreatment and poor role modeling by superiors. Trauma exposure was positively associated with personal growth at year's end. In contrast, exposure to other stressful events was positively associated with endpoint levels of depression and other stress symptoms. Trauma exposure was common but not associated with poor outcomes by year's end, which suggests that students were resilient. Nonetheless, unprofessional behavior by resident and attending physicians might have adverse effects on the well-being of students.

18591639
Trial by fire: in memoriam.


17614884
Perceptions of and attitudes towards medical errors among medical trainees.
The purpose of this study was to develop a better understanding of how medical trainees define medical errors and what factors influence medical trainees' perceptions of medical errors. We surveyed 423 medical students and house staff at an urban academic medical centre to learn about how they defined medical errors, their experiences with medical errors, their beliefs about when a patient should be informed of an error, and their attitudes towards medical errors with differing severity of outcomes. Trainees stated that an event could be considered an error regardless of outcome, negligence, intention or consent. Definitions did not vary according to gender or level of training. Trainees had increasing feelings of guilt and fear as the outcomes related to errors worsened. Respondents were more likely to feel guilty and angry at themselves, and be afraid of accusations of malpractice, losing their licence, damaging their reputation, or losing confidence when errors were made while working individually versus in a team setting. Female trainees were more likely than male trainees to feel guilty and angry at themselves, and were afraid of losing confidence if they made an error. Trainees' perceptions and attitudes towards errors vary depending on whether they are in their clinical years, the severity of outcome, and whether the error is attributable to an individual or a team. These factors will have to be explored in greater depth if we are adequately to prepare young doctors for the errors they will inevitably make.

17485763
GOMER.


