21209217
I?B kinase regulates social defeat stress-induced synaptic and behavioral plasticity.
The neurobiological underpinnings of mood and anxiety disorders have been linked to the nucleus accumbens (NAc), a region important in processing the rewarding and emotional salience of stimuli. Using chronic social defeat stress, an animal model of mood and anxiety disorders, we investigated whether alterations in synaptic plasticity are responsible for the long-lasting behavioral symptoms induced by this form of stress. We hypothesized that chronic social defeat stress alters synaptic strength or connectivity of medium spiny neurons (MSNs) in the NAc to induce social avoidance. To test this, we analyzed the synaptic profile of MSNs via confocal imaging of Lucifer-yellow-filled cells, ultrastructural analysis of the postsynaptic density, and electrophysiological recordings of miniature EPSCs (mEPSCs) in mice after social defeat. We found that NAc MSNs have more stubby spine structures with smaller postsynaptic densities and an increase in the frequency of mEPSCs after social defeat. In parallel to these structural changes, we observed significant increases in I?B kinase (IKK) in the NAc after social defeat, a molecular pathway that has been shown to regulate neuronal morphology. Indeed, we find using viral-mediated gene transfer of dominant-negative and constitutively active IKK mutants that activation of IKK signaling pathways during social defeat is both necessary and sufficient to induce synaptic alterations and behavioral effects of the stress. These studies establish a causal role for IKK in regulating stress-induced adaptive plasticity and may present a novel target for drug development in the treatment of mood and anxiety disorders in humans.

20729488
Transcriptional mechanisms: underlying addiction-related structural plasticity.
Drug addiction is marked by long-lasting changes in behavior that result, in part, from altered patterns of gene expression within limbic forebrain regions, such as the nucleus accumbens (NAc). These changes in gene transcription are coordinated by a complex series of histone modifications surrounding DNA that result in either repression or activation of gene expression. Recent evidence has identified a network of gene expression changes, regulated by the transcription factor DeltaFosB, which alter the structure and function of NAc medium spiny neurons to control addictive-like behavior. In this review, we will discuss recent advances in our understanding of chromatin regulation by cocaine, as well as the consequences of such regulation on structural plasticity and its functional relevance to drug addiction.

20207024
The addicted synapse: mechanisms of synaptic and structural plasticity in nucleus accumbens.
Addictive drugs cause persistent restructuring of several neuronal cell types in the limbic regions of brain thought to be responsible for long-term behavioral plasticity driving addiction. Although these structural changes are well documented in nucleus accumbens medium spiny neurons, little is known regarding the underlying molecular mechanisms. Additionally, it remains unclear whether structural plasticity and its synaptic concomitants drive addictive behaviors or whether they reflect homeostatic compensations to the drug not related to addiction per se. Here, we discuss recent paradoxical data, which either support or oppose the hypothesis that drug-induced changes in dendritic spines drive addictive behavior. We define areas where future investigation can provide a more detailed picture of drug-induced synaptic reorganization, including ultrastructural, electrophysiological and behavioral studies.

20056891
Essential role of the histone methyltransferase G9a in cocaine-induced plasticity.
Cocaine-induced alterations in gene expression cause changes in neuronal morphology and behavior that may underlie cocaine addiction. In mice, we identified an essential role for histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) dimethylation and the lysine dimethyltransferase G9a in cocaine-induced structural and behavioral plasticity. Repeated cocaine administration reduced global levels of H3K9 dimethylation in the nucleus accumbens. This reduction in histone methylation was mediated through the repression of G9a in this brain region, which was regulated by the cocaine-induced transcription factor DeltaFosB. Using conditional mutagenesis and viral-mediated gene transfer, we found that G9a down-regulation increased the dendritic spine plasticity of nucleus accumbens neurons and enhanced the preference for cocaine, thereby establishing a crucial role for histone methylation in the long-term actions of cocaine.

19759294
Antidepressant actions of histone deacetylase inhibitors.
Persistent symptoms of depression suggest the involvement of stable molecular adaptations in brain, which may be reflected at the level of chromatin remodeling. We find that chronic social defeat stress in mice causes a transient decrease, followed by a persistent increase, in levels of acetylated histone H3 in the nucleus accumbens, an important limbic brain region. This persistent increase in H3 acetylation is associated with decreased levels of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in the nucleus accumbens. Similar effects were observed in the nucleus accumbens of depressed humans studied postmortem. These changes in H3 acetylation and HDAC2 expression mediate long-lasting positive neuronal adaptations, since infusion of HDAC inhibitors into the nucleus accumbens, which increases histone acetylation, exerts robust antidepressant-like effects in the social defeat paradigm and other behavioral assays. HDAC inhibitor [N-(2-aminophenyl)-4-[N-(pyridine-3-ylmethoxy-carbonyl)aminomethyl]benzamide (MS-275)] infusion also reverses the effects of chronic defeat stress on global patterns of gene expression in the nucleus accumbens, as determined by microarray analysis, with striking similarities to the effects of the standard antidepressant fluoxetine. Stress-regulated genes whose expression is normalized selectively by MS-275 may provide promising targets for the future development of novel antidepressant treatments. Together, these findings provide new insight into the underlying molecular mechanisms of depression and antidepressant action, and support the antidepressant potential of HDAC inhibitors and perhaps other agents that act at the level of chromatin structure.

19295158
Nuclear factor kappa B signaling regulates neuronal morphology and cocaine reward.
Although chronic cocaine-induced changes in dendritic spines on nucleus accumbens (NAc) neurons have been correlated with behavioral sensitization, the molecular pathways governing these structural changes, and their resulting behavioral effects, are poorly understood. The transcription factor, nuclear factor kappa B (NFkappaB), is rapidly activated by diverse stimuli and regulates expression of many genes known to maintain cell structure. Therefore, we evaluated the role of NFkappaB in regulating cocaine-induced dendritic spine changes on medium spiny neurons of the NAc and the rewarding effects of cocaine. We show that chronic cocaine induces NFkappaB-dependent transcription in the NAc of NFkappaB-Lac transgenic mice. This induction of NFkappaB activity is accompanied by increased expression of several NFkappaB genes, the promoters of which show chromatin modifications after chronic cocaine exposure consistent with their transcriptional activation. To study the functional significance of this induction, we used viral-mediated gene transfer to express either a constitutively active or dominant-negative mutant of Inhibitor of kappa B kinase (IKKca or IKKdn), which normally activates NFkappaB signaling, in the NAc. We found that activation of NFkappaB by IKKca increases the number of dendritic spines on NAc neurons, whereas inhibition of NFkappaB by IKKdn decreases basal dendritic spine number and blocks the increase in dendritic spines after chronic cocaine. Moreover, inhibition of NFkappaB blocks the rewarding effects of cocaine and the ability of previous cocaine exposure to increase an animal's preference for cocaine. Together, these studies establish a direct role for NFkappaB pathways in the NAc to regulate structural and behavioral plasticity to cocaine.

19251249
Role of nuclear factor kappaB in ovarian hormone-mediated stress hypersensitivity in female mice.
The molecular mechanisms of stress-induced depressive behaviors have been characterized extensively in male rodents; however, much less is known about female subjects, despite the fact that human depression is far more prevalent in women. To gain insight into these mechanisms, we performed microarray analysis in nucleus accumbens (NAc), a key brain reward region implicated in depression, in ovariectomized (OVX) and gonadally intact female mice after chronic unpredictable stress and measured stress-induced depression-like behavior in the forced swim test (FST). Male mice were studied in the FST for comparison. We find that stress regulation of genes in NAc of gonadally intact female mice is blunted in OVX mice. This pattern of gene regulation is consistent with behavioral findings on the FST: the pro-depression-like effect of stress in intact female mice is absent in OVX female and gonadally intact male mice. We identified, among many genes regulated by stress, several nuclear factor kappaB (NFkappaB) subunits-a pro-survival transcription factor involved in cellular responses to stress-as being highly upregulated in NAc of OVX mice. Given the role of NFkappaB during stress, we hypothesized that upregulation of NFkappaB by OVX decreases susceptibility to stress. Indeed, we show that inhibition of NFkappaB in NAc of OVX animals increases susceptibility to stress-induced depressive behaviors, whereas activation of NFkappaB in NAc of intact female subjects blocks susceptibility. These results suggest a hormonal mechanism of NFkappaB regulation that contributes to stress-induced depressive behaviors in female subjects and might represent a mechanism for gender differences in prevalence rates of these disorders in humans.

18647613
Neurotrophic factors and structural plasticity in addiction.
Drugs of abuse produce widespread effects on the structure and function of neurons throughout the brain's reward circuitry, and these changes are believed to underlie the long-lasting behavioral phenotypes that characterize addiction. Although the intracellular mechanisms regulating the structural plasticity of neurons are not fully understood, accumulating evidence suggests an essential role for neurotrophic factor signaling in the neuronal remodeling which occurs after chronic drug administration. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a growth factor enriched in brain and highly regulated by several drugs of abuse, regulates the phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3K), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), phospholipase Cgamma (PLCgamma), and nuclear factor kappa B (NFkappaB) signaling pathways, which influence a range of cellular functions including neuronal survival, growth, differentiation, and structure. This review discusses recent advances in our understanding of how BDNF and its signaling pathways regulate structural and behavioral plasticity in the context of drug addiction.

19434558
Molecular mechanisms of psychostimulant-induced structural plasticity.
Drug addiction is characterized by persistent behavioral and cellular plasticity throughout the brain's reward regions. Among the many neuroadaptations that occur following repeated drug administration are alterations in cell morphology including changes in dendritic spines. While this phenomenon has been well documented, the underlying molecular mechanisms are poorly understood. Here, within the context of drug abuse, we review and integrate several of the established pathways known to regulate synaptic remodeling, and discuss the contributions of neurotrophic and dopamine signaling in mediating this structural plasticity. Finally, we discuss how such upstream mechanisms could regulate actin dynamics, the common endpoint involved in structural remodeling in neurons.

