21528422
Reduced isotope dose and imaging time with a high-efficiency CZT SPECT camera.
BACKGROUND: In light of recent focus on diagnostic imaging, cardiac SPECT imaging needs to become a shorter test with lower radiation exposure to patients. Recently introduced Cadmium Zinc Telluride (CZT) cameras have the potential to achieve both goals. METHODS: During a 2-month period patients presenting for a Tc-99m sestamibi SPECT MPI study were imaged using a CZT camera using a low-dose rest-stress protocol (5 mCi rest and 15 mCi stress doses). Patients ?250 lbs or a BMI ?35 kg/m(2) were excluded. Rest images were processed at 5- and 8-minute acquisition times and stress images at 3- and 5-minute acquisition times. A subset of patients had stress imaging performed using both conventional and CZT SPECT cameras. Image acquisition times and SPECT camera images were compared based on total counts, count rate, image quality, and summed rest and stress scores. Twelve month clinical follow-up was also obtained. RESULTS: 131 patients underwent the study protocol (age 64.9 ± 9.8 years, 54.2% male). There was no significant difference in image quality and mean summed scores between 5- and 8-minute rest images and between 3- and 5-minute stress images. When compared to a conventional SPECT camera in 27 patients, total rest and stress perfusion deficits and calculated LVEF were similar (r = 0.94 and 0.96, respectively). At 12 months there was a benign prognosis in patients with normal perfusion. The effective dose was 5.8 mSv for this protocol which is 49.2% less than conventional Tc-99m studies and 75.7% less than conventional Tl-201/Tc-99m dual isotope studies. CONCLUSIONS: New SPECT camera technology with low isotope dose significantly reduces ionizing radiation exposure and imaging times compared to traditional protocols while maintaining image quality and diagnostic accuracy.

21069489
Reduced isotope dose with rapid SPECT MPI imaging: initial experience with a CZT SPECT camera.
Cardiac SPECT imaging needs to become shorter and use lower radiation doses to compete with other available noninvasive imaging modalities. Recently introduced cadmium zinc telluride (CZT) SPECT cameras have the potential to achieve both goals, but clinical experience is so far limited. Images of all patients undergoing a stress MPI over a 4-month period using a CZT camera (Discovery NM 530c) were reviewed. Patients were divided into three groups based on imaging protocols: low-dose stress-only, high-dose stress-only, and standard dose rest-stress. Low-dose stress-only patients were matched by gender, stressor, and BMI to high-dose stress-only and rest-stress subjects. Stress image quality was graded on a four-point scale by readers blinded to the imaging protocol. Demographics, tracer dose, stress imaging time, and total counts were recorded. Of 717 patients imaged, the mean age was 64.0 years, 50.5% were female, 58.9% underwent exercise stress, and the average BMI was 27.9 kg/m(2). A total of 103 low-dose stress-only patients were matched to controls. Imaging for 5 minutes in low-dose stress-only patients and for 3 minutes in high-dose stress-only and rest-stress patients, resulted in a similar number of total counts. This produced similar image quality in the three groups with a 57% isotope dose reduction in the low-dose stress-only compared to the high-dose stress-only group. New SPECT CZT camera technology allows significantly reduced radiation exposure and acquisition time without loss of image quality.

20494662
Comparison of frequency of inducible myocardial ischemia in patients presenting to emergency department with typical versus atypical or nonanginal chest pain.
The present study was designed to assess the value of the presenting symptom of "typical" anginal pain, "atypical/nonanginal" pain, or the lack of chest pain in predicting the presence of inducible myocardial ischemia using cardiac stress testing in emergency department patients being evaluated for possible acute coronary syndrome. We performed a retrospective observational study of adult patients who were evaluated for acute coronary syndrome in an emergency department chest pain unit. The presenting symptoms were obtained from a structured questionnaire administered before stress testing. Patient chest pain was categorized according to the presence of substernal chest pain or discomfort that was provoked by exertion or emotional stress and was relieved by rest and/or nitroglycerin. Chest pain was classified as "typical" angina if all 3 descriptors were present and "atypical" or "nonanginal" if <3 descriptors were present. All patients underwent serial biomarker and cardiac stress testing before discharge. A total of 2,525 patients met the eligibility criteria. Inducible ischemia on stress testing was found in 33 (14%, 95% confidence interval 10% to 19%) of the 231 patients who had typical anginal pain, 238 (11%, 95% confidence interval 10% to 13%) of the 2,140 patients presenting with atypical/nonanginal chest pain, and 25 (16%, 95% confidence interval 11% to 22%) of the 153 patients who had no complaint of chest pain on presentation. Compared to patients with atypical or no chest pain, patients with typical chest pain were not significantly more likely to have inducible ischemia on stress testing (likelihood ratio +1.25, 95% confidence interval 0.89 to 1.78). In conclusion, in our study, the patients who presented with "typical" angina were no more likely to have inducible myocardial ischemia on stress testing than patients with other presenting symptoms.

20390394
The prognosis of a normal stress-only Tc-99m myocardial perfusion imaging study.
Stress-only imaging saves time and radiation exposure, but apprehension remains about the reliability, diagnostic, and prognostic accuracy of a normal stress-only study. The objective of this study was to determine the prognosis of stress-only SPECT MPI in routine clinical practice. Patients at lower pre-test risk for CAD presenting for a Tc-99m SPECT MPI over a 2-year period underwent a stress-only protocol. If the stress images were normal (attenuation correction was routinely acquired on all patients), rest imaging was not done. Outcomes of the stress-only group were compared to a full rest-stress protocol cohort. Only patients with normal perfusion and left ventricular function, and no known CAD, were included. All-cause mortality was determined using the Social Security Death Index and specific causes of death were determined using the National Death Index. The difference in all-cause and cardiac mortality between groups in the presence of competing risks was assessed using log-normal survival models. Out of 10,609 patients studied during the time period, 1,673 had a normal stress-only study and 3,237 had a normal rest-stress study. At one year, there were 20 total and 3 cardiac deaths (1.2% and 0.2% mortality) in the stress-only group, and 40 total and 4 cardiac deaths (1.2% and 0.1% mortality) in the rest-stress cohort. At the end of follow-up (40 +/- 9 months), there were 46 total and 7 cardiac deaths (2.7% and 0.4% mortality) in the stress-only group, and 119 total and 17 cardiac deaths (3.7% and 0.5% mortality) in the rest-stress cohort. No significant difference between the stress-only and rest-stress cohorts was found after controlling for confounding variables for both all-cause mortality (p = .94) and cardiac mortality (p = .82). A normal stress-only MPI has an excellent short-term prognosis (both for all-cause and cardiac mortality) comparable to that of a normal rest-stress MPI study.

19951980
Advances in cardiac single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging.
Cardiac single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging is an established diagnostic and prognostic method for evaluation of suspected and known coronary artery disease. SPECT technology has developed over several decades. Utilization of thallium-201 decreased with the advent of technetium-based perfusion tracers. New cadmium zinc telluride (CZT)-based detectors open a new era of faster imaging and of lower radiation dose to the patient. Appropriate use of the SPECT imaging is regulated by evidence-based guidelines and appropriateness criteria as well as by third-party payers in an effort to curb unsustainable growth of testing seen in recent years. SPECT testing prior to noncardiac surgical procedures is driven by urgency of planned surgery, cardiac risk factors, and perceived risk of surgical procedure. Future of cardiac SPECT imaging will be driven by societal demand for cost effective, accurate, and safe testing, which will improve meaningfully short-term and long-term outcomes.

19231025
The limited utility of routine cardiac stress testing in emergency department chest pain patients younger than 40 years.
This is a study designed to evaluate the utility of routine provocative cardiac testing in low-risk young adult (younger than 40 years) patients evaluated for an acute coronary syndrome in an emergency department (ED) setting. This was a retrospective observational study of patients aged 23 to 40 years who were evaluated for acute coronary syndrome in an ED-based chest pain unit from March 2004 to September 2007. All patients had serial cardiac biomarker testing to rule out myocardial infarction and then underwent provocative cardiac testing to identify the presence of myocardial ischemia. Patients were excluded from the study if they had known coronary artery disease, had ECG findings diagnostic of myocardial infarction or ischemia, or self-admitted, or tested positive for cocaine use. Of the 220 patients who met inclusion criteria, 6 patients (2.7%; 95% confidence interval 1% to 5.8%) had positive stress test results. Among these 6 patients, 4 underwent subsequent coronary angiography that demonstrated no obstructive coronary disease, suggesting the initial provocative study was falsely positive. For the remaining 2 patients, no diagnostic angiography was performed. Discounting the patients who had negative angiography results, only 2 of 220 study patients (0.9%; 95% confidence interval 0.1% to 3.2%) had a provocative test result that was positive for myocardial ischemia. In our study, a combination of age younger than 40 years, nondiagnostic ECG result, and 2 sets of negative cardiac biomarker results at least 6 hours apart identified a patient group with a very low rate of true-positive provocative testing. Routine stress testing added little to the diagnostic evaluation of this patient group and was falsely positive in all patients who consented to diagnostic coronary angiography (4 of 6 cases).

17679071
Dobutamine-induced myocardial infarction with normal coronary arteries during stress SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging.


