21254314
Considering adjustment disorders as stress response syndromes for DSM-5.


21494334
Integrating primary care services into psychiatric care settings: a review of the literature.
This review assesses the outcomes of integrating primary care medical services into psychiatric care settings. PubMed, the Cochrane database, and PsycINFO were searched using the key words integrated care, family medicine, primary care, and internal medicine in combination with psychiatry or psychiatric clinic and ward to identify reports published between 1980 and December 2009 in English. Four studies evaluating medical care services on a psychiatry ward or in a psychiatry clinic were found. Trials involving psychiatric services in primary care clinics (the medical-psychiatric model) were excluded. Data describing setting, patient population, intervention, measured outcomes, and discussion points were collected. It was learned that several models of integrated care exist, and patients in these integrated groups received more preventive health measures and showed improved scores on the Medical Outcomes Study 36-item Short-Form Health Survey and Behavior and Symptom Identification Scale and reduced rates of specialist referral. These data indicate that placing primary care physicians in psychiatric care settings improves health maintenance, care coordination, and satisfaction with nonpsychiatric medical care. Future studies should further address costs, the training of primary care physicians to deliver care in these settings, and whether this integrated model is more effective in specific populations such as those with schizophrenia.

18462545
Affective forecasting and its implications for medical ethics.


18354060
Challenges for consultation-liaison psychiatry in the 21st century.


18243883
The adjustment disorders: the conundrums of the diagnoses.
This article discusses the conundrums and the dilemmas of the conceptual framework of the diagnoses of the adjustment disorders (ADs). The psychiatric diagnoses that arise between normal behavior and the major psychiatric morbidities constitute the problematic subthreshold disorders. These subthreshold entities are also juxtaposed between problem-level diagnoses and more clearly defined major disorders. They present important taxonomic and diagnostic dilemmas in that they are often poorly defined, overlap with other diagnostic groupings, and have indefinite symptomatology. ADs were designed as a "wild card" to allow the coding of a psychiatric "diagnosis" for work done by psychiatrists and other mental health care specialists when the patient's symptoms do not reach the criterion of a major mental disorder. It is therefore not surprising that issues of reliability and validity prevail. The issues of diagnostic rigor and clinical utility seem at odds for the AD. Clinicians need a wild card, and field studies need to use reliable and valid concepts of AD and assessments instruments to determine more exact specification of the parameters of the diagnosis. Finally, appropriate and timely treatment is essential for patients with AD so that their symptoms do not worsen; their important relationships are not further impaired; or their capacity to work, study, or be active in their essential interpersonal pursuits is not compromised.

