21331299
POTENTIAL APPLICATION OF GRAPE DERIVED POLYPHENOLS IN HUNTINGTON'S DISEASE.
Huntington's disease (HD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder associated with selective neuronal cell death. Abnormal aggregation of huntingtin protein with polyQ expansion has been shown to be causally linked to HD. Grape seed polyphenolic extract (GSPE) is a natural compound that has previously been shown to interfere with aggregations of proteins involved in neurological disorders, such as amyloid beta peptides (A?) and Tau protein. In this study we found that GSPE treatment significantly inhibits polyQ aggregation in phaeochromocytoma (PC)-12 cell line containing an ecdysone-inducible protein comprising the first 17 amino acid of huntingtin plus 103 glutamines fused with enhanced GFP. In vivo feasibility studies using the Q93httexon1 drosophila model of HD, we extended our in vitro evidence and found that flies fed with GSPE had a significantly improved lifespan compared to the control flies. Using the R6/2 rodent model of HD, we found that oral administration of 100 mg/kg/day GSPE (equivalent to 500mg per day in human) significantly attenuated the motor skill decay as well as extended the lifespan in the R6/2 mice relative to vehicle-control mice. Collectively, our studies strongly suggest that GSPE might be able to modulate the onset and/or progression of HD.

21247479
Preclinical study of dimebon on ?-amyloid-mediated neuropathology in Alzheimer's disease.
ABSTRACT: Dimebon is a retired non-selective antihistamine drug currently being investigated as a therapeutic agent for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Results from several completed clinical trials are mixed and contradictory. Proper interpretations of these clinical observations, as well as future development of dimebon in AD treatment are complicated by the lack of concrete information on the mechanisms by which dimebon might benefit AD. The present studies are designed specifically to assess whether dimebon might modulate ?-amyloid (A?)-mediated responses which are central to the development and progression of AD dementia. We found that dimebon is bioavailable in the brains of mice following oral administration. AD mice chronically treated with dimebon exhibited a trend of improvement in spatial memory function without affecting the levels of total A? as well as soluble oligomeric A? in the brain. The same trend of behavior improvement is also seen in wild type animals chronically treated with dimebon. Collectively, our preclinical studies using the TgCRND8 AD mouse model demonstrated that dimebon might have some beneficial effect in improving cognitive function independent of Alzheimer's disease-type A?-related mechanisms or global energy metabolism in the brain. Observations from our study and others suggesting dimebon might improve cognition in wild type mice and rats raises the possibility that dimebon might be able to benefit cognitive function in patients with other neurodegenerative disorders, such as Huntington's disease, or in the aging population. Additional studies will be necessary to clarify the mechanisms by which dimebon might directly or indirectly benefit cognitive function.

21196065
Ultrastructural alterations of Alzheimer's disease paired helical filaments by grape seed-derived polyphenols.
Abnormal folding of the microtubule-associated protein tau leads to aggregation of tau into paired helical filaments (PHFs) and neurofibrillary tangles, the major hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD). We have recently shown that grape seed polyphenol extract (GSPE) reduces tau pathology in the TMHT mouse model of tauopathy (Wang et al., 2010). In the present studies we assessed the impact of GSPE exposure on the ultrastructure of PHFs isolated from Alzheimer's disease brain. Transmission electron microscopy revealed that GSPE induced profound dose- and time-dependent alterations in the morphology of PHFs with partial disintegration of filaments. Filaments showed ?2-fold enlargement in width and displayed numerous protrusions and splayed ends consistent with unfolding of tau and diminished structural stability. In addition, GSPE induced a reduction in immunogold labeling with antibodies against the C-terminal half (12E8, PHF-1) and the middle region of tau (AT8, Tau5, pSer214 tau, and AT180) but not the C-terminal end (Tau46). In comparison, labeling of N-terminus (Alz50) was enhanced. It is unlikely that alterations in immunogold labeling were due to biochemical alterations, e.g., protein phosphatase or proteolytic activities potentially stimulated by GSPE, because western blotting studies have shown the preservation of full length polypeptides of tau and their phospho-epitopes in GSPE-treated samples. The GSPE mechanism may include a noncovalent interaction of polyphenols with proline residues in the proline-rich domain of tau, with Pin1 sites at P213 and P232 most seriously affected as judged by suppression of labeling. Collectively, our results suggest that GSPE has a significant potential for therapeutic development by neutralizing phospho-epitopes and disrupting fibrillary conformation leading to disintegration of PHFs.

20871666
Grape-seed polyphenolic extract improves the eye phenotype in a Drosophila model of tauopathy.
Drosophila models of tauopathies have been developed by transgenically overexpressing the disease-associated forms of tau. In this paper we report for the first time that a recently developed Grape-Seed Polyphenolic Extract (GSPE) improves the eye phenotype of a Drosophila eye model of R406W tau. GSPE-mediated improvements in this distinct in vivo neurodegeneration model for protein misfolding/aggregation suggest that GSPE may have therapeutic value in disorders involving aberrant protein aggregation.

20858961
Grape derived polyphenols attenuate tau neuropathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.
Aggregation of microtubule-associated protein tau into insoluble intracellular neurofibrillary tangles is a characteristic hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other neurodegenerative diseases, including progressive supranuclear palsy, argyrophilic grain disease, corticobasal degeneration, frontotemporal dementias with Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17, and Pick's disease. Tau is abnormally hyperphosphorylated in AD and aberrant tau phosphorylation contributes to the neuropathology of AD and other tauopathies. Anti-aggregation and anti-phosphorylation are main approaches for tau-based therapy. In this study, we report that a select grape-seed polyphenol extract (GSPE) could potently interfere with the assembly of tau peptides into neurotoxic aggregates. Moreover, oral administration of GSPE significantly attenuated the development of AD type tau neuropathology in the brain of TMHT mouse model of AD through mechanisms associated with attenuation of extracellular signal-receptor kinase 1/2 signaling in the brain.

20579773
Carvedilol as a potential novel agent for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.
Oligomeric beta-amyloid (Abeta) has recently been linked to synaptic plasticity deficits, which play a major role in progressive cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here we present evidence that chronic oral administration of carvedilol, a nonselective beta-adrenergic receptor blocker, significantly attenuates brain oligomeric beta-amyloid content and cognitive deterioration in 2 independent AD mouse models. We found that carvedilol treatment significantly improved neuronal transmission, and that this improvement was associated with the maintenance of number of the less stable "learning" thin spines in the brains of AD mice. Our novel observation that carvedilol interferes with the neuropathologic, biochemical, and electrophysiological mechanisms underlying cognitive deterioration in AD supports the potential development of carvedilol as a treatment for AD.

20571219
Carvedilol reestablishes long-term potentiation in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.
In this study, we examined acute effects of carvedilol, a nonselective alpha/beta-adrenergic receptor blocker, on neuronal transmission and long-term potentiation (LTP) in six month-old TgCRND8 mice and their wild-type age-matched controls. Field excitatory postsynaptic potentials were recorded in the CA1 region of the hippocampus from carvedilol- or vehicle dimethyl sulfoxide-treated slices, and differences in basal synaptic transmission and LTP were assessed. Carvedilol treatment produced a significant increase in basal synaptic transmission and LTP in TgCRND8 mice, as compared to their vehicle-treated slices, in which basal neuronal transmission and LTP decreased. Interestingly, carvedilol significantly suppressed spontaneous seizure activity in TgCRND8 mice as measured by the number of slices showing epileptic discharges as well as the number of spikes within these and the amplitude of the second spike, measured at baseline and end of recording. In contrast, vehicle-treated slices in TgCRND8 mice did not show a significant decrease in epileptic discharges. These results suggest that carvedilol reestablishes basal synaptic transmission, enhances neuronal plasticity and suppresses neuronal hyperexcitability in TgCRND8 mice.

20569300
Development of a grape seed polyphenolic extract with anti-oligomeric activity as a novel treatment in progressive supranuclear palsy and other tauopathies.
A diverse group of neurodegenerative diseases - including progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), corticobasal degeneration and Alzheimer's disease among others, collectively referred to as tauopathies - are characterized by progressive, age-dependent intracellular formations of misfolded protein aggregates that play key roles in the initiation and progression of neuropathogenesis. Recent studies from our laboratory reveal that grape seed-derived polyphenolic extracts (GSPE) potently prevent tau fibrillization into neurotoxic aggregates and therapeutically promote the dissociation of preformed tau aggregates [J. Alzheimer's Dis. (2009) vol. 16, pp. 433]. Based on our extensive bioavailability, bioactivity and functional preclinical studies, combined with the safety of GSPE in laboratory animals and in humans, we initiated a series of studies exploring the role of GSPE (Meganatural-Az(®) GSPE) as a potential novel botanical drug for the treatment of certain forms of tauopathies including PSP, a neurodegenerative disorder involving the accumulation and deposition of misfolded tau proteins in the brain characterized, in part, by abnormal intracellular tau inclusions in specific anatomical areas involving astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and neurons [J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. (2002) vol. 61, pp. 33]. In this mini-review article, we discuss the biochemical characterization of GSPE in our laboratory and its potential preventative and therapeutic role in model systems of abnormal tau processing pertinent to PSP and related tauopathies.

19945548
The role of Sirt1: at the crossroad between promotion of longevity and protection against Alzheimer's disease neuropathology.
Sirt1, a mammalian member of the sirtuin gene family, holds great potential for promoting longevity, preventing against disease and increasing cell survival. For example, studies suggest that the beneficial impact of caloric restriction in promoting longevity and cellular function may be mediated, in part, by Sirt1 through mechanisms involving PGC-1alpha, which plays important role in the regulation of cellular metabolism and inflammatory and antioxidant responses. Sirt1 may also interfere with mechanisms implicated in pathological disorders. We will present recent evidence indicating that Sirt1 may protect against Alzheimer's disease by interfering with the generation of beta-amyloid peptides. We will discuss Sirt1 as a potential novel target, in addition to the development of Sirt1 activators for the prevention and treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

19796674
Alzheimer's disease biomarker discovery in symptomatic and asymptomatic patients: experimental approaches and future clinical applications.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia in the elderly. Current treatments for AD are not as effective as needed, nor is there any definitive antemortem diagnostic. Understanding the biological processes that occur during AD onset and/or progression will improve disease diagnosis and treatment. Recent applications of microarray technologies for analysis of messenger (m) RNA expression profiles have elucidated distinct changes in the brain as a function of AD dementia initiation and progression. However, mRNA analysis underestimates post-transcriptional modifications and therefore provides only a partial view of the molecular changes in the AD brain. Combining mRNA studies with protein expression analysis may provide a more global picture of the biological processes associated with AD dementia. Information gathered could lead to the development of select biological indices (biomarkers) for guiding AD diagnosis and therapy. We will provide a brief background on AD, followed by a review on the applications of microarray, proteomics, as well as microRNA expression profile analysis to develop novel diagnostic strategies that may be useful for the diagnosis AD and for monitoring disease progression. The availability of biomarkers that promote early disease diagnosis, particularly among asymptomatic patients, will lead to the application of personalized medicine in AD.

19221432
Grape seed polyphenolic extract as a potential novel therapeutic agent in tauopathies.
Abnormal misfoldings of the microtubule-associated protein tau, leading to the aggregation of tau into paired helical filaments that are ultimately deposited as neurofibrillary tangles, is a key neuropathologic feature of a number of neurodegenerative disorders collectively referred to as tauopathies. We recently observed that a particular grape seed polyphenolic extract (GSPE), namely, Meganatural-Az may attenuate the generation and stability of misfolded proteins. We hypothesized that Meganatural-Az GSPE might also attenuate tau protein misfolding that leads to the generation of tau filamentary aggregates that are critical for the initiation and progression of neurodegeneration and/or cognitive dysfunctions in tauopathies. In this study, we used in vitro aggregations of synthetic Ac(306)VQIVYK(311) tau peptide as a model system to explore whether Meganatural-Az GSPE might modulate aggregations of tau protein. We demonstrate that this GSPE is capable of inhibiting tau peptide aggregations, as well as dissociating preformed tau peptide aggregates. Results from this study suggest that this GSPE might provide beneficial disease-modifying bioactivities in tau-associated neurodegenerative disorders by modulating tau-mediated neuropathologic mechanisms. Our observation, in conjunction with the demonstrated bioavailability, as well as safety and tolerability, of this GSPE, supports the development of Meganatural-Az GSPE for the prevention and/or treatment of tau-associated neurodegenerative disorders.

19159013
S100A7, a novel Alzheimer's disease biomarker with non-amyloidogenic alpha-secretase activity acts via selective promotion of ADAM-10.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia among older people. At present, there is no cure for the disease and as of now there are no early diagnostic tests for AD. There is an urgency to develop a novel promising biomarker for early diagnosis of AD. Using surface-enhanced laser desorption ionization-mass spectrometry SELDI-(MS) proteomic technology, we identified and purified a novel 11.7-kDa metal- binding protein biomarker whose content is increased in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and in the brain of AD dementia subjects as a function of clinical dementia. Following purification and protein-sequence analysis, we identified and classified this biomarker as S100A7, a protein known to be involved in immune responses. Using an adenoviral-S100A7 expression system, we continued to examine the potential role of S100A7 in AD amyloid neuropathology in in vitro model of AD. We found that the expression of exogenous S100A7 in primary cortico-hippocampal neuron cultures derived from Tg2576 transgenic embryos inhibits the generation of beta-amyloid (Abeta)(1-42) and Abeta(1-40) peptides, coincidental with a selective promotion of "non- amyloidogenic" alpha-secretase activity via promotion of ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase)-10. Finally, a selective expression of human S100A7 in the brain of transgenic mice results in significant promotion of alpha-secretase activity. Our study for the first time suggests that S100A7 may be a novel biomarker of AD dementia and supports the hypothesis that promotion of S100A7 expression in the brain may selectively promote alpha-secretase activity in the brain of AD precluding the generation of amyloidogenic peptides. If in the future we find that S1000A7 protein content in CSF is sensitive to drug intervention experimentally and eventually in the clinical setting, S100A7 might be developed as novel surrogate index (biomarker) of therapeutic efficacy in the characterization of novel drug agents for the treatment of AD.

19158422
Heterogeneity in red wine polyphenolic contents differentially influences Alzheimer's disease-type neuropathology and cognitive deterioration.
We recently found that moderate consumption of two unrelated red wines generate from different grape species, a Cabernet Sauvignon and a muscadine wine that are characterized by distinct component composition of polyphenolic compounds, significantly attenuated the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD)-type brain pathology and memory deterioration in a transgenic AD mouse model. Interestingly, our evidence suggests that the two red wines attenuated AD phenotypes through independent mechanisms. In particular, we previously found that treatment with Cabernet Sauvignon reduced the generation of AD-type amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptides. In contrast, evidence from our present study suggests that muscadine treatment attenuates Abeta neuropathology and Abeta-related cognitive deterioration in Tg2576 mice by interfering with the oligomerization of Abeta molecules to soluble high-molecular-weight Abeta oligomer species that are responsible for initiating a cascade of cellular events resulting in cognitive decline. Collectively, our observations suggest that distinct polyphenolic compounds from red wines may be bioavailable at the organism level and beneficially modulate AD phenotypes through multiple Abeta-related mechanisms. Results from these studies suggest the possibility of developing a "combination" of dietary polyphenolic compounds for AD prevention and/or therapy by modulating multiple Abeta-related mechanisms.

19158421
Identification of antihypertensive drugs which inhibit amyloid-beta protein oligomerization.
Recent studies suggest that certain cardiovascular antihypertensive agents decrease the incidence of Alzheimer's disease. Based on this evidence and the fact that Abeta aggregation into high-molecular-weight-soluble oligomeric Abeta species is known to directly induce cognitive impairment, we tested the possibility that certain antihypertensive compounds may affect the progression of Alzheimer's disease, at least in part by influencing the formation of Abeta oligomers. High throughput screening of 55 commercially available antihypertensive drugs identified four compounds that significantly reduced Abeta(1-42) oligomerization in a dose dependent manner. These four compounds, furosemide (diuretic), nitrendipine (calcium channel blocker), candesartan cilextil (angiotensin II receptor antagonist) and diazoxide (vasodilator) showed no detectable Abeta lowering activities in primary neuron cultures generated from Tg2576 mouse embryos. However, furosemide, nitrendipine and candesartan cilextil prevented oligomerization of both Abeta(1-40) and Abeta(1-42) in vitro. Furosemide also dissociated pre-aggregated Abeta(1-42) oligomers. Furthermore, short term furosemide treatment resulted in decreased amount of Abeta oligomers in the brain of Tg2576 mice. Our studies suggest that certain antihypertensive compounds may prevent AD-type neuropathology through inhibition of Abeta oligomer formation.

18562609
Grape-derived polyphenolics prevent Abeta oligomerization and attenuate cognitive deterioration in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive impairments in memory and cognition. Extracellular accumulation of soluble high-molecular-weight (HMW) Abeta oligomers has been proposed to be largely responsible for AD dementia and memory deficits in the Tg2576 mice, a model of AD. In this study, we found that a naturally derived grape seed polyphenolic extract can significantly inhibit amyloid beta-protein aggregation into high-molecular-weight oligomers in vitro. When orally administered to Tg2576 mice, this polyphenolic preparation significantly attenuates AD-type cognitive deterioration coincidentally with reduced HMW soluble oligomeric Abeta in the brain. Our study suggests that grape seed-derived polyphenolics may be useful agents to prevent or treat AD.

17965777
Valsartan lowers brain beta-amyloid protein levels and improves spatial learning in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease.
Recent epidemiological evidence suggests that some antihypertensive medications may reduce the risk for Alzheimer disease (AD). We screened 55 clinically prescribed antihypertensive medications for AD-modifying activity using primary cortico-hippocampal neuron cultures generated from the Tg2576 AD mouse model. These agents represent all drug classes used for hypertension pharmacotherapy. We identified 7 candidate antihypertensive agents that significantly reduced AD-type beta-amyloid protein (Abeta) accumulation. Through in vitro studies, we found that only 1 of the candidate drugs, valsartan, was capable of attenuating oligomerization of Abeta peptides into high-molecular-weight (HMW) oligomeric peptides, known to be involved in cognitive deterioration. We found that preventive treatment of Tg2576 mice with valsartan significantly reduced AD-type neuropathology and the content of soluble HMW extracellular oligomeric Abeta peptides in the brain. Most importantly, valsartan administration also attenuated the development of Abeta-mediated cognitive deterioration, even when delivered at a dose about 2-fold lower than that used for hypertension treatment in humans. These preclinical studies suggest that certain antihypertensive drugs may have AD-modifying activity and may protect against progressive Abeta-related memory deficits in subjects with AD or in those at high risk of developing AD.

17294438
Myosin heavy chain-based fiber types in the adult human cricopharyngeus muscle.
The cricopharyngeus (CP) muscle is a major component of the upper sphincter of the esophagus. Its physiology is complex; a variety of reflexes maintain CP sustained contraction except during swallowing, when it relaxes to allow a food bolus to pass into the esophagus. In order to understand CP function, we previously studied the normal adult human CP and found that it has an unusual layered structure, with a slow inner and fast outer layer. In addition, a majority of its muscle fibers express unusual myosin heavy chain (MHC) isoforms (slow-tonic, alpha-cardiac, neonatal, and embryonic) as well as the major MHC isoforms (types I, IIa, and IIx). In this study, autopsied adult human CP muscles were studied with immunocytochemical techniques to determine the patterns of MHC coexpression in CP muscle fibers. The results show that CP fibers were hybrids expressing from two to six MHC isoforms. Ten different combinations of MHC isoforms were identified in CP fibers, with the most common (54%) containing three MHC isoforms. The variety of hybrid CP fiber types suggests that the CP is capable of a wide range of contraction characteristics. Determination of MHC expression patterns of the CP muscle fibers is critical for evaluating the contractile properties of the sphincter.

17074861
Adult human upper esophageal sphincter contains specialized muscle fibers expressing unusual myosin heavy chain isoforms.
The functional upper esophageal sphincter (UES) is composed of the cricopharyngeus muscle (CP), the most inferior part of the inferior pharyngeal constrictor (iIPC), and the upper esophagus (UE). This sphincter is collapsed and exhibits sustained muscle activity in the resting state; it only relaxes and opens during swallowing, vomiting, and belching. The tonic contractile properties of the UES suggest that the skeletal muscle fibers in this sphincter differ from those in the limb and trunk muscles. In this study, myosin heavy chain (MHC) composition in the adult human UES muscles obtained from autopsies was investigated using immunocytochemical and immunoblotting techniques. Results showed that the adult human UES muscle fibers expressed unusual MHC isoforms such as slow-tonic (MHC-ton), alpha-cardiac (MHC-alpha), neonatal (MHC-neo), and embryonic (MHC-emb), which coexisted with the major MHCs (i.e., MHCI, IIa, and IIx). MHC-ton and MHC-alpha were coexpressed predominantly with slow-type I MHC isoform, whereas MHC-neo and MHC-emb coexisted mainly with fast-type IIa MHC. A slow inner layer (SIL) and a fast outer layer (FOL) in the iIPC and CP were identified immunocytochemically. MHC-ton- and MHC-alpha-containing fibers were concentrated mainly in the SIL, whereas MHC-neo- and MHC-emb-containing fibers were distributed primarily to the FOL. Identification of the specialized muscle fibers and their distribution patterns in the adult human UES is valuable for a better understanding of the physiological and pathophysiological behaviors of the sphincter.

