20043830
Determining and addressing obstacles to the effective use of long-lasting insecticide-impregnated nets in rural Tanzania.
The objective of this project was to achieve high, sustainable levels of net coverage in a village in rural Tanzania by combining free distribution of long-lasting insecticide-impregnated nets (LLINs) with community-tailored education. In Tanzania, malaria is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality. Although malaria bed nets have a well-established role in reducing disease burden, few rural households have access to nets, and effective use depends on personal practices and attitudes. Five practices and attitudes inconsistent with effective LLIN use were identified from household interviews (n = 10). A randomized survey of villagers (n = 132) verified local prevalence of these practices and attitudes. Community leaders held an educational session for two members of every household addressing these practice and attitudes, demonstrating proper LLIN use, and emphasizing behaviour modification. Attendees received one or two LLINs per household. Surveys distributed three weeks (n = 104) and 15 months (n = 104) post-intervention assessed corrected practices and attitudes. Project efficacy was defined by correction of baseline practices and attitudes as well as high rates of reported daily net use, with statistical significance determined by chi-square test. Baseline interviews and surveys revealed incorrect practices and attitudes regarding 1) use of nets in dry season, 2) need to retreat LLINs, 3) children napping under nets, 4) need to repair nets, and 5) net procurement as a priority, with 53- 88.6% incorrect responses (11.4-47% correct responses). A three-week follow-up demonstrated 83-95% correct responses. Fifteen-month follow-up showed statistically significant (p < 0.01) corrections from baseline in all five practice and attitudes (39.4-93.3% correct answers). 89.4% of respondents reported using their nets every night, and 93.3% affirmed purchase of nets as a financial priority. Results suggest that addressing community-specific practices and attitudes prior to LLIN distribution promotes consistent and correct use, and helps change attitudes towards bed nets as a preventative health measure. Future LLIN distributions can learn from the paradigm established in this project.

18820521
The design and implementation of a multidisciplinary global health residency track at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
The Mount Sinai Global Health Center established a new multidisciplinary Global Health Residency Track (GHRT) in 2006. The goal of the GHRT is to provide participants with a foundation in global health issues and population-based health care, a chance to develop basic research and public health skills in the field, and guidance for career development. The authors describe how the GHRT was created, present its structure, and discuss their experience implementing this new program. Other selected global health residency training programs are also reviewed. The Mount Sinai GHRT is a two-year program that comprises a didactic curriculum, with participants required to take selected classes in the Master of Public Health Program of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine of New York University, and "field experience," which consists of a public health project that is implemented during a two-month elective period during the second year. Core competencies include (1) epidemiology and research skills, (2) health disparities, human rights, and cultural competency, (3) needs assessment and project development, (4) tropical medicine and infectious disease, and (5) reproductive, maternal, and child health. Nine residents were selected from four Mount Sinai residency programs to participate in the GHRT in its first year, and, during the winter of 2007, senior residents conducted public health projects in the Dominican Republic, India, Kenya, and East Harlem. All components of the track performed well in evaluations. An outcomes survey is ongoing to track career choices among graduates and to identify barriers to continuing involvement in global health.

