20609173
Roux-en-Y loop varices in children with portal hypertension after liver transplantation: An unusual cause of "obscure" gastrointestinal bleeding.
Chu J, Kerkar N, Miloh TA, Rodriguez-Laiz G, Lewis B, Stangl A, Newton KP, Iyer K, Arnon R. Roux-en-Y loop varices in children with portal hypertension after liver transplantation: An unusual cause of "obscure" gastro intestinal bleeding. Pediatr Transplantation 2010: (c) 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Abstract: PHALT may result from graft dysfunction, portal vein thrombosis, arterio-venous fistulas and can lead to GIB, commonly from bleeding esophageal varices. We present three children with GIB requiring multiple blood transfusions that were diagnosed with RY Loop bleeding. Routine EGD, colonoscopy, and CE failed to reveal the bleeding source. However, enteroscopy revealed large varices at the site of hepaticojejunostomy anastomosis in all. Our experience demonstrates that RY loop varices in children with PHALT are a rare and treatable cause of obscure GI bleeding.

19590656
Surgical portosystemic shunts and the Rex bypass in children: a single-centre experience.
This study aimed to illustrate the indications for, and types and outcomes of surgical portosystemic shunt (PSS) and/or Rex bypass in a single centre. Data were collected from children with a PSS and/or Rex bypass between 1992 and 2006 at Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York. Median age at surgery was 10.7 years (range 0.3-22.0 years). Indications included: (i) refractory gastrointestinal bleeding in portal hypertension associated with (a) compensated cirrhosis (n= 12), (b) portal vein thrombosis (n= 10), (c) hepatoportal sclerosis (n= 3); (ii) refractory ascites secondary to Budd-Chiari syndrome (n= 3), and (iii) familial hypercholesterolaemia (n= 4). There were 20 distal splenorenal, four portacaval, three Rex bypass, two mesocaval, two mesoatrial and one proximal splenorenal shunts. At the last follow-up (median 2.9 years, range 0.1-14.1 years), one shunt (Rex bypass) was thrombosed. Two patients had died and two had required a liver transplant. These had a patent shunt at last imaging prior to death or transplant. Portosystemic shunts and Rex bypass have been used to manage portal hypertension with excellent outcomes. In selected children with compensated liver disease, PSS may act as a bridge to liver transplantation or represent an attractive alternative.

19418102
Rapid reversal of parenteral-nutrition-associated cirrhosis following isolated intestinal transplantation.
Liver disease and the development of hepatic fibrosis are complications associated with total parenteral nutrition (TPN). Patients developing cirrhosis and portal hypertension in the setting of intestinal failure have a high mortality and may require combined liver and intestinal transplantation which carries much higher morbidity and mortality than isolated intestinal transplantation. Recently, regression of hepatic fibrosis in patients with TPN liver disease has been described following intestinal transplantation. To date, there has been no demonstration of the reversal of established cirrhosis due to long-term TPN injury. Herein, we describe a patient with intestinal failure who developed cirrhosis from long-standing TPN injury and underwent isolated intestinal transplantation. He had no overt clinical stigmata of portal hypertension and had preserved liver function. Serial liver biopsies were reviewed and assessed with standard histology and quantitation of fibrosis using image analysis. Dramatic regression of fibrosis and reversal of cirrhosis were observed 17 months posttransplantation. Image analysis demonstrated a 14% total decrease in the percentage area of fibrosis. Cirrhosis related to TPN may be rapidly reversible after isolated intestinal transplantation. Such patients may be able to undergo isolated intestinal transplantation if they do not have hepatic synthetic compromise or clinical stigmata of portal hypertension.

18674734
Regression of hepatic fibrosis after intestinal transplantation in total parenteral nutrition liver disease.
Hepatic fibrosis may occur in patients with intestinal failure requiring total parenteral nutrition, leading to liver dysfunction necessitating combined intestinal and liver transplantation. The decision to perform combined transplantation as opposed to an isolated intestinal transplant is based on the presence of hyperbilirubinemia, portal hypertension, and advanced hepatic fibrosis. We identified 4 patients who underwent isolated intestinal transplantation having significant liver fibrosis. A novel image analysis technique was applied to serial liver biopsies to more precisely quantitate posttransplantation fibrosis regression separately within both portal and centrilobular areas. All patients were found to have significant portal and centrilobular fibrosis regression, which occurred more rapidly in the former. Two patients had improvement in fibrosis despite infections and continuation of total parenteral nutrition, suggesting that hepatic fibrosis associated with intestinal failure may in part be related to adequate anatomic and functional bowel length. Significant hepatic fibrosis and liver dysfunction may regress after intestinal transplantation and fibrosis regresses more rapidly in portal areas. This suggests that some patients with intestinal failure and associated liver disease may safely undergo isolated intestinal transplant without the need for concurrent liver transplantation and its attendant higher morbidity and mortality.

18470884
Partial HLA matching and RH incompatibility resulting in graft versus host reaction and Evans syndrome after liver transplantation.
We report a case of a 67-year-old male who underwent OLT from a deceased, sex-matched donor. Two months later he developed Evans syndrome and GVHD of the skin. Donor and recipient were matched for HLA-A and -B loci in the direction of rejection but mismatched in the direction of GVHD and fully mismatched for DRB1. These mismatches were permissible for engraftment of donor T-cells but led to GVHD. Chimerism appeared restricted to the T-cell compartment. In this case, partially matched passenger lymphocytes triggered a graft versus host reaction. In addition, alloantibodies caused cytopenias that improved after immunosuppression. HLA typing was critical in confirming this rare diagnosis and elucidating its cause. Recipients of solid organs from donors that are partially matched in the direction of rejection may need to be closely monitored for GVHD.

17077945
Common hepatic artery arising from the left gastric artery: a rare anatomic variation identified on a cadaveric liver donor.
Anatomical variations of the arterial supply of the liver are not uncommon. The typical normal "textbook" anatomy of the hepatic artery is found only in approximately half of the cases. Some of the variations such as the presence of a right or left hepatic branch are more common, but other ones are extremely rare. We describe here a rare case in which the common hepatic artery arose from the left gastric artery, found during a cadaveric liver donor harvesting and confirmed with imaging studies. Cases like this one highlight the importance of knowing the hepatic arterial anatomy and the possibility of its numerous variations by the transplant and hepatobiliary surgeon.

19545713
Outcome of combined liver and kidney transplantation in hepatitis C: a single-center long-term follow-up experience.
Hepatitis C (HCV) cirrhosis is the prevalent liver disease requiring liver transplantation in the United States. Candidates who also have end-stage renal disease, chronic renal disease stage 4, or prolonged hepatorenal syndrome are considered for combined liver and kidney transplantation (CLKT). We performed a retrospective study of HCV(+) and HCV(-) CLKT patients with more than 12 months of follow-up and HCV(+) patients with isolated liver transplant (OLT) to compare the outcomes of various groups. Since 1988, 2983 OLTs were performed at our institution including 58 CLKTs. Of these, 23 were HCV(+) subjects who were significantly older than HCV(-) CLKT patients. Race, pretransplant dialysis time, renal indication for CLKT, Model for End-stage Liver Disease score, donor age, liver and kidney rejection as well as occurrence of posttransplant hypertension were similar among HCV(+) and HCV(-) CLKT patients. Posttransplant diabetes was observed in 80% of the HCV(+) group and 30% of the HCV(-) group (P = .01). Renal function seemed to be better in HCV(-) when compared with HCV(+) subjects at 5 years (P = .09). Overall patient survival for HCV(+) CLKT, HCV(-) CLKT, and HCV(+) OLT groups at 1, 2, and 5 years were not significantly different (P = .6). HCV positivity should not exclude appropriate candidates for CLKT.

