19935367
T-cell immune monitoring in organ transplantation.
Chronic allograft injury remains the leading cause of graft loss despite improvements in immunosuppression, clinical risk stratification, and state-of-the-art antibody testing. Emerging results indicate that T-cell immune monitoring by cytokine enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot, as part of a comprehensive risk assessment platform, has the potential to guide decision making and improve outcomes after transplantation.

18685339
T-cell immune monitoring in organ transplantation.
Chronic injury and late allograft loss remain major causes of morbidity in clinical transplantation. Biomarkers that can reliably assess the risk of posttransplant complications are required to direct and individualize therapy aimed at prolonging graft survival and improving patient health. The purpose of this review is to provide a framework for understanding how to use biomarkers in the context of clinical transplantation and to summarize current data on available noninvasive cellular-based immune monitoring methods to predict transplant outcome. New microarray and gene profiling data reveal peripheral blood cell gene expression patterns that identify operational tolerance, raising the possibility that the measurements can be used to direct immunosuppression withdrawal. Additional data support the use of selective urine gene products and soluble CD30 measurements in serum as reliable biomarkers of acute graft injury. Finally, recent studies demonstrate that measurement of T-cell alloimmunity by cytokine enzyme-linked immunospot is a promising, supplementary pretransplant risk assessment tool. Recently published studies in organ transplantation suggest that results derived from assays focused on markers of T-cell immunity can segregate transplant candidates or recipients into high and low-risk subgroups for posttransplant graft injury. Larger prospective studies are needed, however, before any proposed biomarker can be incorporated into the transplant physicians' armamentarium to guide individualized therapeutic decision-making.

18337549
Addition of plasmapheresis decreases the incidence of acute antibody-mediated rejection in sensitized patients with strong donor-specific antibodies.
The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of desensitization protocols using intravenous Ig with or without plasmapheresis in patients with donor-specific anti-HLA antibodies on prevention of antibody-mediated rejection and downregulation of donor-specific antibodies. Thirty-five complement-dependent cytotoxicity T cell cross-match-negative but complement-dependent cytotoxicity B cell and/or flow cytometry cross-match-positive kidney transplant recipients were treated with high-dosage intravenous Ig plus Thymoglobulin induction treatment. Donor-specific antibody strength was stratified as strong, medium, or weak by Luminex flow beads. Group 1 patients had weak/moderate and group 2 strong donor-specific antibodies Whereas no group 1 patients had acute rejection, 66% of group 2 had acute rejection (44% antibody-mediated rejection, 22% cellular rejection). The protocol was then changed to the addition of peritransplantation plasmapheresis to patients with strong donor-specific antibodies (group 3). This change resulted in a dramatic decrease in the acute rejection rate to 7%. During a median 18 mo of follow-up, patient survival was 100, 100, and 93% and graft survival was 100, 78, and 86% in groups 1, 2, and 3, respectively. During follow-up, 17 (52%) patients lost donor-specific antibodies completely, and 10 (30%) lost some of donor-specific antibodies and/or decreased the strength of existing donor-specific antibodies. These results indicated that in patients with strong donor-specific antibodies, the addition of plasmapheresis to high-dosage intravenous Ig decreases the incidence of acute rejection. The majority of the patients, whether they received intravenous Ig alone or with plasmapheresis, lost their donor-specific antibodies during follow-up.

17983935
Preemptive kidney transplantation in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Kidney transplantation is the most preferred treatment for end-stage renal disease because it improves not only the patient's survival compared with dialysis, but also the quality of life. Preemptive transplantation is transplantation performed prior to the initiation of renal dialysis. Recent observational studies have shown increased patient and graft survival with preemptive transplantation, compared to patients receiving transplantation after the initiation of dialysis. Preemptive simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation in type 1 diabetic recipients has also been shown to improve patient survival. These results indicate the importance of early referral of patients who have chronic kidney disease to nephrologists and transplant centers.

17942771
Transplant glomerulopathy may occur in the absence of donor-specific antibody and C4d staining.
Transplant glomerulopathy (TGP) has been proposed to be a component of chronic antibody-mediated rejection (AMR). We have studied 36 patients with TGP and 51 patients with chronic allograft nephropathy (CAN) but without TGP for C4d staining and donor-specific anti-HLA antibodies (DSA) to investigate the alloantibody-mediated mechanisms. Allograft biopsies were stained with C4d staining and DSAs were studied by Luminex Flow Beads. Allograft biopsies were done at a mean of 5.3 +/- 5.0 and 5.6 +/- 4.6 yr after transplantation in patients with CAN and TGP, respectively. The mean creatinine level at the time of the biopsy was 2.7 +/- 1.2 mg/dl in each group. Proteinuria of >1.0 g/d was more common in patients with TGP (61 versus 25%; P = 0.002). Whereas three patients with TGP had a history of acute AMR, none of the patients with CAN had. Mean chronicity score of the biopsies were 1.7 +/- 0.7 in patients with CAN and 1.9 +/- 0.8 in patients with TGP. Biopsies from only two (4%) patients with CAN and four (11%) patients with TGP had diffuse C4d positivity. DSA were found in 36% of TGP and 33% of CAN patients. These results suggest that a substantial number of patients with TGP did not have positive C4d staining or DSA, indicating that a non-alloantibody-mediated process may be involved in the development of TGP in some patients.

19459817
Factors associated with failure to list HIV-positive kidney transplant candidates.
With improved survival in the antiretroviral era, data from ongoing studies suggest that HIV patients can be safely transplanted. The disproportionate burden of HIV-related end-stage renal disease in minority populations may impose additional obstacles to successful completion of the transplant evaluation. We retrospectively reviewed 309 potentially eligible HIV patients evaluated for kidney transplant at our institution since 2000. Only 20% of HIV patients have been listed, compared to 73% of HIV-negative patients evaluated over the same period (p < 0.00001). Failure to provide documentation of CD4 and viral load (36% of candidates) was the most common reason for failure to progress beyond initial evaluation. Other factors independently associated with failure to complete the evaluation included CD4 < 200 at initial evaluation (OR 15.17; 95% CI 1.94-118.83), black race (OR 2.33; 95% CI 1.07-5.06), and history of drug use (OR 2.56; 95% CI 1.22-5.37). More efficient medical record sharing and an awareness of factors associated with failure to list HIV-positive transplant candidates may enable transplant centers to more effectively advocate for these patients.

