21347441
Role of cell-to-cell variability in activating a positive feedback antiviral response in human dendritic cells.
In the first few hours following Newcastle disease viral infection of human monocyte-derived dendritic cells, the induction of IFNB1 is extremely low and the secreted type I interferon response is below the limits of ELISA assay. However, many interferon-induced genes are activated at this time, for example DDX58 (RIGI), which in response to viral RNA induces IFNB1. We investigated whether the early induction of IFNBI in only a small percentage of infected cells leads to low level IFN secretion that then induces IFN-responsive genes in all cells. We developed an agent-based mathematical model to explore the IFNBI and DDX58 temporal dynamics. Simulations showed that a small number of early responder cells provide a mechanism for efficient and controlled activation of the DDX58-IFNBI positive feedback loop. The model predicted distributions of single cell responses that were confirmed by single cell mRNA measurements. The results suggest that large cell-to-cell variation plays an important role in the early innate immune response, and that the variability is essential for the efficient activation of the IFNB1 based feedback loop.

21273692
Comparing genetic ancestry and self-reported race/ethnicity in a multiethnic population in New York City.
Self-reported race/ethnicity is frequently used in epidemiological studies to assess an individual's background origin. However, in admixed populations such as Hispanic, self-reported race/ethnicity may not accurately represent them genetically because they are admixed with European, African and Native American ancestry. We estimated the proportions of genetic admixture in an ethnically diverse population of 396 mothers and 188 of their children with 35 ancestry informative markers (AIMs) using the STRUCTURE version 2.2 program. The majority of the markers showed significant deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in our study population. In mothers self-identified as Black and White, the imputed ancestry proportions were 77.6% African and 75.1% European respectively, while the racial composition among self-identified Hispanics was 29.2% European, 26.0% African, and 44.8% Native American. We also investigated the utility of AIMs by showing the improved fitness of models in paraoxanase-1 genotype-phenotype associations after incorporating AIMs; however, the improvement was moderate at best. In summary, a minimal set of 35 AIMs is sufficient to detect population stratification and estimate the proportion of individual genetic admixture; however, the utility of these markers remains questionable.

20967607
Linking emulsion PCR haplotype analysis.
The experimental measurement of haplotype requires the determination of two or more genotypes on the same DNA molecule. Because such measurements are much more complicated than measurements of genotypes, haplotypes are typically inferred using population data for linkage disequilibrium between the markers of interest. We have developed a method for molecular haplotyping, linking emulsion PCR (LE-PCR), and have demonstrated that the method is sufficiently robust to determine haplotypes for multiple markers in a population setting. LE-PCR uses emulsion PCR to isolate single template molecules for simultaneous PCR of widely spaced markers and uses linking PCR to fuse these amplicons into one short amplicon, which maintains the phase of the markers. LE-PCR is illustrated for polymorphisms in human paraoxonase 1 (PON1) that have been shown to affect transcriptional activity and substrate specificity in the detoxification of organophosphates.

20511549
A common polymorphism in the caspase recruitment domain of RIG-I modifies the innate immune response of human dendritic cells.
Infection of human dendritic cells (DCs) by negative-strand RNA viruses, such as Newcastle disease virus, leads to the induction of the IFNbeta gene, IFNB1, through the activation of the RNA helicase RIG-I, which is encoded by DDX58. Expression levels of IFNB1 and DDX58 in infected DCs showed positive correlations at the population and the single-cell levels. DDX58 has a common and potentially functional single nucleotide polymorphism, rs10813831 (A/G), encoding an Arg7Cys amino acid change in the RIG-I protein caspase recruitment domain (CARD). Quantitative RT-PCR analysis on Newcastle disease virus-infected primary DCs from 130 individuals revealed a significant association of the Arg7Cys single nucleotide polymorphism with increased IFNB1 and DDX58 transcription. Allelic imbalance analysis ruled out allele-specific DDX58 message levels and suggested that the observed association between Arg7Cys and IFNB1 and DDX58 transcription originated from a functional change in RIG-I due to the amino acid substitution in the CARD. DDX58 transfection experiments in 293T cells confirmed a biological functional difference between RIG-I 7Cys and the more common RIG-I 7Arg. Taken together, these data indicate that the innate immune response to viral infection of human cells is modified by a functional polymorphism in the RIG-I CARD.

20298589
Coregulation mapping based on individual phenotypic variation in response to virus infection.
Gene coregulation across a population is an important aspect of the considerable variability of the human immune response to virus infection. Methodology to investigate it must rely on a number of ingredients ranging from gene clustering to transcription factor enrichment analysis. We have developed a methodology to investigate the gene to gene correlations for the expression of 34 genes linked to the immune response of Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV) infected conventional dendritic cells (DCs) from 145 human donors. The levels of gene expression showed a large variation across individuals. We generated a map of gene co-expression using pairwise correlation and multidimensional scaling (MDS). The analysis of these data showed that among the 13 genes left after filtering for statistically significant variations, two clusters are formed. We investigated to what extent the observed correlation patterns can be explained by the sharing of transcription factors (TFs) controlling these genes. Our analysis showed that there was a significant positive correlation between MDS distances and TF sharing across all pairs of genes. We applied enrichment analysis to the TFs having binding sites in the promoter regions of those genes. This analysis, after Gene Ontology filtering, indicated the existence of two clusters of genes (CCL5, IFNA1, IFNA2, IFNB1) and (IKBKE, IL6, IRF7, MX1) that were transcriptionally co-regulated. In order to facilitate the use of our methodology by other researchers, we have also developed an interactive coregulation explorer web-based tool called CorEx. It permits the study of MDS and hierarchical clustering of data combined with TF enrichment analysis. We also offer web services that provide programmatic access to MDS, hierarchical clustering and TF enrichment analysis. MDS mapping based on correlation in conjunction with TF enrichment analysis represents a useful computational method to generate predictions underlying gene coregulation across a population.

20164420
Antiviral response dictated by choreographed cascade of transcription factors.
The dendritic cell (DC) is a master regulator of immune responses. Pathogenic viruses subvert normal immune function in DCs through the expression of immune antagonists. Understanding how these antagonists interact with the host immune system requires knowledge of the underlying genetic regulatory network that operates during an uninhibited antiviral response. To isolate and identify this network, we studied DCs infected with Newcastle disease virus, which is able to stimulate innate immunity and DC maturation through activation of RIG-I signaling, but lacks the ability to evade the human IFN response. To analyze this experimental model, we developed a new approach integrating genome-wide expression kinetics and time-dependent promoter analysis. We found that the genetic program underlying the antiviral cell-state transition during the first 18 h postinfection could be explained by a single convergent regulatory network. Gene expression changes were driven by a stepwise multifactor cascading control mechanism, where the specific transcription factors controlling expression changed over time. Within this network, most individual genes were regulated by multiple factors, indicating robustness against virus-encoded immune evasion genes. In addition to effectively recapitulating current biological knowledge, we predicted, and validated experimentally, antiviral roles for several novel transcription factors. More generally, our results show how a genetic program can be temporally controlled through a single regulatory network to achieve the large-scale genetic reprogramming characteristic of cell-state transitions.

19921426
Gene promoter methylation is associated with increased mortality among women with breast cancer.
To better understand breast cancer etiology and progression, we explored the association between promoter methylation status of three breast cancer-related genes (BRCA1, APC, and p16) and survival in a large cohort of women with breast cancer. About 800 archived tumor tissues were collected from women diagnosed with a first primary invasive or in situ breast cancer in 1996-1997. The vital status of the participants was followed through the end of year 2005 with a mean follow-up time of 8.0 years. Promoter methylation was assessed by methylation-specific PCR (for BRCA1) and MethyLight (for APC and p16). The association of promoter methylation and breast cancer mortality was evaluated by Cox-proportional hazards models. Methylated promoters were found in 59.0, 48.4, and 3.6% of the tumor samples for BRCA1, APC, and p16, respectively. Breast cancer-specific mortality was strongly associated with promoter methylation of p16 [HR and 95% CI: 3.53 (1.83-6.78)], whereas the associations with of BRCA1 and APC were less pronounced [HR and 95% CI: 1.81 (1.18-2.78) and 1.46 (0.98-2.17), respectively]. Similar associations were observed with all-cause mortality. As the number of methylated genes increased, the risk of breast cancer-specific mortality also increased in a dose-dependent manner (P, trend = 0.01). Importantly, even with our results stratified by hormone receptor status, promoter methylation of the three genes remained predictive of mortality. Our results suggest that promoter methylation could be promising epigenetic markers to be considered for breast cancer survival.

19767614
Demonstration of all-or-none loss of imprinting in mRNA expression in single cells.
Loss of imprinting (LOI) is the reactivation of the silenced allele of an imprinted gene, leading to perturbation of monoallelic expression. We tested the hypothesis that LOI of PLAGL1, a representative maternally imprinted gene, occurs through an all-or-none process leading to a mixture of fully imprinted and nonimprinted cells. Herein using a quantitative RT-PCR-based experimental approach, we measured LOI at the single cell level in human trophoblasts and demonstrated a broad distribution of LOI among cells exhibiting LOI, with the mean centered at approximately 100% LOI. There was a significant (P < 0.01) increase in expression after 2 days of 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (AZA) treatment and a significant (P < 0.01) increase in LOI after both 1 and 2 days of AZA treatment, while the distribution remained broad and centered at approximately 100% LOI. We propose a transcriptional pulsing model to show that the broadness of the distribution reflects the stochastic nature of expression between the two alleles in each cell. The mean of the distribution of LOI in the cells is consistent with our hypothesis that LOI occurs by an all-or-none process. All-or-none LOI could lead to a second distinct cell population that may have a selective advantage, leading to variation of LOI in normal tissues, such as the placenta, or in neoplastic cells.

18708404
B-vitamin intake, one-carbon metabolism, and survival in a population-based study of women with breast cancer.
Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer mortality among women. Given its important role in DNA methylation and synthesis, one-carbon metabolism may affect breast cancer mortality. We used a population-based cohort of 1,508 women with breast cancer to investigate possible associations of dietary intake of B vitamins before diagnosis as well as nine polymorphisms of one-carbon metabolizing genes and subsequent survival. Women newly diagnosed with a first primary breast cancer in 1996 to 1997 were followed for vital status for an average of 5.6 years. Kaplan-Meier survival and Cox proportional hazard regression analyses were used to evaluate the association between dietary intakes of B vitamins (1,479 cases), genotypes ( approximately 1,065 cases), and all-cause as well as breast cancer-specific mortality. We found that higher dietary intake of vitamin B(1) and B(3) was associated with improved survival during the follow-up period (P(trend) = 0.01 and 0.04, respectively). Compared with the major genotype, the MTHFR 677 T allele carriers have reduced all-cause mortality and breast cancer-specific mortality in a dominant model [hazard ratio (95% confidence interval): 0.69 (0.49-0.98) and 0.58 (0.38-0.89), respectively]. The BHMT 742 A allele was also associated with reduced all-cause mortality [hazard ratio, 0.70 (0.50-1.00)]. Estrogen receptor/progesterone receptor status modified the association between the MTHFR C677T polymorphism and survival (P = 0.05). The survival associations with one-carbon polymorphisms did not differ with the use of chemotherapy, although study power was limited for examining such effect modification. Our results indicate that one-carbon metabolism may be an important pathway that could be targeted to improve breast cancer survival.

18642608
An emulsion polymerase chain reaction-based method for molecular haplotyping.
Genotypes are easily measured using a variety of experimental methods. However, experimental methods for measuring haplotypes, i.e., molecular haplotyping, are limited. Instead, haplotypes often are statistically inferred from genotype data with varying degrees of confidence, depending on the extent of linkage disequilibrium (LD) between markers. We have developed a method for molecular haplotyping, linking-emulsion polymerase chain reaction (LE-PCR), that should find application in studies where LD is limited, especially when the polymorphisms in question affect the function of a single gene product. We have illustrated this technology with the human paraoxonase 1 gene (PON1), where polymorphisms affecting transcription and enzymatic activity show incomplete LD. PON1 is an enzyme with multiple activities, including detoxification of organophosphates.

18521744
BRCA1 promoter methylation is associated with increased mortality among women with breast cancer.
Promoter-CpG island hypermethylation has been proposed as an alternative mechanism to inactivate BRCA1 in the breast where somatic mutations of BRCA1 are rare. To better understand breast cancer etiology and progression, we explored the association between BRCA1 promoter methylation status and prognostic factors as well as survival among women with breast cancer. Promoter methylation of BRCA1 was assessed in 851 archived tumor tissues collected from a population-based study of women diagnosed with invasive or in situ breast cancer in 1996-1997, and who were followed for vital status through the end of 2002. About 59% of the tumors were methylated at the promoter of BRCA1. The BRCA1 promoter methylation was more frequent in invasive cancers (P = 0.02) and among premenopausal cases (P = 0.05). BRCA1 promoter methylation was associated with increased risk of breast cancer-specific mortality (age-adjusted HR 1.71; 95% CI: 1.05-2.78) and all-cause mortality (age-adjusted HR 1.49; 95% CI: 1.02-2.18). Neither dietary methyl intakes in the year prior to the baseline interview nor the functional polymorphisms in one-carbon metabolism were associated with BRCA1 methylation status. Our study is the first epidemiological investigation on the prognostic value of BRCA1 promoter methylation in a large population-based cohort of breast cancer patients. Our results indicate that BRCA1 promoter methylation is an important factor to consider in predicting breast cancer survival.

17675303
Chromosome-specific and noisy IFNB1 transcription in individual virus-infected human primary dendritic cells.
The induction of interferon beta (IFNB1) is a key event in the antiviral immune response. We studied the role of transcriptional noise in the regulation of the IFNB1 locus in primary cultures of human dendritic cells (DCs), which are important 'first responders' to viral infection. In single cell assays, IFNB1 mRNA expression in virus-infected DCs showed much greater cell-to-cell variation than that of a housekeeping gene, another induced transcript and viral RNA. We determined the contribution of intrinsic noise by measuring the allelic origin of transcripts in each cell and found that intrinsic noise is a very significant part of total noise. We developed a stochastic model to investigate the underlying mechanisms. We propose that the surprisingly high levels of IFNB1 transcript noise originate from the complexity of IFNB1 enhanceosome formation, which leads to a range up to many minutes in the differences within each cell in the time of activation of each allele.

17406008
Prenatal organophosphate metabolite and organochlorine levels and performance on the Brazelton Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale in a multiethnic pregnancy cohort.
Prenatal exposures to organophosphate pesticides and polychlorinated biphenyls have been associated with abnormal neonatal behavior and/or primitive reflexes. In 1998-2002, the Mount Sinai Children's Environmental Health Center (New York City) investigated the effects of indoor pesticide use and exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls on pregnancy outcome and child neurodevelopment in an inner-city multiethnic cohort. The Brazelton Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale was administered before hospital discharge (n = 311). Maternal urine samples were analyzed for six dialkylphosphate metabolites and malathion dicarboxylic acid. A random subset of maternal peripheral blood samples from the entire cohort (n = 194) was analyzed for polychlorinated biphenyls and 1,1'-dichloro-2,2'-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethylene. Malathion dicarboxylic acid levels above the limit of detection were associated with a 2.24-fold increase in the number of abnormal reflexes (95% confidence interval: 1.55, 3.24). Likewise, higher levels of total diethylphosphates and total dialkylphosphates were associated with an increase in abnormal reflexes, as was total dimethylphosphates after paraoxonase expression was considered. No adverse associations were found with polychlorinated biphenyl or 1,1'-dichloro-2,2'-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethylene levels and any behavior. The authors uncovered additional evidence that prenatal levels of organophosphate pesticide metabolites are associated with anomalies in primitive reflexes, which are a critical marker of neurologic integrity.

17372271
Polymorphisms of one-carbon-metabolizing genes and risk of breast cancer in a population-based study.
One-carbon metabolism facilitates the crosstalk between genetic and epigenetic processes and plays critical roles in both DNA methylation and DNA synthesis, making it a good candidate for studying the risk of breast cancer. We previously reported that polymorphisms in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) in one-carbon pathway were associated with breast cancer risk in the population-based Long Island Breast Cancer Study Project. Herein, we systematically investigated putatively functional polymorphisms of seven other one-carbon-metabolizing genes in relation to the breast cancer risk in the same population. Except for a slight indication of increased risk of breast cancer associated with the double repeat (2R) allele in the thymidylate synthase (TYMS) 5'-untranslated region (UTR) (P, trend = 0.07), polymorphisms in the other six genes did not substantially modify the risk of breast cancer, or did they modify the risk associated with dietary intakes of folate and related B vitamins. However, we observed a significant multiplicative interaction between the MTHFR 677C>T and the TYMS 5'-UTR polymorphisms (P = 0.02). We used a recursive partitioning method, RTREE, in an attempt to tease out important or rate-limiting genes encoding these intricately related enzymes. Results from RTREE analyses indicate that MTHFR and TYMS are the two leading rate-limiting enzymes in the pathway, consistent with our epidemiological findings. Our findings underscore the importance of one-carbon metabolism in breast cancer etiology. Although the pathway is a network of interrelated enzymes, redundancy exists; evaluating the rate-limiting enzyme and its interaction with environment and other genes within the same pathway is critical in assessing breast cancer risk.

