21057900
Thromboembolic risk and anticoagulation strategies in patients undergoing catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation.
Periprocedural thromboembolic and hemorrhagic events are complications of percutaneous radiofrequency catheter ablation (RFA) of atrial fibrillation (AF). The management of anticoagulation before and after RFA could play an important role in the prevention of these complications. The incidence of thromboembolic events varies from 1% to 5%, depending on the ablation and the anticoagulation strategy used in the periprocedural period. The scientific evidence behind the management of anticoagulation in patients with AF undergoing RFA is scarce and is mostly based on small studies and experts' consensus. It remains unclear whether catheter ablation for AF reduces the risk of stroke and obviates the need for anticoagulation after the procedure. Limited data are available regarding the risk of thromboembolism with and without warfarin after AF ablation. In this review we will review the most current evidence supporting the different strategies to reduce thromboembolic risk before, during, and after catheter ablation for AF.

19335869
Fatal outcome in a pacemaker-dependent patient.
The recent advisory of Medtronic Sprint Fidelis leads has resulted in significant controversy over proper management of patients. The current manufacture's guidelines recommend programming specific device alerts with close follow-up and implantable cardioverter-defibrillator lead replacement in patients with evidence of breach in lead integrity. Recently, several studies have identified significant limitations in this method of surveillance. We report the case of a pacemaker-dependent patient with an ischemic cardiomyopathy, who presented with cardiac arrest and evidence of fracture of the pace/sense portion of a Sprint Fidelis lead during postmortem interrogation. Likely mechanisms leading to his ultimate demise are discussed.

19272063
Transfemoral snaring and stabilization of pacemaker and defibrillator leads to maintain vascular access during lead extraction.
Lead extraction is an effective method for removing pacemaker and defibrillator leads and to obtain venous access when central veins are occluded. We report a series of patients who required lead extraction and preservation of vascular access requiring a vascular snare introduced from the femoral vein to provide traction on the lead. This technique allowed advancement of the extraction sheath beyond the level of vascular occlusion, preserving vascular access in all patients. All patients had peripheral contrast venography performed immediately prior to the procedure to identify the site(s) of venous occlusion. An extraction sheath was employed and with direct manual traction, the lead tip pulled free from the myocardial surface prior to advancement of the sheath beyond the occlusion. A transfemoral snare was used to grasp the distal portion of the lead and traction was used to immobilize the lead. In all patients, transfemoral snaring of the leads was necessary to allow safe advancement of a sheath to open the occluded venous system. There were no complications in any of the patients. Our series demonstrates the simple and safe technique of transfemoral lead snaring to assist lead extraction and maintain vascular access in the setting of venous occlusion, when the distal lead tip pulls free of the myocardium before an extraction sheath is passed beyond the point of venous obstruction.

19148728
Lack of clinical predictors of optimal V-V delay in patients with cardiac resynchronization devices.
Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) is a well-established therapy for patients with moderate-to-severe heart failure (HF), left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction <or= 35% and a QRS on the surface electrocardiogram of >or=130 msec. Device optimization is often performed, adjusting the timing of RV and LV stimulation to produce a pacing sequence that yields the best global cardiac performance. However, no standard guidelines exist for optimization and many invasive and non-invasive techniques have been employed with mixed results. The aim of the present study was to determine whether there are any clinical predictors of the optimal V-V settings in patients implanted with CRT devices. We prospectively evaluated 47 consecutive patients with HF who were referred to our device optimization clinic. The mean patient age was 64.9 +/- 12.7 years. Patients were in both sinus rhythm (83%) and atrial fibrillation. Prior to device implant, 51% of patients had left bundle branch block (LBBB), 17% had intra-ventricular conduction delay (IVCD) and 21% were RV paced. Sixty-two percent were male, the mean QRS duration was 152 +/- 29 ms, mean LVEF 26 +/- 8% and 60% had a non-ischemic cardiomyopathy. Overall, 82% of patients required sequential pacing with 69% requiring LV pre-excitation to produce the best global cardiac function as determined by aortic velocity time integrals (VTI). In our cohort, none of the clinical characteristics evaluated, including etiology of the cardiomyopathy, QRS duration, LVEF, pre-implant rhythm or AV delay were predictive of an optimal simultaneous or sequential V-V setting. None of the clinical variables tested in our analysis predicted optimal RV-LV settings. Our results suggest that individual optimization and programming of V-V settings is necessary. The inability to predict optimal settings likely reflects the unique characteristics of each patient and supports the need for individualized programming of each device.

18950298
Impact of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator recalls on patients' anxiety, depression, and quality of life.
In the past 2 years, multiple implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) manufacturers have issued recalls on ICD models due to the potential for serious malfunction and even patient death. Previous studies examining the relationship between these recalls and patients' psychological well-being have been limited by small sample size and conflicting results. The purpose of this study is to examine the association between ICD recalls and patients' anxiety, depression, and quality of life. Patients were drawn from an outpatient electrophysiology clinic at a tertiary care hospital in New York City. Patients who had devices subject to a recall (cases) were identified from lists provided by device manufacturer and controls (patients with ICDs not subjected to a recall) were drawn from a convenience sample of outpatients. The survey instrument consisted of two validated questionnaires--Hospital Anxiety and Depression Score (HADS) and MacNew heart disease health-related quality of life (QOL) instrument. In addition, a series of Likert-type scales were designed to elucidate patients' concerns related to the following domains: anger, trust, hope, concerns regarding ICD shock, fear of death (FOD), and physicians' ability to reduce their concern about the ICD recall. Data were analyzed using simple descriptive statistics and bivariate analyses (chi(2) and t-test) as appropriate. Sixty-one cases and 43 control patients were enrolled. Thirty-two patients (52%) with devices subject to a recall opted for a generator replacement. There were no significant differences in the mean scores on the HADS scale, or the MacNew QOL scale between these two groups of patients (cases and controls). Subgroup analysis within the group of patients whose ICDs were recalled (cases) revealed a reduced QOL among patients with a class I recall (reasonable probability that the product will cause serious adverse health consequences or death) as compared to those with a class II recall (product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences) (P = 0.01). Both cases and control patients reported having reduced trust in the health-care system. On the whole, however, patients were satisfied with the way their physicians dealt with the recall. There was no significant change in the overall concern of ICD shocks or FOD between the two groups. In this study of ICD recall, we found no difference in the levels of anxiety, depression, or QOL expressed by patients with an ICD subject to a recall as compared to those without. These findings may be a reflection of good physician-patient communication, which might have reduced any anxiety associated with recalls.

18721573
Epicardial pulmonary vein isolation: a long-term histologic and imaging animal study comparing cryothermy versus radiofrequency.
Simplifications of the Cox-Maze procedure to treat atrial fibrillation (AF) include epicardial pulmonary vein (PV) isolation using various sources to create lines of conduction block. The creation of transmural lesions has been a concern. The heat-sink effect caused by blood flow has limited the effectiveness of unipolar radiofrequency and linear application of cryothermy, which should be abolished when clamp devices are used for PV isolation. The efficacy and safety of epicardial beating-heart PV isolation with clamp devices using cryothermy or bipolar radiofrequency energy was studied. Twelve domestic pigs underwent beating-heart epicardial PV isolation using cryothermy (n = 6) or radiofrequency (n = 6) energy. Follow-up was 30 days for 3 animals of each group and 90 days for the others. Lesions were assessed by epicardial pacing, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and histologic analysis. Immediate and long-term electrical isolation of PVs was achieved with both energy sources. Histologic analysis showed transmural lesions in all animals at 30 and 90 days. Cardiac MRI showed no evidence of PV stenosis or thrombus formation. Mean left atrial ejection fraction was 0.36 +/- 0.01, 0.36 +/- 0.02, and 0.36 +/- 0.01 at baseline and at 30 and 90 days, respectively (p = 0.360 and 0.230, respectively) and not significantly different with cryothermy or radiofrequency ablations. Beating-heart PV isolation using epicardial cryothermy or radiofrequency ablation produces transmural lesions with complete electrical conduction block, with low or no risk of endocardial thrombosis or PV stenosis. This approach may be useful for PVI in selected patients with AF caused by PV triggers.

18634918
Sudden cardiac death in infiltrative cardiomyopathies: sarcoidosis, scleroderma, amyloidosis, hemachromatosis.
Sarcoidosis, scleroderma, amyloidosis, and hemachromatosis are systemic infiltrative disorders that commonly affect the heart. Owing to their potential for diffuse organ involvement, these diseases may present with myriad clinical manifestations. Conduction system abnormalities are common, and each of these disorders has been associated with sudden cardiac death. In this review, we summarize the epidemiology, clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment of each of these entities. We place special emphasis on existing literature as it pertains to risk stratification and therapy aimed at the prevention of sudden cardiac death in these infiltrative cardiomyopathies.

18594551
Evaluation and management of the adult patient with transposition of the great arteries following atrial-level (Senning or Mustard) repair.
Atrial-level repair for transposition of the great arteries is one of the greatest achievements of modern cardiovascular medicine, transforming a once fatal congenital heart condition into one with excellent long-term survival. Although atrial-level repair has been supplanted by the arterial switch, there remains a population of patients who underwent atrial-level repair as children and now require ongoing care as adults. Survival slowly continues to decline in this population mainly owing to systemic right ventricular dysfunction and sudden death. Other problems include sinus node dysfunction, atrial arrhythmias, systemic atrioventricular valve regurgitation, baffle problems, and pulmonary hypertension. Evaluation and management of these late complications is addressed.

18339784
Cardiac involvement in patients with sarcoidosis: diagnostic and prognostic value of outpatient testing.
Cardiac sarcoidosis (CS) causes substantial morbidity and sudden death. Early diagnosis and risk stratification are warranted. Ambulatory patients with sarcoidosis were interviewed to determine whether they experienced palpitations, syncope, or presyncope, and were evaluated with ECG, Holter monitoring, and echocardiography (transthoracic echocardiogram [TTE]). Those with symptoms or abnormal results were studied with cardiac MRI (CMRI) or positron emission tomography (PET) scanning. The diagnosis of CS was based on abnormalities detected by these imaging studies. Patients with CS were referred for risk stratification by electrophysiology study (EPS). Among the 62 patients evaluated, the prevalence of CS was 39%. Patients with CS had more cardiac symptoms than those without CS (46% vs 5%, respectively; p < 0.001), and were more likely to have abnormal Holter monitoring findings (50% vs 3%, respectively; p < 0.001) and TTE findings (25% vs 5%, respectively; p = 0.02). The degree of pulmonary impairment did not predict CS. Two of the 17 patients who underwent EPS had abnormal test findings and received implantable cardioverter-defibrillators. No patients died, had ventricular arrhythmias that triggered defibrillator therapy, or had heart failure develop during almost 2 years of follow-up. This diagnostic approach was more sensitive than the established criteria for identifying CS. CS is common among patients with sarcoidosis. A structured clinical assessment incorporating advanced cardiac imaging with PET scanning or CMRI is more sensitive than the established criteria for the identification of CS. Sarcoidal lesions seen on CMRI or PET scanning do not predict arrhythmias in ambulatory patients with preserved cardiac function, who appear to be at low risk for short-term mortality.

18181924
Laser lead extraction and baffle stenting to facilitate dual chamber implantable defibrillator upgrade in a patient with L-transposition of the great arteries status-post Senning/Rastelli repair: a case report and review of literature.
A case of successful laser extraction of a defibrillator lead with baffle stenting in a 15-year-old boy with dextrocardia, L-transposition, ventricular septal defect, and pulmonic stenosis status-post Senning/Rastelli repair is presented. Six-month follow-up revealed a significant increase in exercise tolerance and maximum oxygen consumption (VO(2)max).

18095037
"That's like an act of suicide" patients' attitudes toward deactivation of implantable defibrillators.
To understand potential patient barriers to discussions about implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) deactivation in patients with advanced illness. Qualitative focus groups. Fifteen community-dwelling, ambulatory patients with ICDs assigned to focus groups based on duration of time since implantation and whether they had ever received a shock from their device. A physician and a social worker used a predetermined discussion guide to moderate the groups, and each session was audiotaped and subsequently transcribed. Transcripts were analyzed using the method of constant comparison. No participant had ever discussed deactivation with their physician nor knew that deactivation was an option. Patients expressed a great deal of anxiety about receiving shocks from their device. Participants discussed why they needed the device and expressed desire for more information about the device; however, they would not engage in conversations about deactivating the ICD. One patient described deactivation "like an act of suicide" and all patients believed that the device was exclusively beneficial. Patients also expressed a desire to have their physician make the decision about deactivation. None of the patients in our study knew that they might need to deactivate their ICD as their health worsens. These community-dwelling outpatients were not willing to discuss the issue of ICD deactivation and their attitudes about deactivation might impede patients from engaging in these conversations. These findings are in contrast to findings in other advance care planning research and may be related to the unique nature of the ICD.

18095036
"It's like crossing a bridge" complexities preventing physicians from discussing deactivation of implantable defibrillators at the end of life.
To understand potential barriers to physician-initiated discussions about Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator (ICD) deactivation in patients with advanced illness. Qualitative one-on-one interviews. Four electrophysiologists, 4 cardiologists, and 4 generalists (internists and geriatricians) from 3 states. Clinicians were interviewed using open-ended questions to elicit their past experiences with discussing deactivating ICDs and to determine what barriers might impede these discussions. Transcripts of these interviews were analyzed using the qualitative method of constant comparison. Although many physicians believed that conversations about deactivating ICDs should be included in advance care planning discussions, they acknowledged that they rarely did this. Physicians indicated that there was something intrinsic to the nature of these devices that makes it inherently difficult to think of them in the same context as other management decisions at the end of a patient's life. Other explanations physicians gave as to why they did not engage in conversations included: the small internal nature of these devices and hence absence of a physical reminder to discuss the ICD, the absence of an established relationship with the patient, and their own general concerns relating to withdrawing care. Whereas some of the barriers to discussing ICD deactivation are common to all forms of advance care planning, ICDs have unique characteristics that make these conversations more difficult. Future educational interventions will need to be designed to teach physicians how to improve communication with patients about the management of ICDs at the end of life.

17697838
Prevalence and correlates of septal delayed contrast enhancement in patients with pulmonary hypertension.
Using cardiac magnetic resonance, the presence of myocardial delayed contrast enhancement (DCE) has been described in the ventricular septum at the level of the right ventricular insertion points in patients with pulmonary hypertension (PH). The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence, extent, and correlates of this finding. Septal DCE was evaluated in 55 patients with known or suspected PH of various causes. The extent of DCE was estimated visually with an insertion enhancement score (range 0 to 4) and quantified as DCE mass. The results were correlated with cine magnetic resonance and right-sided cardiac catheterization. Predictors of DCE were investigated using multivariate analysis. PH at rest was present in 42 patients (group 1) and absent in 13 (group 2). DCE was noted in 41 patients (97%) in group 1 and 3 (23%) in group 2 (p <0.0001). The extent of DCE was higher in group 1 than group 2 (median insertion enhancement score 3 vs 0, median DCE mass 8.7 vs 0 g, respectively; p <0.0001 for both). The extent of DCE showed moderate to good univariate correlations (r = 0.5 to 0.73) with pulmonary pressures and with right ventricular volumes, mass, and ejection fractions. In multivariate analysis, systolic pulmonary pressure was the only predictor of DCE. In conclusion, the presence of septal DCE at the right ventricular insertion points is common in PH of different causes, and the level of systolic pulmonary pressure elevation appears to be the main determinant of this finding.

19126935
Stroke prevention in atrial fibrillation--pharmacologic strategies.
Stroke prevention in atrial fibrillation presents a challenge for many clinicians. A considerable amount of research has gone into creating scoring systems that can accurately predict thromboembolic risk. Patients at low enough risk are best treated with aspirin, whereas higher-risk patients require anticoagulation with warfarin despite its shortcomings. Antithrombotic regimens for moderate-risk patients require careful consideration based on bleeding risk, age, and the ability to undergo frequent serum monitoring. Oral drugs may soon be available to replace warfarin. While this may simplify dosing and monitoring, it will still be necessary to weigh the risks and benefits of therapy.

17437574
Reverse electrical remodeling of the atria post cardioversion in patients who remain in sinus rhythm assessed by signal averaging of the P-wave.
This study was designed to determine whether the signal-averaged electrocardiogram of the P-wave (SAPW) is an independent predictor of recurrence of atrial fibrillation (AF) post cardioversion (CV), and to assess atrial remodeling using SAPW. There are limited electrophysiologic data to predict the recurrence of AF post-CV. The electrical remodeling that occurs post-CV is poorly understood. Sixty-four patients with persistent AF undergoing CV were prospectively enrolled. SAPW parameters were measured the day of CV and repeated at 1 month. These SAPW parameters were compared to other baseline indices for the recurrence of AF. Sixty patients (94%) had successful CV. At 1 month, 22 (37%) maintained sinus rhythm (SR). The SAPW total duration decreased significantly in those who remained in SR (159 ms +/- 19 to 146 ms +/- 17; P < 0.0001). Only the duration of AF (46 +/- 50 days vs 147 +/- 227 days, P = 0.03) and the presence of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH, 12% vs 65%, P = 0.0006) were significantly associated with recurrence of AF. Atrial size strongly correlated with the SAPW duration in patients who remained in SR (R(2)= 0.67, P = 0.003) but not in those who returned to AF (R(2)= 0.11, P = 0.65). Atrial electrical reverse remodeling occurs in patients with AF who maintain SR post-CV. This remodeling is likely inversely related to the duration of AF and LVH. SAPW duration does not predict recurrence of AF post-CV.

