21335514
Virological synapses allow HIV-1 uptake and gene expression in renal tubular epithelial cells.
In animal models of HIV-associated nephropathy, the expression of HIV regulatory genes in epithelial cells is sufficient to cause disease, but how the CD4-negative epithelial cells come to express HIV genes is unknown. Here, we co-cultured T cells infected with fluorescently tagged HIV with renal tubular epithelial cells and observed efficient virus transfer between these cells. The quantity of HIV transferred was much greater than that achieved by exposure to large amounts of cell-free virus and occurred without a requirement for CD4 or Env. The transfer required stable cell-cell adhesion, which could be blocked by sulfated polysaccharides or poly-anionic compounds. We found that the internalization of virus could lead to de novo synthesis of viral protein from incoming viral RNAs even in the presence of a reverse transcriptase inhibitor. These results illustrate an interaction between infected T cells and nonimmune cells, supporting the presence of virological synapses between HIV-harboring T cells and renal tubular epithelial cells, allowing viral uptake and gene expression in epithelial cells.

20683959
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 infects human hepatic stellate cells and promotes collagen I and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 expression: implications for the pathogenesis of HIV/hepatitis C virus-induced liver fibrosis.
Patients coinfected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) develop more rapid fibrosis than those infected with HCV only. In HIV/HCV-coinfected patients, fibrosis progression correlates with HIV RNA levels, suggesting a direct role of HIV in liver fibrogenesis. Chemokine (C-C motif) receptor 5 (CCR5) and cysteine-X-cysteine receptor 4 (CXCR4), the two major coreceptors required for HIV entry into cells, are expressed on activated hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), the principle fibrogenic cell type in the liver. We therefore examined whether HIV can infect HSCs, explored the potential mechanisms of viral entry, and assessed the impact of infection as reflected by the ability of HSCs to transfer virus to T lymphocytes and elicit a proinflammatory and profibrogenic response. We report that the laboratory-adapted viruses HIV-IIIB (CXCR4-tropic or X4) and HIV-BaL (CCR5-tropic or R5) and primary HIV isolates can infect both a human stellate cell line, LX-2, and primary human HSCs. HIV entry and gene expression in HSCs was confirmed using HIV-green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression viral constructs in the presence or absence of the reverse-transcriptase inhibitor azidothymidine. CD4 expression on a subset of primary HSCs was demonstrated using fluorescence-activated cell sorting and immunofluorescence staining. Blocking experiments in the presence of anti-CD4, anti-CXCR4, and anti-CCR5 revealed that HIV entry into HSCs is predominantly CD4/chemokine coreceptor-independent. HIV infection promoted HSC collagen I expression and secretion of the proinflammatory cytokine monocyte chemoattractant protein-1. Furthermore, infected LX-2 cells were capable of transferring GFP-expressing virus to T lymphocytes in a coculture system. Conclusion: Taken together, our results suggest a potential role of HIV in liver fibrosis/inflammation mediated through effects on HSCs. The role of early highly active antiretroviral therapy initiation in patients with HIV/HCV coinfection warrants further investigation.

20479248
Prothymosin-alpha inhibits HIV-1 via Toll-like receptor 4-mediated type I interferon induction.
Induction of type I interferons (IFN) is a central feature of innate immune responses to microbial pathogens and is mediated via Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent and -independent pathways. Prothymosin-alpha (ProTalpha), a small acidic protein produced and released by CD8(+) T cells, inhibits HIV-1, although the mechanism for its antiviral activity was not known. We demonstrate that exogenous ProTalpha acts as a ligand for TLR4 and stimulates type I IFN production to potently suppress HIV-1 after entry into cells. These activities are induced by native and recombinant ProTalpha, retained by an acidic peptide derived from ProTalpha, and lost in the absence of TLR4. Furthermore, we demonstrate that ProTalpha accounts for some of the soluble postintegration HIV-1 inhibitory activity long ascribed to CD8(+) cells. Thus, a protein produced by CD8(+) T cells of the adaptive immune system can exert potent viral suppressive activity through an innate immune response. Understanding the mechanism of IFN induction by ProTalpha may provide therapeutic leads for IFN-sensitive viruses.

20065862
Human peritoneal macrophages from ascitic fluid can be infected by a broad range of HIV-1 isolates.
Macrophages are major HIV target cells. They support both productive and latent HIV-1 infection. Susceptibility of primary macrophages to HIV depends on the anatomical location and activation state of the cells. We demonstrate that peritoneal macrophages (PMs) are abundant in ascitic fluid of patients with liver cirrhosis and are susceptible to HIV-1 infection. PMs expressed CD68, a differentiation marker, exhibited phagocytic activity, and survived in culture for 2 months without additional growth factors. Freshly isolated PMs were susceptible to HIV-1 R5 strains but not to X4-T-cell line-adapted strains. Interestingly, after 7 days in culture, PMs acquired susceptibility to X4-T-cell line-adapted strains. HIV entry inhibitors, TAK779 and AMD3100, blocked HIV infection of PMs, indicating that infection by R5 and X4 strains was mediated by CCR5 and CXCR4, respectively. Although PMs did not express detectable cell surface levels of CXCR4 and CCR5, they did express mRNAs of these HIV coreceptors and responded to stimulation by their natural ligands, SDF-1alpha and RANTES. PMs were susceptible to HIV-1 X4, R5, and X4R5 primary isolates. PMs after 7 days in culture produced greater amounts of X4 and X4R5 HIV than freshly isolated PMs. The day-7 PMs were more susceptible to R5 infection in a single-cycle infection assay, but there was no increase in viral production in a multiple-round infection assay. The level of CXCR4 mRNA and production of CC-chemokines (MIP-1alpha, MIP-1beta, and RANTES) increased significantly during 7 days in culture. Our results indicate that PMs are susceptible to receptor-mediated infection by a broad range of HIV strains. These primary macrophages could provide a valuable system for investigating the role of primary macrophages in HIV pathogenesis.

17600282
Influence of prothymosin-alpha on HIV-1 target cells.
The important role of CD8(+) T cells in controlling HIV-1 infection through the innate as well as the adaptive immune system is well established. In addition to the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-dependent cytotoxic activity of CD8(+) T cells, they produce soluble factors that suppress HIV-1 replication in an MHC-independent manner. Several of those factors have been identified, including beta-chemokines, Rantes, MIP-1alpha, MIP-1beta, and MDC. We previously identified that prothymosin alpha (ProTalpha) in the conditioned medium of HVS transformed CD8(+) T cells was a potent inhibitor of HIV-1 replication following proviral integration. In this report we further characterize the anti-HIV-1 activity of ProTalpha by demonstrating its target-cell specificity, distinction from additional inhibitors of HIV-1 transcription in CD8(+) T cell supernatants, as well as the differential regulation of host cell antiviral genes that could impact HIV-1 replication. These genes include a number of transcription factors as well IFN-alpha-inducible genes including PKR, IRF1, and Rantes, in the absence of induction of IFN-alpha. These data suggest that the anti-HIV-1 activity of ProTalpha is mediated through the modulation of a number of genes that have been reported to suppress HIV-1 replication including the dysregulation of transcription factors and the induction of PKR and Rantes mRNA.

