21514110
Endovascular Stent-Graft Repair of a Tuberculous Mycotic Aortic Aneurysm.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is a rare cause of mycotic aortic aneurysms, which have been classically treated with a combination of antimycobacterial medical therapy and open surgery. Endovascular therapy has been gaining popularity as an alternative to open surgery for mycotic aneurysms. We report a case of a tuberculous mycotic aneurysm of the descending thoracic aorta that was successfully treated with endovascular stent-graft placement with complete resolution of the pseudoaneurysm at 1 year. We also review other cases in the previously published data to identify factors that may affect the outcome of endovascular treatment of tuberculous mycotic aneurysms.

21367562
Outcome of elective endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair in nonagenarians.
OBJECTIVE: Compared with open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA), endovascular repair (EVAR) is associated with decreased perioperative morbidity and mortality in a standard patient population. This study sought to determine if the advantage of EVAR extends to patients aged ?90 years. METHODS: This was a retrospective review from a prospectively maintained computerized database. Of the 322 patients aged ?80 treated with EVAR from January 1997 to November 2007, 24 (1.9%) were aged ?90. Mean age was 91.5 ± 1.5 years (range, 90-95 years), and 83.3% were men. Mean aneurysm size was 6.8 cm (range, 5.2-8.7 cm). RESULTS: Mean procedural blood loss was 490 mL (range, 100-4150 mL), and 20.8% required an intraoperative transfusion. Mean postoperative length of stay was 6.0 days, (median, 4 days; mode, 1 day; range, 1-42 days), with 33.3% of patients discharged on the first postoperative day. Amongst the 24 patients, there were 6 (25.0%) perioperative major adverse events, and 2 patients died, for a perioperative mortality rate of 8.3%. Mean follow-up was 20.5 months (range, 1-49 months). Overall, three patients (12.5%) required a secondary intervention, comprising thrombectomy, angioplasty, and proximal cuff extension. No patients required conversion to open repair. Two patients (8.3%) died of AAA rupture at 507 and 1254 days. Freedom from all-cause mortality was 83.3% at 1 year and 19.3% at 5 years. Freedom from aneurysm-related mortality was 87.5% at 1 year and 73.2% at 5 years. Endoleak occurred in five patients (20.8%), with three type I and two of indeterminate type; of these, two patients with type I endoleak underwent secondary intervention at 153 and 489 days after EVAR, of which one case was successful. CONCLUSION: Our study supports that EVAR in nonagenarians is associated with acceptable procedural success and perioperative morbidity and mortality. The medium-term results suggest that EVAR may be of limited benefit in very carefully selected patients who are aged ?90 years.

21247730
A multicenter experience of the management of collapsed thoracic endografts.
Thoracic endograft collapse after thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) is a potentially devastating complication. This study evaluates the management of thoracic stent graft collapse. A multicenter review of thoracic stent graft collapse was performed from 2005 to 2009. Diagnosis and preoperative planning was performed by computed tomography angiography (CTA). Outcome measures included success of endovascular salvage, postoperative complications, and conversion to open repair. Eleven patients (10 men) with thoracic endograft collapse were identified. Mean age was 41.2 years old (range, 21-66 years). Indications for the index TEVAR were traumatic aortic transections in 8 patients and acute type B dissections in 3 patients. All were initially treated with the TAG endoprosthesis (Gore and Associates, Flagstaff, Ariz). The median duration from initial repair to diagnosis of collapse was 9 days (range, 1 day-38 months). All collapses were initially treated by endovascular means using another TAG device in 7 patients, a Talent (Medtronic, Santa Rosa, Calif) thoracic stent graft in 3 patients, and a Palmaz (Cordis Endovascular, Warren, NJ) stent in 1 patient. In 1 patient, the secondary TAG did not resolve the collapse and required a Palmaz stent placement. Technical success rate was 91%, while re-expansion of the collapsed endograft was achieved in all patients. Early and late complications were observed in 3 patients. Delayed (>30 days) open conversion with device explantation was performed for an aortoesophageal fistula, physiological aortic coarctation, and prevention of a recurrent collapse in 1 patient each. There were no perioperative deaths or recurrent collapses. Endograft collapse can be successfully managed by endovascular techniques in most cases. Redo-TEVAR using high radial force devices should be considered the initial treatment of choice. Late endograft-related complications after treatment of collapsed endografts are not uncommon and can be safely managed by open conversion.

21098497
Improved hemodynamic outcomes with glycopyrrolate over atropine in carotid angioplasty and stenting.
Prophylactic atropine traditionally has been used to prevent CAS-associated hemodynamic depression. Glycopyrrolate may serve as an alternative with decreased cardiac effects. This study aims to compare the efficacy of prophylactic glycopyrrolate to atropine in preventing CAS-induced hemodynamic instability and cardiac complications. 115 consecutive CAS patients from 2004-2010 were evaluated. Primary endpoints were stroke, MI, bradycardia (HR<60 beats/min), and hypotension (systolic BP <90 mm Hg). Additional outcomes included tachycardia (HR >100 beats/min), hypertension (systolic BP >160 mm Hg), pre- and postoperative systolic BP difference, vasopressor use, arrhythmias, cardiac enzyme elevations, and access site complications. Of 115 patients, 65 (56.5%) patients who received atropine or glycopyrrolate prior to CAS were analyzed [40 (61.5%) patients received glycopyrrolate, 25 (38.5%) received atropine]. Mean age was 70.0 ± 8.5 years (range, 48-86 years). Mean stenosis was 86.2 ± 7.4% (range, 70-99%). No MI, major stroke, or death was observed in the 30-day postoperative period. Baseline systolic BP and HR were equivalent between groups. Postoperative bradycardia and hypotension were significantly lower in glycopyrrolate patients compared with atropine patients (30% vs 72%, P = .002; 2.5% vs 36%, P < .001, respectively). Postoperative hypertension was also significantly lower in the glycopyrrolate cohort (2.5% vs 16%, P = .047), whereas tachycardia, pressure changes, vasopressor use, and cardiac complications did not differ significantly. No significant differences in neurologic and access site complications were observed. Prophylactic glycopyrrolate, compared with atropine, reduces hemodynamic instability during CAS. The authors recommend glycopyrrolate use to prevent CAS-induced bradycardia and hypotension.

20932714
The success of endovascular therapy for all TransAtlantic Society Consensus graded femoropopliteal lesions.
Advances in technology and practice have led to increased endovascular management of all TransAtlantic Society Consensus (TASC)-graded lesions. This study aims to evaluate the success of endovascular therapy in the management of TASC-graded femoropopliteal lesions. Patients undergoing endovascular treatment for femoropopliteal lesions between July 1999 and August 2008 were divided by TASC scores and evaluated for primary, assisted-primary, and secondary patency rates at 12 and 24 months. Secondary endpoints included limb loss and postoperative complications. A total of 499 femoropopliteal lesions in 427 patients were treated with endovascular interventions. Score distribution for TASC type A, type B, type C, and type D lesions was 26 (5.2%), 140 (28.1%), 168 (33.7%), and 165 (33.1%), respectively. Primary, assisted-primary, and secondary patency rates at 24 months were 77.7 ± 3.2%, 78.9 ± 3.2%, and 86.7 ± 2.6%, respectively, for TASC type A + B lesions, 76.0 ± 3.3%, 77.2 ± 3.2%, and 85.0 ± 2.8%, respectively, for TASC type C lesions, and 61.2 ± 3.8%, 61.2 ± 3.8%, and 78.2 ± 3.2%, respectively, for TASC type D lesions. Compared with TASC type A + B and TASC type C lesions, TASC type D lesions were associated with worse primary and assisted-primary patency rates. However, there was no statistically significant difference in secondary patency between TASC type A + B and TASC type D lesions. The TASC score was not a significant predictor of postoperative complication rates. The 24-month limb salvage rate in patients with TASC type D lesions presenting with critical limb ischemia was 71.9 ± 8.0%. It was observed that all femoropopliteal lesions can be safely and effectively managed with endovascular therapy. Although TASC type D lesions do have lower primary and assisted-primary patency rates, high secondary patency rates comparable with other TASC scores can be achieved with effective prevention of limb loss. These data provide evidence to support endovascular therapy as primary management for all femoropopliteal lesions regardless of the TASC score.

20881768
Determinants of embolic risk during angioplasty and stenting: neurologic symptoms and coronary artery disease increase embolic risk.
Carotid angioplasty and stenting (CAS) has proven to be a potential alternative to carotid endarterectomy in the treatment of severe carotid disease. Patient selection has emerged as a means of optimizing the outcomes of CAS. To determine whether the presence of preprocedural neurologic symptoms and having a history of coronary artery disease (CAD) are associated with greater embolic risk during CAS through analysis of the embolic debris captured within protective filters. A total of 233 consecutive CAS procedures were performed between 2003 and 2009. Particles of embolic debris within the filters were quantified by photomicroscopy and video imaging software. Particulate size was determined by measuring the length along the longest axis. Preprocedural neurologic symptoms included transient ischemic attack, cerebrovascular accident, and amaurosis fugax. History of CAD included prior myocardial infarction, coronary artery bypass grafting, congestive heart failure, or abnormal stress test. Of the 137 (58.8%) filters that were analyzed (mean age, 71.3 ± 9.1 years, 56.9% male), 52 (38.0%) and 80 (58.4%) filters were from symptomatic and CAD patients, respectively. Filters of symptomatic (S) patients contained both a greater number and larger mean particle size compared with those of asymptomatic (AS) patients (S: 15.8 ± 13.5 particles vs. AS: 9.8 ± 8.7 particles, P = 0.002; S: 507 ± 389 ?m vs. AS: 398 ± 181 ?m, P = 0.03; respectively). Filters from CAD patients also had a greater number of particles, but trended toward smaller minimum size than those in non-CAD patients (CAD: 14.4 ± 12.8 particles vs. non-CAD: 8.8 ± 7.4 particles, P = 0.002; CAD: 167 ± 172 ?m vs. 228 ± 203 ?m, P = 0.06). These findings suggest that the presence of preprocedural neurologic symptoms and a history of CAD are associated with increased embolization during CAS. Therefore, the benefit of carotid stenting should be tempered by the potential for increased perioperative events in both symptomatic and CAD patients.

20620007
A rare case of familial carotid body tumor in a patient with bilateral fibromuscular dysplasia.
Carotid body tumors (CBTs) are neuroendocrine tumors that arise due to mutations of respiratory cycle enzymes. Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is a disease that causes narrowing of medium-sized arteries. There is no documented link between CBT and FMD. In this article, we report a case of a patient with bilateral carotid FMD and familial CBT, including one in an identical twin who underwent successful surgical excision of the CBT. We describe specific considerations in the management of CBT in patients with concomitant carotid FMD. Also, we review the literature about the genetics of familial CBT and its possible relationship to the etiology of FMD.

20506448
Endovascular surgery: advances in science and technique.


20347545
Outcome of elective endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair in octogenarians and nonagenarians.
Compared to open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA), endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) is associated with decreased perioperative morbidity and mortality. This study sought to examine the outcomes of EVAR in patients >or=80 years of age. This was a retrospective review from a prospectively maintained computerized database. A total of 322 patients aged >or=80 underwent elective EVAR from January 1997 to November 2007. Mean age was 84 years +/- 3.4 years (range, 80-95 years), and 78.5% were male. Mean aneurysm size was 62 mm +/- 12 mm (range, 39-110 mm). Mean procedural blood loss was 350 mL (range, 50-2700 mL), and 13.9% required intraoperative transfusion. Mean length of postoperative stay was 2.46 days (median, 1 day; range, 1-42 days), with 54.3% of patients discharged on the first postoperative day. There were 25 (7.8%) perioperative major adverse events. The most common were categorized as device-related (6), cardiac (4), gastrointestinal (4), and bleeding/hematoma (3). The perioperative 30-day mortality rate was 3.1% (10 of 322). Mean follow-up was 25.7 months (range, 1-110 months). Overall, 47 patients (14.6%) required secondary intervention, 7 patients (2.2%) underwent conversion to open repair, and 4 patients (1.2%) died from AAA rupture. Endoleaks occurred in 95 patients (29.4%), with 20 type I, 48 type II, and 27 of indeterminate type; of these, 10 patients with type I endoleaks underwent secondary intervention. Freedom from all-cause mortality at 1 year was 84.3% and at 5 years was 27.4%. Freedom from aneurysm-related mortality at 5 years was 92.9%. EVAR in octogenarians is associated with high procedural success and low perioperative morbidity and mortality. The midterm results of this study support the use of EVAR in this patient population. Further studies are needed to predict short-term and long-term mortality risk, and treatment for other causes of death.

20308168
Anesthetic experience with endovascular aortic aneurysm repair.
We endeavored to characterize the anesthesia experience with endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) at a large academic medical center in the United States. A retrospective review of electronic medical records was conducted for all patients undergoing elective EVAR from 2002 to 2007 in a large academic medical center. A total of 522 cases met inclusion criteria, with 4% of cases using general anesthesia (GA), 92% regional anesthesia (RA), and 4% local anesthesia (LA). There was no statistically significant difference between the groups for duration of surgery or in-hospital mortality. In-hospital length of stay was longer for GA than LA or RA. Four cases were converted to open repair. Two mortalities occurred during the perioperative period (0.4% of cases). The vast majority of EVAR were successfully performed under RA, involved mild blood loss, involved infrequent need for conversion to GA, and resulted in brief in-hospital length of stay and low mortality rate.

20206803
Five-year results for the Talent enhanced Low Profile System abdominal stent graft pivotal trial including early and long-term safety and efficacy.
The pivotal trial of the Talent enhanced Low Profile System (eLPS; Medtronic Vascular, Santa Rosa, Calif) stent graft evaluated short and long-term safety and efficacy of endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR). These data and a confirmatory group assessing the performance of the CoilTrac delivery system supported the United States premarket approval application for the device. The pivotal trial was a prospective, nonrandomized study conducted at 13 sites from February 2002 to April 2003. The study group (n = 166) underwent EVAR using the Talent eLPS stent graft. The control group (n = 243) underwent open surgical AAA repair. Data for this group were obtained from the Society for Vascular Surgery Endovascular AAA Surgical Controls project. Outcomes were compared at 30 days and 12 months. Additional 5-year follow-up was obtained for the eLPS group. A single-center cohort of 137 patients was the confirmatory group for the assessment of the clinical performance of the CoilTrac delivery system, with analysis of outcomes <or=30 days from the procedure. AAA anatomy with neck length as short as 3 mm and maximum neck diameter of 32 mm were included in the eLPS group. EVAR was superior to open repair for periprocedural outcomes, including mean procedure duration (167.3 vs 196.4 minutes, P < .001), blood transfusion (18.2% vs 56.8%, P < .001), median intensive care unit stay (19.3 vs 74.3 hours, P < .001), and mean hospital stay (3.6 vs 8.2 days, P < .001). Freedom from major adverse events was 89.2% for EVAR at 30 days vs 44.0% (P < .001) and 81.3% vs 42.4% at 1 year (P < .001). Freedom from all-cause mortality and aneurysm-related mortality (ARM) was 93.7% and 98.2% for EVAR vs 92.4% and 96.7% for the controls. Through 5 years for the EVAR group, rates of freedom from all-cause mortality, ARM, aneurysm rupture, and conversion to surgery were 69.8%, 96.5%, 98.2%, and 99.1%, respectively, with one conversion to surgery, 25 secondary reinterventions, and five site-reported instances of stent graft migration. The technical success rate for the CoilTrac confirmatory group was 100%, with no aneurysm rupture or conversion to open repair at 30 days. The 30-day all-cause mortality rate was 1.5% (2 of 137). In a population with challenging anatomic characteristics, EVAR with the Talent eLPS and use of the CoilTrac delivery system compared favorably with open repair through 1 year. Sustained protection from ARM, with minimal reinterventions, was attained through 5 years.

19808721
Sirolimus-eluting stent placement for refractory renal artery in-stent restenosis: sustained patency and clinical benefit at 24 months.
Renal artery stenosis may cause or exacerbate hypertension and renal failure. Percutaneous transluminal renal artery stent placement, increasingly the first-line therapy for ostial atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis, can be complicated by in-stent restenosis weeks to months after the procedure. There is currently no consensus for the treatment of in-stent restenosis. Sirolimus-eluting stents have been shown to be effective to treat in-stent restenosis in the coronary circulation. We report a case of sustained 24-month patency after repair of recurrent renal artery in-stent restenosis with use of a sirolimus-eluting stent.

19631504
Hybrid repair of bilateral subclavian artery aneurysms in a patient with Marfan syndrome.
A 32-year-old man with Marfan syndrome presented with enlarging, asymptomatic bilateral subclavian artery aneurysms. He has an extensive surgical history including aortic arch and descending thoracic aorta replacement. The L aneurysm was treated first with an L carotid-vertebral artery vein bypass, aneurysm debranching, and stent-graft repair of aneurysm via the L brachial artery approach. The R aneurysm was treated by placing a stent graft from the proximal R common carotid artery across the R subclavian artery origin and landing in the prosthetic innominate bypass graft via an L common carotid artery conduit. An aneurysm debranching and R carotid-subclavian artery bypass completed the procedure. A proximal type I endoleak was detected in the R aneurysm sac on follow-up computed tomography angiography. This was treated with sternotomy, aorta to L common carotid artery bypass, stent graft removal, and oversewing of the R subclavian artery origin. The patient recovered uneventfully. Subclavian artery aneurysms are rarely diagnosed in patients with Marfan disease. Although durability remains unproven, hybrid repair should be considered in patients with subclavian artery aneurysms, to minimize the morbidity commonly associated with open repair.

19563974
Tips and techniques in carotid artery stenting.
Significant technical advances have made carotid artery stenting an option for high-risk patients. These advances bring forth new challenges that must be overcome. Preprocedural planning is essential for optimal outcome for every patient given the high risk for significant neurologic complications. In this article we describe a standard approach for performing carotid artery stenting and techniques used to circumvent challenges that may be encountered. In addition, implementation of modifications and advanced techniques in challenging cases may allow successful treatment of carotid stenosis. Maintenance of proficiency in carotid artery stenting requires significant and ongoing experience.

19223385
Carotid artery pseudo-occlusion: does end-diastolic velocity suggest need for treatment?
We reviewed our institution's experience with carotid artery pseudo-occlusion (CAPO), to investigate whether internal carotid artery (ICA) end-diastolic velocity (EDV) as measured by duplex ultrasonography, was a predictor of need for further intervention. From February 2003 to January 2008, 7478 patients underwent duplex ultrasonographic evaluation of their carotid arteries. Diagnosis of CAPO included the appearance of a narrow flow jet (string sign) on power doppler images, low velocities in the ICA and additional criteria listed below. Ten patients (0.13%) were identified as having a CAPO. All patients were asymptomatic and had an EDV<78 cm/s. Occlusion or functional occlusion was identified in nine patients on contrast imaging studies. Eight of these patients were treated medically without neurologic complication on follow-up. Two patients were treated with interventions and were asymptomatic at follow up. The mean follow up for the entire group was 12 months. Although this is a low volume study, there is evidence to suggest that asymptomatic patients with low EDV in the setting of carotid artery pseudo-occlusion found of duplex, may be safely managed medically.

18083340
Endovascular stent-graft repair of failed endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair.
Despite high initial technical success, the long-term durability of endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) continues to be a concern. Following EVAR, patients can experience endoleaks, device migration, device fractures, or aneurysm growth that may require intervention. The purpose of this study was to review all patients treated with secondary endovascular devices at our institution for failed EVAR procedures. Over an 8-year period, 988 patients underwent EVAR, of whom 42 (4.3%) required secondary interventions involving placement of additional endovascular devices. Data regarding patient characteristics, aneurysm size, initial device type, time until failure, failure etiology, secondary interventions, and outcomes were reviewed. The mean time from initial operation until second operation was 34.1 months. Failures included type I endoleaks in 38 patients (90.5%), type III endoleaks in two patients (4.8%), and enlarging aneurysms without definite endoleaks in two patients (4.8%). The overall technical success rate for secondary repair was 92.9% (39/42). Perioperative complications occurred in nine patients (21.4%), including wound complications (n = 6), cerebrovascular accident (CVA) (n = 1), foot drop (n = 1), and death (n = 1). Mean follow-up following secondary repair was 16.4 months (range 1-50). Eighty-six percent of patients treated with aortouni-iliac devices had successful repairs compared to 45% of patients treated with proximal cuffs. Ten patients (23.8%) had persistent or recurrent type I or type III endoleaks following revision. Of these, four had tertiary interventions, including two patients who had additional devices placed. Failures following EVAR occur in a small but significant number of patients. When anatomically possible, endovascular revision offers a safe means of treating these failures. Aortouni-iliac devices appear to offer a more durable repair than the proximal cuff for treatment of proximal type I endoleaks. Midterm results indicate that these patients may require additional procedures but have a low rate of aneurysm-related mortality. Longer-term follow-up is necessary to determine the durability of these endovascular revisions.

17942851
Endovascular treatment of visceral artery aneurysms.
Visceral artery aneurysms, although uncommon, can present with life-threatening hemorrhage. The increasing use of imaging studies has allowed for earlier identification and intervention of these aneurysms, thus avoiding the high morbidity and mortality associated with rupture. The treatment options for visceral artery aneurysms range from conventional open surgical repair to minimally invasive techniques using covered stents or embolization materials. Anatomic features and patient selection determine which treatment option would result in the most durable treatment and outcome. This article reviews our experience with the endovascular treatment of visceral artery aneurysms.

17905287
Endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair: emerging developments and anesthetic considerations.


17391902
Durability of renal artery stents in patients with transrenal abdominal aortic endografts.
The management of renal artery stenosis in patients with abdominal aortic aneurysms continues to be complex and technically challenging despite advances in endovascular therapy. There is growing concern about the durability of renal artery stents in the setting of transrenal abdominal aortic endografts. This study reports a single-center experience of renal artery stenting with transrenal abdominal aortic endografts for patients with renal artery stenosis. All patients undergoing endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair preceded or followed by renal artery stent placement between January 1999 and December 2005 were retrospectively reviewed from a prospectively gathered endovascular database. Patients were surveyed after renal stent procedures with multidetector computed tomography angiography or duplex sonography. The surveillance data were analyzed for primary patency of the renal artery stent at 6 months, incidence of complications, need for secondary interventions, and changes in creatinine clearance (CrCl). Sixty-two renal artery stents were placed in 56 patients (44 men, 12 women) with a mean age of 77.3 years (range, 61 to 94 years). Forty-one were placed before the endograft procedure, eight were placed during the endograft procedure, and 13 were placed postoperatively. There were no major or minor complications related to the renal artery stent procedures. Transrenal aortic endografts were used in 44 of the 56 patients, and 12 had devices with infrarenal fixation. The mean follow-up was 18.5 months (range, 1 to 73 months). The 6-month primary patency, which could be evaluated for 51 renal artery stents, was 97.4% (37/38) in patients with transrenal fixation and 84.6% (11/13) in patients with infrarenal fixation. The overall rate of in-stent restenosis was 8.5% (4/47) in the transrenal fixation group and 20.0% (3/15) in the infrarenal fixation group. The overall occlusion rate was 2.1% (1/47) in the transrenal fixation group and 0% (0/15) in infrarenal fixation group. Five (83.3%) of six patients underwent successful treatment of in-stent restenosis with placement of a new stent in all five cases. CrCl decreased in the total group by 4.2 +/- 11.8 mL/min, by 4.7 +/- 12.0 mL/min in patients with transrenal fixation, and by 2.2 +/- 11.0 mL/min in patients with infrarenal fixation. The presence of a transrenal aortic endograft did not affect the outcome of the renal artery revascularization procedure in this cohort. Renal artery stenting in the presence of transrenal abdominal aortic endografts appears to be a safe procedure without adverse effect on renal artery stent patency or renal function.

17380166
Surgery insight: advances in endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Despite improvements in diagnostic and therapeutic methods and an increased awareness of their clinical significance, abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs) continue to be a major source of morbidity and mortality. Endovascular repair of AAAs, initially described in 1990, offers a less-invasive alternative to conventional open repair. The technology and devices used for endovascular repair of AAAs have progressed rapidly and the approach has proven to be safe and effective in short to midterm investigations. Furthermore, several large trials have demonstrated that elective endovascular repair is associated with lower perioperative morbidity and mortality than open repair. The long-term benefits of endovascular repair relative to open repair, however, continue to be studied. In addition to elective repair, the use of endovascular repair for ruptured AAAs has been increasing, and has been shown to be associated with reduced perioperative morbidity and mortality. Advances in endovascular repair of AAAs, including the development of branched and fenestrated grafts and the use of implantable devices to measure aneurysm-sac pressures following stent-graft deployment, have further broadened the application of the technique and have enhanced postoperative monitoring. Despite these advances, endovascular repair of AAAs remains a relatively novel technique, and further long-term data need to be collected.

