21374078
Sinusoidal galvanic vestibular stimulation (sGVS) induces a vasovagal response in the rat.
Blood pressure (BP) and heart rate (HR) were studied in isoflurane-anesthetized Long-Evans rats during sinusoidal galvanic vestibular stimulation (sGVS) and sinusoidal oscillation in pitch to characterize vestibular influences on autonomic control of BP and HR. sGVS was delivered binaurally via Ag/AgCl needle electrodes inserted over the mastoids at stimulus frequencies 0.008-0.4 Hz. Two processes affecting BP and HR were induced by sGVS: 1) a transient drop in BP (?15-20 mmHg) and HR (?3 beat*s(-1)), followed by a slow recovery over 1-6 min; and 2) inhibitory modulations in BP (?4.5 mmHg/g) and HR (?0.15 beats*s(-1)/g) twice in each stimulus cycle. The BP and HR modulations were approximately in-phase with each other and were best evoked by low stimulus frequencies. A wavelet analysis indicated significant energies in BP and HR at scales related to twice and four times the stimulus frequency bands. BP and HR were also modulated by oscillation in pitch at frequencies 0.025-0.5 Hz. Sensitivities at 0.025 Hz were ?4.5 mmHg/g (BP) and ?0.17 beat*s(-1)/g (HR) for pitches of 20-90°. The tilt-induced BP and HR modulations were out-of-phase, but the frequencies at which responses were elicited by tilt and sGVS were the same. The results show that the sGVS-induced responses, which likely originate in the otolith organs, can exert a powerful inhibitory effect on both BP and HR at low frequencies. These responses have a striking resemblance to human vasovagal responses. Thus, sGVS-activated rats can potentially serve as a useful experimental model of the vasovagal response in humans.

21340443
Spatial orientation of the angular vestibulo-ocular reflex (aVOR) after semicircular canal plugging and canal nerve section.
We investigated spatial responses of the aVOR to small and large accelerations in six canal-plugged and lateral canal nerve-sectioned monkeys. The aim was to determine whether there was spatial adaptation after partial and complete loss of all inputs in a canal plane. Impulses of torques generated head thrusts of ? 3,000°/s². Smaller accelerations of ? 300°/s² initiated the steps of velocity (60°/s). Animals were rotated about a spatial vertical axis while upright (0°) or statically tilted fore-aft up to ± 90°. Temporal aVOR yaw and roll gains were computed at every head orientation and were fit with a sinusoid to obtain the spatial gains and phases. Spatial gains peaked at ? 0° for yaw and ? 90° for roll in normal animals. After bilateral lateral canal nerve section, the spatial yaw and roll gains peaked when animals were tilted back ? 50°, to bring the intact vertical canals in the plane of rotation. Yaw and roll gains were identical in the lateral canal nerve-sectioned monkeys tested with both low- and high-acceleration stimuli. The responses were close to normal for high-acceleration thrusts in canal-plugged animals, but were significantly reduced when these animals were given step stimuli. Thus, high accelerations adequately activated the plugged canals, whereas yaw and roll spatial aVOR gains were produced only by the intact vertical canals after total loss of lateral canal input. We conclude that there is no spatial adaptation of the aVOR even after complete loss of specific semicircular canal input.

21287155
Prolonged reduction of motion sickness sensitivity by visual-vestibular interaction.
The angular vestibulo-ocular reflex (aVOR) and optokinetic nystagmus (OKN) were elicited simultaneously at low frequencies to study effects of habituation of the velocity storage time constant in the vestibular system on motion sickness. Twenty-nine subjects, eleven of whom were susceptible to motion sickness from common transportation, were habituated by sinusoidal rotation at 0.017 Hz at peak velocities from 5 to 20°/s, while they watched a full-field OKN stimulus. The OKN stripes rotated in the same direction and at the same frequency as the subjects, but at a higher velocity. This produced an OKN opposite in direction to the aVOR response. Motion sickness sensitivity was evaluated with off-vertical axis rotation (OVAR) and by the response to transportation before and after 5 days of visual-vestibular habituation. Habituation did not induce motion sickness or change the aVOR gains, but it shortened the vestibular time constants in all subjects. This greatly reduced motion sickness produced by OVAR and sensitivity to common transport in the motion susceptible subjects, which persisted for up to 18 weeks. Two motion susceptible subjects who only had aVOR/OKN habituation without being tested with OVAR also became asymptomatic. Normal subjects who were not habituated had no reduction in either their aVOR time constants or motion sickness sensitivity. The opposing aVOR/OKN stimulation, which has not been studied before, was well tolerated, and for the first time was an effective technique for rapid and prolonged habituation of motion sickness without exposure to drugs or other nauseating habituation stimuli.

21286691
Complementary gain modifications of the cervico-ocular (COR) and angular vestibulo-ocular (aVOR) reflexes after canal plugging.
To determine whether the COR compensates for the loss of aVOR gain, independent of species, we studied cynomolgus and rhesus monkeys in which all six semicircular canals were plugged. Gains and phases of the aVOR and COR were determined at frequencies ranging from 0.02 to 6 Hz and fit with model-based transfer functions. Following canal plugging in a rhesus monkey, the acute stage aVOR gain was small and there were absent responses to thrusts of yaw rotation. In the chronic state, aVOR behavior was characterized by a cupula/endolymph time constant of ? 0.07 s, responding only to high frequencies of head rotation. COR gains were ? 0 before surgery but increased to ? 0.15 at low frequencies just after surgery; the COR gains increased to ? 0.4 over the next 12 weeks. Nine weeks after surgery, the summated aVOR + COR responses compensated for head velocity in space in the 0.5-3 Hz frequency range. The gains and phases continued to improve until the 35th week, where the combined aVOR + COR stabilized with gains of ? 0.5-0.6 and the phases were compensatory over all frequencies. Two cynomolgus monkeys operated 3-12 years earlier had similar frequency characteristics of the aVOR and COR. The combined aVOR + COR gains were ? 0.4-0.8 with compensatory phases. To achieve gains close to 1.0, other mechanisms may contribute to gaze compensation, especially with the head free. Thus, while there are individual variations in the time of adaptation of the gain and phase parameters, the essential functional organization of the adaption to vestibular lesions is uniform across these species.

20535456
Motion sickness induced by off-vertical axis rotation (OVAR).
We tested the hypothesis that motion sickness is produced by an integration of the disparity between eye velocity and the yaw-axis orientation vector of velocity storage. Disparity was defined as the magnitude of the cross product between these two vectors. OVAR, which is known to produce motion sickness, generates horizontal eye velocity with a bias level related to velocity storage, as well as cyclic modulations due to re-orientation of the head re gravity. On average, the orientation vector is close to the spatial vertical. Thus, disparity can be related to the bias and tilt angle. Motion sickness sensitivity was defined as a ratio of maximum motion sickness score to the number of revolutions, allowing disparity and motion sickness sensitivity to be correlated. Nine subjects were rotated around axes tilted 10 degrees-30 degrees from the spatial vertical at 30 degrees/s-120 degrees/s. Motion sickness sensitivity increased monotonically with increases in the disparity due to changes in rotational velocity and tilt angle. Maximal motion sickness sensitivity and bias (6.8 degrees/s) occurred when rotating at 60 degrees/s about an axis tilted 30 degrees. Modulations in eye velocity during OVAR were unrelated to motion sickness sensitivity. The data were predicted by a model incorporating an estimate of head velocity from otolith activation, which activated velocity storage, followed by an orientation disparity comparator that activated a motion sickness integrator. These results suggest that the sensory-motor conflict that produces motion sickness involves coding of the spatial vertical by the otolith organs and body tilt receptors and processing of eye velocity through velocity storage.

20042701
Frequency-velocity mismatch: a fundamental abnormality in parkinsonian gait.
Gait dysfunction and falling are major sources of disability for patients with advanced Parkinson's disease (PD). It is presently thought that the fundamental defect is an inability to generate normal stride length. Our data suggest, however, that the basic problem in PD gait is an impaired ability to match step frequency to walking velocity. In this study, foot movements of PD and normal subjects were monitored with an OPTOTRAK motion-detection system while they walked on a treadmill at different velocities. PD subjects were also paced with auditory stimuli at different frequencies. PD gait was characterized by step frequencies that were faster and stride lengths that were shorter than those of normal controls. At low walking velocities, PD stepping had a reduced or absent terminal toe lift, which truncated swing phases, producing shortened steps. Auditory pacing was not able to normalize step frequency at these lower velocities. Peak forward toe velocities increased with walking velocity and PD subjects could initiate appropriate foot dynamics during initial phases of the swing. They could not control the foot appropriately in terminal phases, however. Increased treadmill velocity, which matched the natural PD step frequency, generated a second toe lift, normalizing step size. Levodopa increased the bandwidth of step frequencies, but was not as effective as increases in walking velocity in normalizing gait. We postulate that the inability to control step frequency and adjust swing phase dynamics to slower walking velocities are major causes for the gait impairment in PD.

19692515
Dependence of the roll angular vestibuloocular reflex (aVOR) on gravity.
Little is known about the dependence of the roll angular vestibuloocular reflex (aVOR) on gravity or its gravity-dependent adaptive properties. To study gravity-dependent characteristics of the roll aVOR, monkeys were oscillated about a naso-occipital axis in darkness while upright or tilted. Roll aVOR gains were largest in the upright position and decreased by 7-15% as animals were tilted from the upright. Thus the unadapted roll aVOR gain has substantial gravitational dependence. Roll gains were also decreased or increased by 0.25 Hz, in- or out-of-phase rotation of the head and the visual surround while animals were prone, supine, upright, or in side-down positions. Gain changes, determined as a function of head tilt, were fit with a sinusoid; the amplitudes represented the amount of the gravity-dependent gain change, and the bias, the gravity-independent gain change. Gravity-dependent gain changes were absent or substantially smaller in roll (approximately 5%) than in yaw (25%) or pitch (17%), whereas gravity-independent gain changes were similar for roll, pitch, and yaw (approximately 20%). Thus the high-frequency roll aVOR gain has an inherent dependence on head orientation re gravity in the unadapted state, which is different from the yaw/pitch aVORs. This inherent gravitational dependence may explain why the adaptive circuits are not active when the head is tilted re gravity during roll aVOR adaptation. These behavioral differences support the idea that there is a fundamental difference in the central organization of canal-otolith convergence of the roll and yaw/pitch aVORs.

19645957
Effects of the linear vestibulo-ocular reflex on accommodative vergence eye movements.
The aim of the study was to determine whether accommodation to the relative motion of a target along the visual axis of one eye during fore-aft movement of the head could induce accurate vergence over a wide range of viewing distances and frequencies of oscillation, despite lack of vision in the second eye. This was compared to the vergence when both eyes viewed the target. Two rhesus monkeys were trained to fixate a visual target located 216-336 mm in front and along the visual axis of one eye, while being sinusoidally translated in the fore-aft direction. There was no movement of the seeing eye while the other eye converged, regardless of whether there was vision in the converged eye. Gain and phase of the convergence were determined based on the ratio of actual versus expected eye position if the target was accurately fixated. During translation at frequencies from 0.05 to 2 Hz, the eye converged on the target with an eye position gain of approximately 1, and a phase close to zero. When vision was occluded in the converging eye, gains of convergence were 0.6-0.8 Hz up to 2 Hz, and the phases remained close to zero. At low frequencies of fore-aft movement, when the acceleration was negligible, convergence was driven by accommodation in the seeing eye. At higher frequencies, vergence could also be driven by the linear vestibulo-ocular reflex (lVOR). Thus, vision in one nonmoving eye and the lVOR combine to generate convergence over a wide range of frequencies and viewing distances.

19645928
Adaptation of orientation of central otolith-only neurons.
Otolith-only neurons were recorded extracellularly in the vestibular nuclei before and after cynomolgus monkeys were held on-side for up to 3 hr. The aim was to determine whether the polarization vectors of these neurons reorient toward the spatial vertical as do canal-otolith convergent neurons. Otolith input was characterized by tilting the animal 30 degrees from the upright position while positioning the head in different directions in yaw. This determined the response vector orientation (RVO), that is, the projection of the otolith polarization vector onto the head horizontal plane. Changes in the RVO of otolith-only neurons ranged from 2 degrees -16 degrees , which was on average considerably less than the changes previously noted in canal-otolith convergent vestibulo-only (VO) and vestibular plus saccade (VPS) neurons, which ranged up to 109 degrees. Some of the otolith-only neurons had marked sensitivity changes. These findings suggest that otolith-only neurons tend to maintain a head-fixed orientation during prolonged head tilts relative to gravity. In contrast, canal-convergent VO and VPS neurons optimize their response vector orientation to gravity when the head is oriented for prolonged periods.

19645885
Effect of canal plugging on quadrupedal locomotion in monkey.
The vestibular system plays an important role in controling gait, but where in the labyrinths relevant activity arises is largely unknown. After the semicircular canals are plugged, low frequency (0.01-2 Hz) components of the angular vestibulo-ocular reflex (aVOR) and angular vestibulo-collic reflex (aVCR) are lost, but high frequency (3-20 Hz) components remain. We determined how loss of low frequency canal afference affects limb and head movements during quadrupedal locomotion. Head, body, and limb movements were recorded in three dimensions (3-D) in a cynomolgus monkey with a motion detection system, while the animal walked on a treadmill. All six canals were plugged, reducing the canal time constants from approximately 4.0 sec to approximately 0.07 sec. Major changes in the control of the limbs occurred after surgery. Fore and hind limbs were held farther from the body, producing a broad-based gait. Swing-phase trajectories were inaccurate, and control of medial-lateral limb movement was erratic. These changes in gait were present immediately after surgery, as well as 15 months later, when the animal had essentially recovered. Thus, control of the limbs in the horizontal plane was defective after loss of the low-frequency semicircular canal input and never recovered. Cycle-averaged pitch and roll head rotations, and 3-D head translations were also significantly larger and more erratic after than before surgery. Head rotations in yaw could not be quantified due to intrusion of voluntary head turns. These findings indicate that the semicircular canals provide critical low frequency information to maximize the accuracy of stepping and stabilize the head during normal quadrupedal locomotion.

19645881
Modification of the cervico-ocular reflex by canal plugging.
The cervico-ocular reflex (COR) has a low gain in normal animals. In this study, we determined whether COR gain increases were specific to the low/midband frequency range, which is the range over which the angular vestibulo-ocular reflex (aVOR) is compromised by plugging. The gain and phase of the yaw and pitch COR and aVOR were compared in normal monkeys and those with all six semicircular canals or only the lateral canal plugged. During experiments animals sat with the body fixed to a chair and the head fixed in space. The body was oscillated about body-yaw and body-pitch axes over a frequency range of 0.05-6 Hz, with amplitude <10 degrees. For normal animals, both yaw and pitch eye velocities were compensatory to the relative velocity of the head with respect to the body. The gains were 0.1-0.2 at frequencies below 1 Hz and decreased to zero as stimulus frequency increased above 1 Hz. Canal-plugged animals had COR gains close to 1.0 at low frequencies, decreasing to approximately 0.6 at 0.5 Hz and to 0.2 for stimulus frequencies above 3 Hz. The phase of eye velocity was 180 degrees relative to head-re-body velocity at frequencies below 0.5 Hz and shifted toward 270 degrees as frequencies were increased to 4 Hz. This study demonstrates that adaptation of COR gain is tuned to a frequency range at which the aVOR is compromised by the canal plugging.

19458941
Adaptation of the angular vestibulo-ocular reflex to head movements in rotating frames of reference.
Head movements in a rotating frame of reference are commonly encountered, but their long term effects on the angular vestibulo-ocular reflex (aVOR) are not well understood. To study this, monkeys were oscillated about a naso-occipital (roll) axis for several hours while rotating about a spatial vertical axis (roll-while-rotating, RWR). This induced oscillations in roll and pitch eye velocity and continuous horizontal (yaw) nystagmus. For several hours thereafter, simple roll in darkness induced horizontal nystagmus and pitch and roll oscillations. The rising and falling time constants of the horizontal velocity indicated that the nystagmus arose in velocity storage. The continuous nystagmus was correlated with a phase shift of vertical eye velocity from 90 degrees to 0 degrees re head position. As the phases reverted toward pre-adaptive values, the horizontal velocity declined. Similar yaw nystagmus and pitch and roll velocities were produced by oscillation in roll after adaptation with roll and horizontal optokinetic nystagmus (OKN), but not after adaptation with pitch-while-rotating (PWR). Findings were explained by a model that shifted the roll orientation vector of velocity storage toward the pitch axis during adaptation with RWR and Roll & OKN. This shift produced modulation in vertical eye velocity in the post adaptive state, which was approximately in phase with roll head position, generating horizontal nystagmus. Similar orientation changes to prolonged exposure to complex motion environments may be responsible for producing post-stimulus motion sickness and/or mal de debarquement.

18718351
Baclofen, motion sickness susceptibility and the neural basis for velocity storage.
Reduction of the dominant time constant (T(VOR)) of the angular vestibulo-ocular reflex (aVOR) by habituation is associated with a decrease in motion sickness susceptibility. Baclofen, a GABA(b) agonist, reduces the time constant of the velocity storage integrator in the aVOR in a dose-dependent manner. The high frequency aVOR gain is unaltered by baclofen. Here we demonstrate that the reduction in T(VOR) produced by oral administration of 20 mg of baclofen causes a significant reduction in motion sickness susceptibility, tested with roll while rotating (RWR). These data show that motion sickness susceptibility can be pharmacologically manipulated with a GABA(b) agonist and support our conclusion that motion sickness is generated through velocity storage. We also show how baclofen acts on velocity storage at the neural level. A vestibular-plus-saccade (VPS) neuron was recorded in the rostral medial vestibular nucleus (rMVN) of a cynomolgus monkey, an area where we postulate that velocity storage is generated. The cell had a time constant during steps of velocity that was close to that of the T(VOR). After parenteral administration of baclofen, there was a similar decrease in the time constants of the VPS neuron and the T(VOR). This is the first demonstration of the concurrence of unit and aVOR time constants before and after baclofen. The data support the hypothesis that the velocity storage integrator is generated through activity of vestibular-only (VO) and VPS neurons in rMVN and suggest that GABA(b) synapses on VO and VPS neurons are likely to be involved in the baclofen-induced reduction in motion sickness susceptibility.

18718319
Differential coding of head rotation by lateral-vertical canal convergent central vestibular neurons.
Convergent inputs from the lateral and vertical semicircular canals (LC and VC) to 31 central vestibular-only (VO) and vestibular-plus-saccade (VPS) neurons were determined by oscillating monkeys about a spatial vertical axis while the head was tilted forward and backward up to 90 degrees. Activity of each neuron varied as a function of head tilt. Seven neurons had maximal activation when the head was tilted approximately 30 degrees forward (spatial phase), indicating convergent inputs from the LC, while peak activation of 10 units occurred with the head tilted back approximately 50 degrees, indicating VC input. Fourteen neurons had spatial phases that deviated more that 15 degrees from the LC and VC planes, indicating convergent inputs from LC and VC. Seven of these neurons had a spatial phase less than 15 degrees forward and 35 degrees back, indicating canal inputs from both sides. Seven other neurons had spatial phases more that 45 degrees forward and 65 degrees back, indicating inputs from canals located on the same side. Thus, there are two groups of central vestibular neurons: one group responds maximally when the head is rotated about a spatial vertical axis in an upright position, declining as the head is tilted away from this position. Another group responds minimally to rotation in an upright head orientation, increasing as the head is tilted away from the upright. A majority of the cells also had convergent otolith input. The otolith and canal inputs superposed when the animals were rotated about roll and pitch axes from an upright position. This insured that these neurons would respond over a broad frequency range from very low to high frequencies.

18718318
Dynamics of binocular fixation of targets during fore-aft motion.
When subjects move in the fore-aft direction, version and vergence are generated through the linear vestibulo-ocular reflex (lVOR) and pursuit systems to maintain binocular fixation. While the dynamics of pursuit and the lVOR have been studied for monocular gaze, the frequencies over which these systems operate to maintain binocular fixation are not known. The frequency characteristics of pursuit and the lVOR and their interaction were determined in two monkeys that were trained to fixate targets at vertical, lateral, and oblique positions on a computer screen. Animals were oscillated at 0.05 Hz to 4 Hz along their naso-occipital axes while fixating the targets (lVOR+pursuit). Animals were also stationary and fixated targets on the screen moving horizontally, vertically, or obliquely over approximately 3 degrees at various frequencies up to 1 Hz (pursuit). Eye movements were recorded with dual scleral search coils, and Fick angles were computed for each eye and compared to target positions. When animals pursued targets moving on the screen at low frequencies (0.05 Hz-0.5 Hz), the gains were close to unity, and the eyes were in-phase with the target. Pursuit gains decreased to approximately 0.5 and phases lagged by approximately 35 degrees as the frequencies of target oscillation increased above approximately 0.5 Hz. When fixating the targets during fore-aft oscillation (lVOR+pursuit), the gain was close to 1.0, and phases were within 10 degrees-15 degrees for frequencies up to 3 Hz. Thus, although pursuit alone does not contribute to visual following at higher frequencies, the interaction of binocular pursuit and the lVOR supported accurate binocular fixation for frequencies up to 3 Hz.

18497367
Adaptation of orientation vectors of otolith-related central vestibular neurons to gravity.
Behavioral experiments indicate that central pathways that process otolith-ocular and perceptual information have adaptive capabilities. Because polarization vectors of otolith afferents are directly related to the electro-mechanical properties of the hair cell bundle, it is unlikely that they change their direction of excitation. This indicates that the adaptation must take place in central pathways. Here we demonstrate for the first time that otolith polarization vectors of canal-otolith convergent neurons in the vestibular nuclei have adaptive capability. A total of 10 vestibular-only and vestibular-plus-saccade neurons were recorded extracellularly in two monkeys before and after they were in side-down positions for 2 h. The spatial characteristics of the otolith input were determined from the response vector orientation (RVO), which is the projection of the otolith polarization vector, onto the head horizontal plane. The RVOs had no specific orientation before animals were in side-down positions but moved toward the gravitational axis after the animals were tilted for extended periods. Vector reorientations varied from 0 to 109 degrees and were linearly related to the original deviation of the RVOs from gravity in the position of adaptation. Such reorientation of central polarization vectors could provide the basis for changes in perception and eye movements related to prolonged head tilts relative to gravity or in microgravity.

18372705
Semicircular canal plugging shifts the frequency of spatial-temporal convergence (STC) in central vestibular neurons.


17952421
Relative contribution of walking velocity and stepping frequency to the neural control of locomotion.
Stepping frequency is tightly coupled to walking velocity during natural locomotion. In a recent model, we demonstrated that walking velocity determines stride frequency, governs the active feedback control of the swing and determines the swing phase dynamics that governs foot movement. Here, we questioned whether the swing phase dynamics reflect independent effects of stride frequency and walking velocity. Foot movements were measured with a motion detection system (Optotrak) while subjects walked at 0.6-2.1 m/s on a treadmill. Stepping frequencies of 1.3-2.8 Hz were generated with pacing cues at each walking velocity. In the 'iso-velocity' condition, peak forward toe velocity during the swing phases was related to walking velocity and did not vary with alterations in stride frequency. In the 'iso-frequency' condition, in contrast, stepping frequency altered the relationship between toe acceleration and toe position in the fore-aft direction. The cycle frequency, main sequence (peak velocity vs. amplitude) relationships, and the shape of the phase-plane trajectories of the swing phases also reflected this relationship. The data were modeled by decoupling stepping frequency from walking velocity, while maintaining active feedback control dependent on frequency. The latter predicted both the dominant shape of the phase plane trajectories and the main sequence relationships. Thus, according to the model, walking velocity and stride frequency are independent central variables that control the dynamics of the swing phases and stepping. The ability to decouple stride frequency from walking velocity may help in navigating over uneven terrain or when executing curved trajectories while maintaining a constant velocity.

17946882
A model-based approach for assessing parkinsonian gait and effects of levodopa and deep brain stimulation.
Gait and balance disturbances are amongst the most disabling features of Parkinson's disease (PD), and are not adequately controlled with currently available medical and surgical therapies. Development of objective quantitative measures of these abnormalities would greatly help in the assessment and the development of therapeutic interventions. Recently, we developed a methodology, using dynamical system theory, for testing gait with a state-of-the-art motion-detection system (OPTOTRAK 3020, Northern Digital, Inc.). We also developed a model of the dynamics of the foot that predicts the stance and swing phase dynamics of normal walking. In the present study, we determined whether model parameters were altered in subjects with PD when they were tested on/off levodopa (LD) and on/off deep brain stimulation (DBS) in a 2 x 2 matrix.

17946708
Head fixed field coil system for measuring eye movements in freely moving monkeys.
Coil systems have been a standard for measuring eye movements since they were first introduced. These systems, which have been designed to work at low frequencies (20 KHz), generally require large field coils so that a uniform field can be established at the eye coil site. This configuration makes it virtually impossible to study eye movements in freely moving animals. In this paper, we describe the design of a coil system, which operates at radio frequencies (10 MHz). This system allows the use of compact coils with radii of 10 mm that are capable of accurately measuring eye movements in three dimensions during head free locomotion. This system opens the possibility for studying eye movements in freely moving monkeys under a wide range of conditions.

17926026
Vertical (Z-axis) acceleration alters the ocular response to linear acceleration in the rabbit.
Whether ocular orientation to gravity is produced solely by linear acceleration in the horizontal plane of the head or depends on both horizontal and vertical components of the acceleration of gravity is controversial. Here, we compared orienting eye movements of rabbits during head tilt to those produced by centrifugation that generated centripetal acceleration along the naso-occipital (X-), bitemporal (Y-) and vertical (Z-) axes in a constant gravitational field. Sensitivities of ocular counter-pitch and vergence during pitch tilts were approximately 25 degrees /g and approximately 26 degrees /g, respectively, and of ocular counter-roll during roll tilts was approximately 20 degrees /g. During X-axis centripetal acceleration with 1 g of gravity along the Z-axis, pitch and vergence sensitivities were reduced to approximately 13 degrees /g and approximately 16 degrees /g. Similarly, Y-axis acceleration with 1g along the Z-axis reduced the roll sensitivity to approximately 16 degrees /g. Modulation of Z-axis centripetal acceleration caused sensitivities to drop by approximately 6 degrees /g in pitch, approximately 2 degrees /g in vergence, and approximately 5 degrees /g in roll. Thus, the constant 1g acceleration along the Z-axis reduced the sensitivity of ocular orientation to linear accelerations in the horizontal plane. Orienting responses were also modulated by varying the head Z-axis acceleration; the sensitivity of response to Z-axis acceleration was linearly related to the response to static tilt. Although the sign of the Z-axis modulation is opposite in the lateral-eyed rabbit from that in frontal-eyed species, these data provide evidence that the brain uses both the horizontal and the vertical components of acceleration from the otolith organs to determine the magnitude of ocular orientation in response to linear acceleration.

17256169
Labyrinthine lesions and motion sickness susceptibility.
The angular vestibulo-ocular reflex (aVOR) has a fast pathway, which mediates compensatory eye movements, and a slow (velocity storage) pathway, which determines its low frequency characteristics and orients eye velocity toward gravity. We have proposed that motion sickness is generated through velocity storage, when its orientation vector, which lies close to the gravitational vertical, is misaligned with eye velocity during head motion. The duration of the misalignment, determined by the dominant time constant of velocity storage, causes the buildup of motion sickness. To test this hypothesis, we studied bilateral labyrinthine-defective subjects with short vestibular time constants but normal aVOR gains for their motion sickness susceptibility. Time constants and gains were taken from rotational responses. Motion sickness was generated by rolling the head while rotating, and susceptibility was assessed by the number of head movements made before reaching intolerable levels of nausea. More head movements signified lower motion sickness susceptibility. Labyrinthine-defective subjects made more head movements on their first exposure to roll while rotating than normals (39.8 +/- 7.2 vs 13.7 +/- 5.5; P < 0.0001). Normals were tested eight times, which habituated their time constants and reduced their motion sickness susceptibility. Combining data from all subjects, there was a strong inverse relationship between time constants and number of head movements (r = 0.94), but none between motion sickness susceptibility and aVOR gains. This provides further evidence that motion sickness is generated through velocity storage, not the direct pathway, and suggests that motion sickness susceptibility can be reduced by reducing the aVOR time constant.

