21458888
Corticosteroids, but not NSAIDs, are associated with less Alzheimer neuropathology.
The objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that corticosteroid and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) medications are associated with less global and regional Alzheimer's disease (AD) neuropathology. This postmortem study was based on 694 brains of subjects from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine Brain Bank who did not have neuropathologies other than neuritic plaques (NPs), neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), or cerebrovascular disease. Densities of NPs and of NFTs were assessed in several neocortical regions and in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and amygdala. Counts of NPs in several neocortical regions were also assessed. For each neuropathology measure, analyses of covariance controlling for age at death and sex compared subjects who received only corticosteroids (n = 54) or those who received only NSAIDs (n = 56) to the same comparison group, subjects who received neither (n = 576). Subjects receiving corticosteroids had significantly lower ratings and counts of NPs for all neuropathological measures, and NFTs overall and in the cerebral cortex and amygdala. In contrast, no measures were significant for subjects who received NSAIDs. Use of corticosteroids was associated with approximately 50% fewer NPs and NFTs in most brain regions examined, compared with nonmedicated subjects. In contrast, use of NSAIDs was not substantially associated with the reductions in hallmark lesions of AD. Because corticosteroids have anti-inflammatory as well as a myriad of other neurobiological effects, more direct studies in model systems could reveal novel therapeutic targets and mechanisms for AD lesion reduction.

21187583
Profiles of Alzheimer's disease-related pathology in an aging urban population sample in India.
Systematic studies on Alzheimer's disease (AD)-related pathology that complement clinical and epidemiological data on dementia from low and middle income countries are rare. We report the first large study on AD-related pathology in autopsy service-derived brains from an urban center in India, a low/middle income country, and compare findings with a similar sample from New York. Amyloid-? plaques and neurofibrillary tangles were assessed in 91 brain specimens derived from hospital autopsy cases from Mumbai, India (age 60+ years; mean age 71.1 years, ± 8.3 SD; range 60-107 years) and compared with identically examined age-matched sample obtained in New York. These cases had no known clinical history of dementia. Our study showed that in comparison with the New York sample, the mean brain weight of the Mumbai sample was lower (p = 0.013) and mean diffuse plaque density was higher (p = 0.019), while differences in mean density and counts of neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques were not statistically significant (p > 0.05). Our findings indicate that the burden of AD-related pathology was approximately equivalent in Mumbai and New York samples, which is at variance with expected lower AD-related lesion burden based on the clinical/epidemiological studies suggesting lower prevalence of AD in India.

19896333
Cortical neuritic plaques and hippocampal neurofibrillary tangles are related to dementia severity in elderly schizophrenia patients.
Cognitive decline has been described in elderly patients with schizophrenia, but the underlying pathology remains unknown. Some studies report increases in plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, but there is no evidence for an increased risk for Alzheimer's disease (AD) in elderly schizophrenics. Models of a decreased cerebral reserve suggest that increases in AD-related neuropathology below the threshold for a neuropathological diagnosis could be related to dementia severity in elderly schizophrenia patients. We tested this hypothesis in 110 autopsy specimens of schizophrenia patients, without a neuropathological diagnosis of AD or other neurodegenerative disorders. Furthermore, we assessed the effects of apolipoprotein E (ApoE) status, a known genetic risk factor for AD. Measures of density of neuritic plaques were obtained in five cortical regions, and the degree of hippocampal neurofibrillary tangles was rated. Dementia severity was measured prior to postmortem using the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale. multivariate analyses of variance were conducted with the factors dementia severity, by ApoE4 carrier status. Hippocampal neurofibrillary tangles correlated with increased dementia severity (p<.05). Neuritic plaque density increased with greater dementia severity (p<.005), and ApoE4 carrier status (p<.005), and these differences were magnified by the ApoE4 carrier status (p<.01). Even below the threshold for a neuropathological diagnosis of AD, neuritic plaques and hippocampal neurofibrillary tangles are associated with dementia severity in schizophrenia patients, even more so in the presence of genetic risk factors, suggesting that a decreased cerebral reserve in elderly schizophrenics may increase susceptibility for dementia.

19129700
Serum lipids are related to Alzheimer's pathology in nursing home residents.
Studies of associations between serum lipids and Alzheimer's disease (AD) or other dementias in the elderly show conflicting results, perhaps due to misclassification of the various dementias. For 358 nursing home residents, serum lipids were studied at admission and diagnoses established at autopsy. We used defined neuropathological criteria to distinguish the presence of AD and to avoid errors of clinical dementia assessment. Residents with any AD pathology, as compared to those without AD pathology, had higher mean serum total cholesterol (TC; 200.4 vs. 185.9 mg/dl; p = 0.02) and higher mean low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL; 124.5 vs. 111.5 mg/dl; p = 0.03). Further, mean TC, LDL and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels all increased progressively with increasing pathological certainty of AD (p for trend = 0.001, 0.02 and 0.02). TC and LDL were significantly related to pathologically defined AD. If serum lipids have a role in the pathogenesis of AD, interventions may modify the course of disease.

18367838
Clinical dementia rating performed several years prior to death predicts regional Alzheimer's neuropathology.
To assess the relationships between early and late antemortem measures of dementia severity and Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology severity. 40 residents of a nursing home, average age at death 82.0, participated in this longitudinal cohort study with postmortem assessment. Severity of dementia was measured by Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) at two time points, averaging 4.5 and 1.0 years before death. Densities of postmortem neuritic plaques (NPs) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) were measured in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and entorhinal cortex. For most brain areas, both early and late CDRs were significantly associated with NPs and NFTs. CDRs assessed proximal to death predicted NFTs beyond the contribution of early CDRs. NPs were predicted by both early and late CDRs. NPs were predictive of both early and late CDRs after controlling for NFTs. NFTs were only associated significantly with late CDR in the cerebral cortex after controlling for NPs. Even if assessed several years before death, dementia severity is associated with AD neuropathology. NPs are more strongly associated with dementia severity than NFTs. NFTs consistently associate better with late than early CDR, suggesting that these neuropathological changes may occur relatively later in the course of the disease.

18239198
Increased neurofibrillary tangles in patients with Alzheimer disease with comorbid depression.
Recent evidence suggests that a history of major depression may lead to increases in hippocampal neuropathology in Alzheimer disease (AD). The authors tested the hypothesis that neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are more pronounced in the brains of patients with AD with comorbid depression as compared with patients with AD without depression. Brain samples from patients were selected from the U.S. National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center database. The primary analysis included 7164 individuals: 6468 had AD as the primary neuropathologic diagnosis and 696 were considered neuropathologically normal. Depression at study inclusion was rated as present or absent in consensus conferences. Neuropathologic ratings from the Consortium to Establish a Registry in Alzheimer's Disease rating of neuritic plaques and Braak staging of neurofibrillary tangles were used for between-group analyses. Brains of patients with AD with comorbid depression showed higher levels of cortical tangle formation than brains of patients with AD without comorbid depression. Results remained stable when controlling for age, gender, level of education, and cognitive status. Within patients with AD, comorbid depression increased the odds for advanced neuropathologic disease stage (odds ratio: 1.47; 95% confidence interval: 1.03-2.08). In AD, the presence of depression comorbidity corresponds to increases in AD-related neuropathologic changes beyond age, gender, level of education, and cognitive status, suggesting an interaction between depression and the neuropathologic processes in AD.

18079025
Number of children is associated with neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease in women.
To examine the association between number of born children and neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The brains of 86 subjects with data on the number of biological children born, were studied postmortem. Primary analyses included 73 subjects (average age at death=80; 42 women) devoid of cerebrovascular disease associated lesions (i.e., infarcts) or of non-AD related neuropathology. Women were significantly older at death than men (85.6 vs. 73.4; p<.0005) but did not differ significantly from men in number of children or dementia severity. Secondary analyses included 13 additional subjects who had concomitant cerebrovascular disease. Density of neuritic plaques (NPs) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, amygdala and multiple regions of the cerebral cortex, as well as composites of these indices reflecting overall neuropathology, were analyzed. For men and women separately, partial correlations, controlling for age at death and dementia severity, were used to assess the associations of number of children with these neuropathological variables. Among women, all the partial correlations were positive, with statistical significance for overall neuropathology (r=.37; p=.02), overall NPs (r=.36; p=.02), and for NPs in the amygdala (r=.47; p=.002). Among men, none of the partial correlations were statistically significant. Results of the secondary analyses were similar. Since the associations between number of children and neuropathology of AD were found for women only, they might reflect sex-specific mechanisms (such as variations in estrogen or luteinizing hormone levels) rather than social, economic, biological or other mechanisms common to both men and women.

21244352
Cholesterol and LDL Relate to Neuritic Plaques and to APOE4 Presence but Not to Neurofibrillary Tangles.
Elevated serum total cholesterol (TC) has been considered a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD), but conflicting results have confused understanding of the relationships of serum lipids to the presence of AD in the elderly. Methods: To clarify these issues, we evaluated correlations of admission TC, low-density (LDL) and high-density (HDL) cholesterol directly with the densities of Alzheimer hallmarks-neuritic plaques (NP) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT)--in nursing home residents (n=281). Results: Significant positive associations of TC and LDL with NP densities were found in both the neocortex (TC: r=0.151, p=0.013 and LDL: r=0.190, p=0.005) and the hippocampal/entorhinal (allocortical) region (TC: r=0.182, p=0.002 and LDL: r=0.203, p=0.003). Associations of HDL with NP were less strong but also significant. In contrast, after adjustment for confounders, no correlations of NFT with any lipid were significant.When subjects with any non-AD neuropathology (largely vascular) were excluded, the TC-plaque and LDL-plaque associations for the remaining "Pure AD" subgroup were consistently stronger than for the full sample. The TC- and LDL-plaque correlations were also stronger for the subgroup of 87 subjects with an APOE ?4 allele. Conclusions: The findings indicate that serum TC and LDL levels clearly relate to densities of NP, but not to densities of NFT. The stronger associations found in the subgroup that excluded all subjects with non-AD neuropathology suggest that cerebrovascular involvement does not explain these lipid-plaque relationships. Since the associations of TC/LDL with NP were particularly stronger in ?4 carriers, varying prevalence of this allele may explain some discrepancies among prior studies.

19228583
Less Alzheimer disease neuropathology in medicated hypertensive than nonhypertensive persons.
To test the hypothesis that use of antihypertensive medication is associated with lower Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology. This was a postmortem study of 291 brains limited to those with normal neuropathology or with uncomplicated AD neuropathology (i.e., without other dementia-associated neuropathology) in persons with or without hypertension (HTN) who were and were not treated with antihypertensive medications. Neuritic plaque (NP) and neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) densities, quantified in selected brain regions according to the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD) neuropathologic criteria, with additional cortical NP counts, yielded 24 neuropathologic regional measures or summaries. Medicated hypertension (HTN-med; n = 77), nonmedicated HTN (HTN-nomed; n = 42), and non-HTN (no-HTN; n = 172) groups were compared by analyses of variance. The HTN-med group had significantly less neuropathology than the no-HTN group. The no-HTN group averaged over 50% higher mean NP and NFT ratings, and double the mean NP count, of the HTN-med group. The HTN-nomed group had significantly more neuropathology than the HTN-med group, but not significantly less than the no-HTN group. There was substantially less Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology in the medicated hypertension group than the nonhypertensive group, which may reflect a salutary effect of antihypertensive medication against AD-associated neuropathology.

18765651
Insulin in combination with other diabetes medication is associated with less Alzheimer neuropathology.
To examine the association between treatment for diabetes and Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathology. This postmortem study matched 124 subjects with diabetes to 124 without diabetes from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine Brain Bank, on age (mean = 81.2 + 9.3), sex (57.3% F), and severity of dementia (Clinical Dementia Rating [CDR] 2.4 + 1.7). Densities of neuritic plaques (NPs) and of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) were assessed in several neocortical regions and in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and amygdala. Diabetic subjects were classified according to their recorded lifetime antidiabetic medications: none (n = 29), insulin only (n = 49), diabetes medications other than insulin only (n = 28), or concomitant use of both insulin and any oral antidiabetic medications (n = 18). For each dependent variable, analysis of covariance controlling for age at death, sex, and CDR distinguished among the nondiabetic patients and four diabetic subgroups. There were differences among the five groups for NP ratings in the entorhinal cortex (p = 0.003), amygdala (p = 0.009), and overall NP (p = 0.014) as well as counts of NPs in all regions examined (p values ranging from 0.009 to 0.04). NP ratings in the hippocampus (p = 0.057) and the combined neocortical measure (p = 0.052) approached significance. In each analysis, the concomitant medication group had significantly fewer NPs (approximately 20%) than any of the other groups, which were relatively similar. No significant NFT differences were found. The results of this study suggest that the combination of insulin with other diabetes medication is associated with substantially lower neuritic plaque density consistent with the effects of both on the neurobiology of insulin.

