21598266
Linking population, health, and the environment: an overview of integrated programs and a case study in Nepal.
Population, health, and environment programs are cross-sectoral development initiatives that link conservation, health, and family planning interventions. These programs are generally located in biodiversity hotspots, where population pressure is among the factors contributing to environmental degradation. This review describes the general structure of population, health, and environment programs and provides selected examples to highlight various aspects of this approach. We focus in depth on a case study from the Integrating Population and Health into Forestry Management Agendas program in Nepal that simultaneously addressed deforestation from fuel-wood harvesting, indoor air pollution from wood fires, acute respiratory infections related to smoke inhalation, as well as family planning in communities in Nepal's densely populated forest corridors. Keys to the success of the Nepal project included empowerment of community forest user groups with population, health, and environment program know-how and appropriate technology. Lessons learned in Nepal point to the critical role that nongovernmental organizations can play as catalysts of cross-sectoral responses to complex development issues such as this one. The population, health, and environment approach can be an effective method for achieving sustainable development and meeting both conservation and health objectives. Mt Sinai J Med 78:394-405, 2011. © 2011 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

18820521
The design and implementation of a multidisciplinary global health residency track at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
The Mount Sinai Global Health Center established a new multidisciplinary Global Health Residency Track (GHRT) in 2006. The goal of the GHRT is to provide participants with a foundation in global health issues and population-based health care, a chance to develop basic research and public health skills in the field, and guidance for career development. The authors describe how the GHRT was created, present its structure, and discuss their experience implementing this new program. Other selected global health residency training programs are also reviewed. The Mount Sinai GHRT is a two-year program that comprises a didactic curriculum, with participants required to take selected classes in the Master of Public Health Program of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine of New York University, and "field experience," which consists of a public health project that is implemented during a two-month elective period during the second year. Core competencies include (1) epidemiology and research skills, (2) health disparities, human rights, and cultural competency, (3) needs assessment and project development, (4) tropical medicine and infectious disease, and (5) reproductive, maternal, and child health. Nine residents were selected from four Mount Sinai residency programs to participate in the GHRT in its first year, and, during the winter of 2007, senior residents conducted public health projects in the Dominican Republic, India, Kenya, and East Harlem. All components of the track performed well in evaluations. An outcomes survey is ongoing to track career choices among graduates and to identify barriers to continuing involvement in global health.

