21415307
G protein-coupled receptor heteromerization: a role in allosteric modulation of ligand binding.
It is becoming increasingly recognized that G protein-coupled receptors physically interact. These interactions may provide a mechanism for allosteric modulation of receptor function. In this study, we examined this possibility by using an established model system of a receptor heteromer consisting of ? and ? opioid receptors. We examined the effect of a number of ? receptor ligands on the binding equilibrium and association and dissociation kinetics of a radiolabeled ? receptor agonist, [(3)H]deltorphin II. We also examined the effect of ? receptor ligands on the binding equilibrium and association and dissociation kinetics of a radiolabeled ? receptor agonist, [(3)H][d-Ala(2),N-Me-Phe(4),Gly(5)-ol]-enkephalin ([(3)H]DAMGO). We show that ? receptor ligands are capable of allosterically enhancing ? receptor radioligand binding and vice versa. Thus, there is strong positive cooperativity between the two receptor units with remarkable consequences for ligand pharmacology. We find that the data can be simulated by adapting an allosteric receptor model previously developed for small molecules, suggesting that the ligand-occupied protomers function as allosteric modulators of the partner receptor's activity.

21158738
Exploring a role for heteromerization in GPCR signalling specificity.
The critical involvement of GPCRs (G-protein-coupled receptors) in nearly all physiological processes, and the presence of these receptors at the interface between the extracellular and the intracellular milieu, has positioned these receptors as pivotal therapeutic targets. Although a large number of drugs targeting GPCRs are currently available, significant efforts have been directed towards understanding receptor properties, with the goal of identifying and designing improved receptor ligands. Recent advances in GPCR pharmacology have demonstrated that different ligands binding to the same receptor can activate discrete sets of downstream effectors, a phenomenon known as 'ligand-directed signal specificity', which is currently being explored for drug development due to its potential therapeutic advantage. Emerging studies suggest that GPCR responses can also be modulated by contextual factors, such as interactions with other GPCRs. Association between different GPCR types leads to the formation of complexes, or GPCR heteromers, with distinct and unique signalling properties. Some of these heteromers activate discrete sets of signalling effectors upon activation by the same ligand, a phenomenon termed 'heteromer-directed signalling specificity'. This has been shown to be involved in the physiological role of receptors and, in some cases, in disease-specific dysregulation of a receptor effect. Hence targeting GPCR heteromers constitutes an emerging strategy to select receptor-specific responses and is likely to be useful in achieving specific beneficial therapeutic effects.

20811967
Hemoglobin-derived peptides as novel type of bioactive signaling molecules.
Most bioactive peptides are generated by proteolytic cleavage of large precursor proteins followed by storage in secretory vesicles from where they are released upon cell stimulation. Examples of such bioactive peptides include peptide neurotransmitters, classical neuropeptides, and peptide hormones. In the last decade, it has become apparent that the breakdown of cytosolic proteins can generate peptides that have biological activity. A case in point and the focus of this review are hemoglobin-derived peptides. In vertebrates, hemoglobin (Hb) consists of a tetramer of two ?- and two ?-globin chains each containing a prosthetic heme group, and is primarily involved in oxygen delivery to tissues and in redox reactions (Schechter Blood 112:3927-3938, 2008). The presence of ?- and/or ?-globin chain in tissues besides red blood cells including rodent and human brain and peripheral tissues (Liu et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:6643-6647, 1999; Newton et al. J Biol Chem 281:5668-5676, 2006; Wride et al. Mol Vis 9:360-396, 2003; Setton-Avruj Exp Neurol 203:568-578, 2007; Ohyagi et al. Brain Res 635:323-327, 1994; Schelshorn et al. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 29:585-595, 2009; Richter et al. J Comp Neurol 515:538-547, 2009) suggests that globins and/or derived peptidic fragments might play additional physiological functions in different tissues. In support of this hypothesis, a number of Hb-derived peptides have been identified and shown to have diverse functions (Ivanov et al. Biopoly 43:171-188, 1997; Karelin et al. Neurochem Res 24:1117-1124, 1999). Modern mass spectrometric analyses have helped in the identification of additional Hb peptides (Newton et al. J Biol Chem 281:5668-5676, 2006; Setton-Avruj Exp Neurol 203:568-578, 2007; Gomes et al. FASEB J 23:3020-3029, 2009); the molecular targets for these are only recently beginning to be revealed. Here, we review the status of the Hb peptide field and highlight recent reports on the identification of a molecular target for a novel set of Hb peptides, hemopressins, and the implication of these peptides to normal cell function and disease. The potential therapeutic applications for these Hb-derived hemopressin peptides will also be discussed.

20729750
?2-Adrenergic receptor signaling in the cardiac myocyte is modulated by interactions with CXCR4.
Chemokines are small secreted proteins with chemoattractant properties that play a key role in inflammation, metastasis, and embryonic development. We previously demonstrated a nonchemotactic role for one such chemokine pair, stromal cell-derived factor-1? and its G-protein coupled receptor, CXCR4. Stromal cell-derived factor-1/CXCR4 are expressed on cardiac myocytes and have direct consequences on cardiac myocyte physiology by inhibiting contractility in response to the nonselective ?-adrenergic receptor (?AR) agonist, isoproterenol. As a result of the importance of ?-adrenergic signaling in heart failure pathophysiology, we investigated the underlying mechanism involved in CXCR4 modulation of ?AR signaling. Our studies demonstrate activation of CXCR4 by stromal cell-derived factor-1 leads to a decrease in ?AR-induced PKA activity as assessed by cAMP accumulation and PKA-dependent phosphorylation of phospholamban, an inhibitor of SERCA2a. We determined CXCR4 regulation of ?AR downstream targets is ?2AR-dependent. We demonstrated a physical interaction between CXCR4 and ?2AR as determined by coimmunoprecipitation, confocal microscopy, and BRET techniques. The CXCR4-?2AR interaction leads to G-protein signal modulation and suggests the interaction is a novel mechanism for regulating cardiac myocyte contractility. Chemokines are physiologically and developmentally relevant to myocardial biology and represent a novel receptor class of cardiac modulators. The CXCR4-?2AR complex could represent a hitherto unknown target for therapeutic intervention.

20691961
Escorts take the lead molecular chaperones as therapeutic targets.
The functional and physiological diversity of transmembrane receptors results from factors that influence the pharmacology, signaling, and trafficking of these receptors. Receptor mutations and other modifications may lead to misfolding, intracellular retention, and ineffective signaling of transmembrane receptors. The importance of such mutations is highlighted by the fact that various diseases have been linked to mutations that lead to ineffective signaling of these receptors, resulting from the retention of receptors in intracellular compartments. Studies focused on understanding the regulation of trafficking and cell surface expression of newly synthesized receptors have highlighted molecular chaperones as key regulators of receptor maturation and sorting. In this chapter, we discuss the functions of molecular chaperones in the regulation of seven-transmembrane-containing G-protein-coupled receptor function and trafficking and explore ways in which chaperones can serve as novel therapeutic targets.

20687183
Role of antibodies in developing drugs that target G-protein-coupled receptor dimers.
G-protein-coupled receptors are important molecular targets in drug discovery. These receptors play a pivotal role in physiological signaling pathways and are targeted by nearly 50% of currently available drugs. Mounting evidence suggests that G-protein-coupled receptors form dimers, and various studies have shown that dimerization is necessary for receptor maturation, signaling, and trafficking. However, the physiological implications of dimerization in vivo have not been well explored because detection of GPCR dimers in endogenous systems has been a challenging task. One exciting new approach to this challenge is the generation of antibodies against specific G-protein-coupled receptor dimers. Such antibodies could be used as tools for characterization of heteromer-specific function; as reagents for their purification, tissue localization, and regulation in vivo; and as probes for mapping their functional domains. In addition, such antibodies could serve as alternative ligands for G-protein-coupled receptor heteromers. Thus, heteromer-specific antibodies represent novel tools for the exploration and manipulation of G-protein-coupled receptor-dimer pharmacology.

20647592
Increased abundance of opioid receptor heteromers after chronic morphine administration.
The mu and delta types of opioid receptors form heteromers that exhibit pharmacological and functional properties distinct from those of homomeric receptors. To characterize these complexes in the brain, we generated antibodies that selectively recognize the mu-delta heteromer and blocked its in vitro signaling. With these antibodies, we showed that chronic, but not acute, morphine treatment caused an increase in the abundance of mu-delta heteromers in key areas of the central nervous system that are implicated in pain processing. Because of its distinct signaling properties, the mu-delta heteromer could be a therapeutic target in the treatment of chronic pain and addiction.

20060175
Receptor heteromerization and drug discovery.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are membrane proteins that convert extracellular information into intracellular signals. They are involved in many biological processes and therefore represent powerful targets to modulate physiological and pathological states. Recent studies have demonstrated that GPCR activity is regulated by several mechanisms. Among these, protein-protein interactions (and in particular interactions with other receptors leading to heteromerization) has been shown to have an important role in modulating GPCR function. This has expanded their repertoire of signaling and added a new level of regulation to their physiological roles. Emerging studies provide evidence for tissue-specific and disease-specific receptor heteromerization. This suggests that heteromers represent novel drug targets for the identification of selective compounds with potentially fewer side-effects.

20013213
Quantitative neuroproteomics of the synapse.
An emerging way to study neuropsychiatric or neurodegenerative diseases is by performing proteomic analyses of brain tissues. Here, we describe methods used to isolate and identify the proteins associated with a sample of interest, such as the synapse, as well as to compare the levels of proteins in the sample under different conditions. These techniques, involving subcellular fractionation and modern quantitative proteomics using isotopic labels, can be used to understand the organization of neuronal compartments and the regulation of synaptic function under various conditions.

19956087
Modulation of opiate-related signaling molecules in morphine-dependent conditioned behavior: conditioned place preference to morphine induces CREB phosphorylation.
Opiate addiction is a chronic, relapsing behavioral disorder where learned associations that develop between the abused opiate and the environment in which it is consumed are brought about through Pavlovian (classical) conditioning processes. However, the signaling mechanisms/pathways regulating the mechanisms that underlie the responses to opiate-associated cues or the development of sensitization as a consequence of repeated context-independent administration of opiates are unknown. In this study we examined the phosphorylation levels of various classic signaling molecules in brain regions implicated in addictive behaviors after acute and repeated morphine administration. An unbiased place conditioning protocol was used to examine changes in phosphorylation that are associated with (1) the expression of the rewarding effects of morphine and (2) the sensitization that develops to this effect. We also examined the effects of a delta-receptor antagonist on morphine-induced conditioned behavior and on the phosphorylation of classic signaling molecules in view of data showing that blockade of delta-opioid receptor (deltaOR) prevents the development of sensitization to the rewarding effects of morphine. We find that CREB phosphorylation is specifically induced upon the expression of a sensitized response to morphine-induced conditioned behavior in brain areas related to memory consolidation, such as the hippocampus and cortex. A similar effect is also observed, albeit to a lesser extent, in the case of the GluR1 subunit of AMPA glutamate receptor. These increases in the phosphorylation levels of CREB and pGluR1 are significantly blocked by pretreatment with a deltaOR antagonist. These results indicate a critical role for phospho-CREB, AMPA, and deltaOR activities in mediating the expression of a sensitized response to morphine-dependent conditioned behavior.

19857996
Cannabinoid-opioid interactions during neuropathic pain and analgesia.
Opiates and exogenous cannabinoids, both potent analgesics used for the treatment of patients with neuropathic pain, bind to and activate class A G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). Several lines of evidence have recently suggested that opioid and cannabinoid receptors can functionally interact in the central nervous system (CNS). These interactions may be direct, such as through receptor heteromerization, or indirect, such as through signaling cross-talk that includes agonist-mediated release and/or synthesis of endogenous ligands that can activate downstream receptors. Interactions between opioid and cannabinoid receptors may mediate many of the behavioral phenomena associated with the use of these drugs, including the production of acute antinociception and the development of tolerance and cross-tolerance to the antinociceptive effects of opioid and cannabinoid-specific ligands. This review summarizes behavioral, anatomical, and molecular data characterizing these interactions during the development of neuropathic pain and during antinociceptive treatment with these drugs alone or in combination. These studies are critical for understanding how the receptor systems involved in pain relief are altered during acute or chronic pain, and for designing better antinociceptive drug therapies, such as the combined use of opioid and cannabinoid receptor agonists or selective activation of receptor heteromers, that directly target the altered neurophysiology of patients experiencing pain.

19562802
Systems approach to explore components and interactions in the presynapse.
The application of proteomic techniques to neuroscientific research provides an opportunity for a greater understanding of nervous system structure and function. As increasing amounts of neuroproteomic data become available, it is necessary to formulate methods to integrate these data in a meaningful way to obtain a more comprehensive picture of neuronal subcompartments. Furthermore, computational methods can be used to make biologically relevant predictions from large proteomic data sets. Here, we applied an integrated proteomics and systems biology approach to characterize the presynaptic (PRE) nerve terminal. For this, we carried out proteomic analyses of presynaptically enriched fractions, and generated a PRE literature-based protein-protein interaction network. We combined these with other proteomic analyses to generate a core list of 117 PRE proteins, and used graph theory-inspired algorithms to predict 92 additional components and a PRE complex containing 17 proteins. Some of these predictions were validated experimentally, indicating that the computational analyses can identify novel proteins and complexes in a subcellular compartment. We conclude that the combination of techniques (proteomics, data integration, and computational analyses) used in this study are useful in obtaining a comprehensive understanding of functional components, especially low-abundance entities and/or interactions in the PRE nerve terminal.

18836069
Cell surface targeting of mu-delta opioid receptor heterodimers by RTP4.
Mu opioid receptors are G protein-coupled receptors that mediate the pain-relieving effects of clinically used analgesics, such as morphine. Accumulating evidence shows that mu-delta opioid heterodimers have a pharmacologic profile distinct from those of the mu or delta homodimers. Because the heterodimers exhibit distinct signaling properties, the protein and mechanism regulating their levels have significant effects on morphine-mediated physiology. We report the characterization of RTP4, a Golgi chaperone, as a regulator of the levels of heterodimers at the cell surface. We show that the association with RTP4 protects mu-delta receptors from ubiquitination and degradation. This leads to increases in surface heterodimer levels, thereby affecting signaling. Thus, the oligomeric organization of opioid receptors is controlled by RTP4, and this governs their membrane targeting and functional activity. This work is the first report of the identification of a chaperone involved in the regulation of the biogenesis of a family A GPCR heterodimer. The identification of such factors as RTP4 controlling dimerization will provide insight into the regulation of heterodimers in vivo. This has implications in the modulation of pharmacology of their endogenous ligands, and in the development of drugs with specific therapeutic effects.

18673273
Antibodies against G-protein coupled receptors: novel uses in screening and drug development.
Antibodies are components of the body's humoral immune system that are generated in response to foreign pathogens. Modern biomedical research has employed these very specific and efficient molecules designed by nature in the diagnosis of diseases, localization of gene products as well as in the rapid screening of targets for drug discovery and testing. In addition, the introduction of antibodies with fluorescent or enzymatic tags has significantly contributed to advances in imaging and microarray technology, which are revolutionizing disease research and the search for effective therapeutics. More recently antibodies have been used in the isolation of dimeric G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) complexes. In this review, we discuss antibodies as powerful research tools for studying GPCRs, and their potential to be developed as drugs themselves.

18507370
Homology modeling and site-directed mutagenesis to identify selective inhibitors of endothelin-converting enzyme-2.
Endothelin-converting enzyme-2 (ECE-2), a member of M13 family of zinc metallopeptidases, has previously been shown to process a number of neuropeptides including those derived from prodynorphin, proenkephalin, proSAAS, and amyloid precursor protein. ECE-2, unlike ECE-1, exhibits restricted neuroendocrine distribution and acidic pH optimum; it is consistent with a role in the regulation of neuropeptide levels in vivo. Here, we report the generation of a three-dimensional (3D) molecular model of ECE-2 using the crystal structure of neprilysin (EC 3.4.24.11) as a template. On the basis of the predictions made from the molecular model, we mutated and tested two residues, Trp 148 and Tyr 563, in the catalytic site. The mutation of Tyr 563 was found to significantly affect the catalytic activity and inhibitor binding. The molecular model was used to virtually screen a small molecule library of 13 000 compounds. Among the top-scoring compounds three were found to inhibit ECE-2 with high affinity and exhibited specificity for ECE-2 compared to neprilysin. Thus, the model provides a new useful tool to probe the active site of ECE-2 and design additional selective inhibitors of this enzyme.

18323015
Teaching resources. Using web-based discussion forums as a model of the peer-review process and a tool for assessment.
This Teaching Resource describes how to use an online asynchronous discussion as a mechanism to introduce students to the peer-review process, as well as to assess student performance and understanding. This method was applied to a graduate course on signal transduction and the Teaching Resource includes a syllabus, detailed plan for incorporating the online discussion, sample journal club questions, and sample student responses to the discussion forum, faculty responses, and student revisions.

18309063
Inquiry learning. Integrating content detail and critical reasoning by peer review.


18267983
Regulation of CB1 cannabinoid receptor trafficking by the adaptor protein AP-3.
Cannabinoid receptor 1 (CB(1)) is an abundant G protein-coupled receptor, involved in a number of physiological processes. This receptor is localized at the plasma membrane, as well as in intracellular vesicles. The trafficking events leading to this intracellular localization remain controversial. In this study, we examine the differential trafficking of CB(1) receptors and its implication on signaling. We find that the transfected tagged receptors are predominantly at the plasma membrane, whereas endogenous receptors exhibit an intracellular localization. We also find that intracellular endogenous CB(1) receptors do not have an endocytic origin. Instead, these receptors associate with the adaptor protein AP-3 and traffic to the lysosomes. siRNA-mediated AP-3delta knockdown leads to enhanced cell surface localization of CB(1) receptors. Finally, we show that CB(1) receptors in the late endosomal/lysosomal compartment are associated with heterotrimeric G proteins and mediate signal transduction. These results suggest that intracellular CB(1) receptors are functional and that their spatial segregation is likely to significantly affect receptor function.

18256033
Post-activation-mediated changes in opioid receptors detected by N-terminal antibodies.
The majority of studies examining activity-induced conformational changes in G protein-coupled receptors have focused on transmembrane helices or intracellular regions. Relatively few studies have examined the involvement of the extracellular region in general and the N-terminal region in particular in this process. To begin to address this, we generated a series of antibodies to the N-terminal region of opioid receptors. Characterization of these antibodies revealed that they differentially recognize activated receptors. Recently, we generated monoclonal antibodies that recognize regions proximal to glycosylation sites in the receptor N terminus. Characterization of these antibodies revealed that agonist treatment leads to a decrease in epitope recognition by the antibody presumably because of a movement of the region of the N terminus proximal to glycosylation sites. The time course of the decrease in antibody recognition suggested that it could be due to a post-activation-mediated event. Examination of the involvement of receptor residues in the C-tail and beta-arrestin binding using site-directed mutagenesis and cells or tissues lacking beta-arrestin 2 suggests a role for these desensitization-related mechanisms in governing antibody binding to the receptor. Thus, these N-terminally directed antibodies can differentially recognize post-activation-mediated changes in the C-terminal (intracellular) region of the receptor. Therefore, these conformation-sensitive antibodies represent powerful reagents to probe receptor activation states and provide a potential tool for identifying and characterizing new compounds of therapeutic interest.

17982578
An emerging role for the delta opioid receptor in the regulation of mu opioid receptor function.
Morphine and related opiates are commonly used in the clinical management of various types of pain. However, the antinociceptive properties of morphine are often overshadowed by the development of tolerance and dependence following its chronic use. The mechanisms underlying opiate tolerance are not fully understood, but appear to involve numerous and complex physiological adaptations. Recently, a role for the heterodimerization of mu and delta opioid receptors in the development of morphine tolerance has been proposed. This novel mechanism could help us to understand several observations, such as the critical role of delta opioid receptor regulation, the impact of delta opioid receptor binding site occupancy, and the participation of beta-arrestin2, in the development of morphine tolerance.

17419802
Use of proteomics for the identification of novel drug targets in brain diseases.
In spite of the rapid advances in the development of the new proteomic technologies, there are, to date, relatively fewer studies aiming to explore the neuronal proteome. One of the reasons is the complexity of the brain, which presents high cellular heterogeneity and a unique subcellular compartmentalization. Therefore, tissue fractionation of the brain to enrich proteins of interest will reduce the complexity of the proteomics approach leading to the production of manageable and meaningful results. In this review, general considerations and strategies of proteomics, the advantages and challenges to exploring the neuronal proteome are described and summarized. In addition, this article presents an overview of recent advances of proteomic technologies and shows that proteomics can serve as a valuable tool to globally explore the changes in brain proteome during various disease states. Understanding the molecular basis of brain function will be extremely useful in identifying novel targets for the treatment of brain diseases.

17148456
Conformation state-sensitive antibodies to G-protein-coupled receptors.
A growing body of evidence indicates that G-protein-coupled receptors undergo complex conformational changes upon agonist activation. It is likely that the extracellular region, including the N terminus, undergoes activation-dependent conformational changes. We examined this by generating antibodies to regions within the N terminus of micro-opioid receptors. We find that antibodies to the midportion of the N-terminal tail exhibit enhanced recognition of activated receptors, whereas those to the distal regions do not. The enhanced recognition is abolished upon treatment with agents that block G-protein coupling or deglycosylate the receptor. This suggests that the N-terminal region of mu receptors undergoes conformational changes following receptor activation that can be selectively detected by these region-specific antibodies. We used these antibodies to characterize micro receptor type-specific ligands and find that the antibodies accurately differentiate ligands with varying efficacies. Next, we examined if these antibodies can be used to investigate the extent and duration of activation of endogenous receptors. We find that peripheral morphine administration leads to a time-dependent increase in antibody binding in the striatum and prefrontal cortex with a peak at about 30 min, indicating that these antibodies can be used to probe the spatio-temporal dynamics of native mu receptors. Finally, we show that this strategy of targeting the N-terminal region to generate receptor conformation-specific antisera can be applied to other G(alpha)(i)-coupled (delta-opioid, CB1 cannabinoid, alpha(2A)-adrenergic) as well as G(alpha)(s)-(beta(2)-adrenergic) and G(alpha)(q)-coupled (AT1 angiotensin) receptors. Taken together, these studies describe antisera as tools that allow, for the first time, studies probing differential conformation states of G-protein-coupled receptors, which could be used to identify molecules of therapeutic interest.

17028301
Morphine administration alters the profile of hippocampal postsynaptic density-associated proteins: a proteomics study focusing on endocytic proteins.
Numerous studies have shown that drugs of abuse induce changes in protein expression in the brain that are thought to play a role in synaptic plasticity. Drug-induced plasticity can be mediated by changes at the synapse and more specifically at the postsynaptic density (PSD), which receives and transduces synaptic information. To date, the majority of studies examining synaptic protein profiles have focused on identifying the synaptic proteome. Only a handful of studies have examined the changes in synaptic profile by drug administration. We applied a quantitative proteomics analysis technique with the cleavable ICAT reagent to quantitate relative changes in protein levels of the hippocampal PSD in response to morphine administration. We identified a total of 102 proteins in the mouse hippocampal PSD. The majority of these were signaling, trafficking, and cytoskeletal proteins involved in synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory. Among the proteins whose levels were found to be altered by morphine administration, clathrin levels were increased to the largest extent. Immunoblotting and electron microscopy studies showed that this increase was localized to the PSD. Morphine treatment was also found to lead to a local increase in two other components of the endocytic machinery, dynamin and AP-2, suggesting a critical involvement of the endocytic machinery in the modulatory effects of morphine. Because alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors are thought to undergo clathrin-mediated endocytosis, we examined the effect of morphine administration on the association of the AMPA receptor subunit, GluR1, with clathrin. We found a substantial decrease in the levels of GluR1 associated with clathrin. Taken together, these results suggest that, by causing a redistribution of endocytic proteins at the synapse, morphine modulates synaptic plasticity at hippocampal glutamatergic synapses.

