21533091
Reversal of diabetic nephropathy by a ketogenic diet.
Intensive insulin therapy and protein restriction delay the development of nephropathy in a variety of conditions, but few interventions are known to reverse nephropathy. Having recently observed that the ketone 3-beta-hydroxybutyric acid (3-OHB) reduces molecular responses to glucose, we hypothesized that a ketogenic diet, which produces prolonged elevation of 3-OHB, may reverse pathological processes caused by diabetes. To address this hypothesis, we assessed if prolonged maintenance on a ketogenic diet would reverse nephropathy produced by diabetes. In mouse models for both Type 1 (Akita) and Type 2 (db/db) diabetes, diabetic nephropathy (as indicated by albuminuria) was allowed to develop, then half the mice were switched to a ketogenic diet. After 8 weeks on the diet, mice were sacrificed to assess gene expression and histology. Diabetic nephropathy, as indicated by albumin/creatinine ratios as well as expression of stress-induced genes, was completely reversed by 2 months maintenance on a ketogenic diet. However, histological evidence of nephropathy was only partly reversed. These studies demonstrate that diabetic nephropathy can be reversed by a relatively simple dietary intervention. Whether reduced glucose metabolism mediates the protective effects of the ketogenic diet remains to be determined.

19445909
Estradiol impairs hypothalamic molecular responses to hypoglycemia.
In rats and humans estradiol attenuates neuroendocrine responses to hypoglycemia. Since neuroendocrine responses to hypoglycemia are mediated by hypothalamic neurons, we assessed if estradiol attenuates hypoglycemia-induced gene expression in the hypothalamus in female ovariectomized mice. As expected, estradiol-implanted ovariectomized mice exhibited increased plasma estradiol, increased uterine weight, decreased body weight, decreased visceral adiposity, and enhanced glucose tolerance with decreased plasma insulin. Estradiol-implanted mice exhibited attenuated hypoglycemia-induced gene expression of both glucose transporter 1 (Glut1) and inhibitor of kappa beta signaling (IkappaB) in the hypothalamus but not in the liver. Estradiol also attenuated hypoglycemia-induced plasma glucagon, pituitary proopiomelanocortin (POMC), and adrenal c-fos, consistent with impaired counterregulatory responses to hypoglycemia. In addition, estradiol inhibited hypothalamic expression of carnitine palmitoyltransferase (CPT1a and CPT1c) and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4), effects that would be expected to enhance the accumulation of long-chain fatty acids and glycolysis. Taken together, these findings suggest hypothalamic mechanisms mediating attenuation of hypoglycemia-induced neuroendocrine responses.

17974626
Inhibition of agouti-related peptide expression by glucose in a clonal hypothalamic neuronal cell line is mediated by glycolysis, not oxidative phosphorylation.
The regulation of neuroendocrine electrical activity and gene expression by glucose is mediated through several distinct metabolic pathways. Many studies have implicated AMP and ATP as key metabolites mediating neuroendocrine responses to glucose, especially through their effects on AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), but other studies have suggested that glycolysis, and in particular the cytoplasmic conversion of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) to reduced NAD (NADH), may play a more important role than oxidative phosphorylation for some effects of glucose. To address these molecular mechanisms further, we have examined the regulation of agouti-related peptide (AgRP) in a clonal hypothalamic cell line, N-38. AgRP expression was induced monotonically as glucose concentrations decreased from 10 to 0.5 mm glucose and with increasing concentrations of glycolytic inhibitors. However, neither pyruvate nor 3-beta-hydroxybutyrate mimicked the effect of glucose to reduce AgRP mRNA, but on the contrary, produced the opposite effect of glucose and actually increased AgRP mRNA. Nevertheless, 3beta-hydroxybutyrate mimicked the effect of glucose to increase ATP and to decrease AMPK phosphorylation. Similarly, inhibition of AMPK by RNA interference increased, and activation of AMPK decreased, AgRP mRNA. Additional studies demonstrated that neither the hexosamine nor the pentose/carbohydrate response element-binding protein pathways mediate the effects of glucose on AgRP expression. These studies do not support that either ATP or AMPK mediate effects of glucose on AgRP in this hypothalamic cell line but support a role for glycolysis and, in particular, NADH. These studies support that cytoplasmic or nuclear NADH, uniquely produced by glucose metabolism, mediates effects of glucose on AgRP expression.

