21185269
In vivo 1H-magnetic resonance spectroscopy study of the attentional networks in autism.
Attentional dysfunction is one of the most consistent findings in individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). However, the significance of such findings for the pathophysiology of autism is unclear. In this study, we investigated cellular neurochemistry with proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy imaging ((1)H-MRS) in brain regions associated with networks subserving alerting, orienting, and executive control of attention in patients with ASD. Concentrations of cerebral N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA), creatinine+phosphocreatinine, choline-containing compounds, myo-inositol (Ins) and glutamate+glutamine (Glx) were determined by 3T (1)H-MRS examinations in 14 high-functioning medication-free adults with a diagnosis of ASD and 14 age- and IQ-matched healthy controls (HC) in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), thalamus, temporoparietal junction (TPJ), and areas near or along the intraparietal sulcus (IPS). Compared to HC group, the ASD group showed significantly lower Glx concentration in right ACC and reduced Ins concentration in left TPJ. This study provides evidence of abnormalities in neurotransmission related to networks subserving executive control and alerting of attention, functions which have been previously implicated in ASD pathogenesis.

21115834
Effects of oxytocin on recollections of maternal care and closeness.
Although the infant-caregiver attachment bond is critical to survival, little is known about the biological mechanisms supporting attachment representations in humans. Oxytocin plays a key role in attachment bond formation and maintenance in animals and thus could be expected to affect attachment representations in humans. To investigate this possibility, we administered 24 IU intranasal oxytocin to healthy male adults in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover designed study and then assessed memories of childhood maternal care and closeness--two features of the attachment bond. We found that the effects of oxytocin were moderated by the attachment representations people possess, with less anxiously attached individuals remembering their mother as more caring and close after oxytocin (vs. placebo) but more anxiously attached individuals remembering their mother as less caring and close after oxytocin (vs. placebo). These data contrast with the popular notion that oxytocin has broad positive effects on social perception and are more consistent with the animal literature, which emphasizes oxytocin's role in encoding social memories and linking those memories to the reward value of the social stimulus.

21062623
Analysis of a purported SHANK3 mutation in a boy with autism: clinical impact of rare variant research in neurodevelopmental disabilities.
There is strong evidence for rare, highly penetrant genetic variants playing an etiological role in multiple neurodevelopmental disabilities, including autism spectrum disorders. The rate of discovery of such rare variants is increasing with the advent of larger sample collections, chromosome microarray analyses, and high-throughput sequencing. As the variants that are being discovered can be highly penetrant, they lead immediately to model systems with construct validity, critical for understanding the underlying neurobiology of these conditions, which in turn can provide leads for novel therapeutic targets. Moreover, these discoveries can benefit families with information about recurrence risk, resolve concerns about etiology, provide information about associated medical issues, and engender directed advocacy for specific genetic conditions. For these reasons, diagnostic laboratories are taking advantage of research data as they are produced. In the current report, we present our molecular analysis of a child with a purported disruptive mutation in SHANK3 identified by a commercial genetic testing laboratory and we provide evidence that this was not an etiological variant. The variant was a 1-bp insertion in exon 11 of the RefSeq gene, which we then determined was inherited from a healthy mother and found in ~1% of controls. Since the variant would be predicted to disrupt the reference gene, and the penetrance of SHANK3 mutations is very high, we did follow up molecular and bioinformatic analyses and concluded that the presumptive exon containing the variant is not likely to be present in most or all SHANK3 transcripts. The results highlight difficulties that can arise with rapid translation of research findings to clinical practice. Researchers are in a unique position to generate resources with collated and curated information that can inform research, genetic testing, clinicians, and families about the best practices as pertains to rare genetic variants in neurodevelopmental disabilities. Of immediate importance would be a well-curated database of gene variation identified in large numbers of typically developing individuals and in individuals affected with neurodevelopmental disabilities. Such a database would reduce false-positive results in clinical settings, would be helpful in structure-function analyses, and would direct translational research to pathways most likely to benefit families.

20855907
Oxytocin selectively improves empathic accuracy.


20825264
The pharmacological treatment of bipolar disorder: the question of modern advances.
Lithium has been the mainstay of treatment for patients with bipolar disorder in the United States since 1970. Major treatment guidelines recommend lithium as a first-line treatment for mania and maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder, yet lithium has fallen out of favor while other agents have grown in popularity. The purpose of this review is to examine the evidence for treatments that were available in 1970 and to determine if the field has made any significant advance in the treatment of mania, bipolar depression, and maintenance. We conducted a MEDLINE search through 2009, and examined only English-language, randomized/controlled, placebo, or comparison studies. Tolerability as a factor was not considered for this review. Lithium, valproate, benzodiazepines, and antipsychotics have been reported effective for mania-which was essentially the state of the field in 1970. Despite an FDA indication for the use of lamotrigine for depression and depression maintenance, the supporting evidence is conflicting. For bipolar maintenance, the evidence is overwhelming in support of lithium and very thin for valproate and carbamazepine. There is emerging evidence that several atypical antipsychotics may have efficacy in prevention. The gold standard for treating bipolar disorder in 1970 was lithium, and the gold standard in 2009 remains lithium. Newer agents may increase our armamentarium to some extent, but it is not clear if they represent a major advance in treatment. They still need to be tested against the gold standard.

20044143
Relationship between whole blood serotonin and repetitive behaviors in autism.
This study was conducted to examine the relationship between whole blood serotonin level and behavioral symptoms in 78 subjects with autism. No significant associations were found between serotonin level and the primary behavioral outcome measures. However, a significant inverse relationship between serotonin level and self-injury was demonstrated.

18439113
Psychopharmacology of aggression in children and adolescents with autism: a critical review of efficacy and tolerability.
Autism is characterized by a clinical triad of symptoms that affect social, language, and behavioral domains. Aggression and self-injury may be associated symptoms of autism and can result in significant harm to those affected as well as marked distress for their families. The precise nature of the relationship between aggressive or self-injurious behavior (SIB) and autism remains unclear and as a result, these symptoms are treated with a broad range of pharmacological approaches. This review seeks to systematically and critically examine the evidence for the pharmacological management of aggression and SIB in children with autism spectrum disorders. The entire PubMed database was searched for English language biomedical articles on clinical trials with medication in autism spectrum disorders. Studies were selected based on the following inclusion criteria: (1) randomized placebo-controlled trials; (2) a sample population that included children and adolescents; (3) at least one standardized assessment of aggression as a primary outcome measure of the study. Twenty one trials with 12 medications were identified. Five medications produced significant improvement as compared to placebo, including tianeptine, methylphenidate, risperidone, clonidine, and naltrexone. Only risperidone and methylphenidate demonstrate results that have been replicated across at least two studies. Although many medications have been studied under placebo-controlled conditions, few produce significant improvement. Additional placebo-controlled trials are needed to increase the number of therapeutic options available in the treatment of aggression in autism.

17404128
Prenatal and perinatal risk factors for autism: a review and integration of findings.
To review the evidence for the presence of prenatal and perinatal factors that affect the risk of autism and autism spectrum disorders. Relevant articles were identified by searching MEDLINE, screening reference lists of original studies, and searching major journals likely to publish epidemiological studies on the topic. For inclusion in this review, studies required (1) a well-defined sample of cases drawn from population-based registers or cohorts; (2) standardized, prospectively collected obstetric information from birth records or registers; (3) comparison subjects drawn from the general population with information on obstetric complications collected from the same source; and (4) a standardized format for presentation of data, allowing for comparisons among studies. Main Exposures Parental characteristics and obstetric complications. Rates of autism and autism spectrum disorders. Seven epidemiological studies were identified that fulfilled inclusion criteria. The parental characteristics associated with an increased risk of autism and autism spectrum disorders included advanced maternal age, advanced paternal age, and maternal place of birth outside Europe or North America. The obstetric conditions that emerged as significant fell into 2 categories: (1) birth weight and duration of gestation and (2) intrapartum hypoxia. Evidence to suggest that parental age and obstetric conditions are associated with an increased risk of autism and autism spectrum disorders is accumulating. Although not proven as independent risk factors for autism, these variables should be examined in future studies that use large, population-based birth cohorts with precise assessments of exposures and potential confounders.

