21445249
Serum IGF-1 affects skeletal acquisition in a temporal and compartment-specific manner.
Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) plays a critical role in the development of the growing skeleton by establishing both longitudinal and transverse bone accrual. IGF-1 has also been implicated in the maintenance of bone mass during late adulthood and aging, as decreases in serum IGF-1 levels appear to correlate with decreases in bone mineral density (BMD). Although informative, mouse models to date have been unable to separate the temporal effects of IGF-1 depletion on skeletal development. To address this problem, we performed a skeletal characterization of the inducible LID mouse (iLID), in which serum IGF-1 levels are depleted at selected ages. We found that depletion of serum IGF-1 in male iLID mice prior to adulthood (4 weeks) decreased trabecular bone architecture and significantly reduced transverse cortical bone properties (Ct.Ar, Ct.Th) by 16 weeks (adulthood). Likewise, depletion of serum IGF-1 in iLID males at 8 weeks of age, resulted in significantly reduced transverse cortical bone properties (Ct.Ar, Ct.Th) by 32 weeks (late adulthood), but had no effect on trabecular bone architecture. In contrast, depletion of serum IGF-1 after peak bone acquisition (at 16 weeks) resulted in enhancement of trabecular bone architecture, but no significant changes in cortical bone properties by 32 weeks as compared to controls. These results indicate that while serum IGF-1 is essential for bone accrual during the postnatal growth phase, depletion of IGF-1 after peak bone acquisition (16 weeks) is compartment-specific and does not have a detrimental effect on cortical bone mass in the older adult mouse.

21440062
Material and mechanical properties of bones deficient for fibrillin-1 or fibrillin-2 microfibrils.
The contribution of non-collagenous components of the extracellular matrix to bone strength is largely undefined. Here we report that deficiency of fibrillin-1 or fibrillin-2 microfibrils causes distinct changes in bone material and mechanical properties. Morphometric examination of mice with hypomorphic or null mutations in fibrillin-1 or fibrillin-2, respectively, revealed appreciable differences in the postnatal shaping and growth of long bones. Fourier transform infrared imaging spectroscopy indicated that fibrillin-1 plays a predominantly greater role than fibrillin-2 in determining the material properties of bones. Biomechanical tests demonstrated that fibrillin-2 exerts a greater positive influence on the mechanical properties of bone than fibrillin-1 assemblies. Published evidence indirectly supports the notion that the above findings are mostly, if not exclusively, related to the differential control of TGF? family signaling by fibrillin proteins. Our study therefore advances our understanding of the role that extracellular microfibrils play in bone physiology and implicitly, in the pathogenesis of bone loss in human diseases caused by mutations in fibrillin-1 or -2.

21125361
Functional Interactions Among Morphologic and Tissue Quality Traits Define Bone Quality.
BACKGROUND: Advances in diagnostic and treatment regimens that aim to reduce fracture incidence will benefit from a better understanding of how bone morphology and tissue quality define whole-bone mechanical properties. QUESTIONS/PURPOSES: The goal of this article was to review what is known about the interactions among morphologic and tissue quality traits and how these interactions contribute to bone quality (ie, whole-bone mechanical function). Several questions were addressed. First, how do interactions among morphology and tissue quality traits relate to functional adaptation? Second, what are the emergent patterns of functionally adapted trait sets in long bones? Third, how effective is phenotypic integration at establishing function across a population? Fourth, what are the emergent patterns of functionally adapted trait sets in corticocancellous structures? Fifth, how do functional interactions change with aging? METHODS: A literature review was conducted with papers identified primarily through citations listed in reference sections as well as general searches using Google Scholar and PubMed. RESULTS: The interactions among adult traits or phenotypic integration are an emergent property of the compensatory mechanisms complex systems used to establish function or homeostasis. Traits are not regulated independently but vary simultaneously (ie, covary) in specific ways to establish function. This covariation results in individuals acquiring unique sets of traits to establish bone quality. CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Biologic constraints imposed on the skeletal system result in a population showing a pattern of trait sets that is predictable based on external bone size and that can be used to identify individuals with reduced bone quality relative to their bone size and body size.

20839322
Cycle-dependent matrix remodeling gene expression response in fatigue-loaded rat patellar tendons.
Expression profiling of selected matrix remodeling genes was conducted to evaluate differences in molecular response to low-cycle (100) and high-cycle (7,200) sub-failure-fatigue loading of patellar tendons. Using our previously developed in vivo patellar tendon model, tendons were loaded for 100 or 7,200 cycles and expression of selected metalloproteinases (MMPs), tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), and collagens were quantified by real-time RT-PCR at 1- and 7-day post-loading. Expression profiles were also obtained from lacerated tendons as an acute injury model. The high-cycle group showed upregulation of TIMP-1, -2, Col3a1, and Col5a1, and downregulation TIMP-4 at both time points, upregulation of MMP-2 at 7-day post-loading and downregulation of MMP-13 and -14 at 1-day post-loading, suggesting overall repair/remodeling. In contrast, the low-cycle loaded group showed upregulation of MMP-2, -3, -13, and Col12a1 at both time points, upregulation of TIMP-1, -2, -3, Col3a1, and integrin ?1 and downregulation of integrin ?11 at 1-day post-loading and upregulation of Col1a1 at 7-day post-loading, consistent with a hypertrophic (adaptive) pattern. Lacerated tendons showed a typical acute wound response with upregulation of all examined remodeling genes. Differences found in tendon response to high- and low-cycle loading are suggestive of the underlying mechanisms associated with a healthy or damaging response.

20627302
Automated image analysis method for quantifying damage accumulation in tendon.
Tendon pathology is frequently sub-clinical prior to frank rupture, denoting the need for non-destructive methods of assessing disease presence and progression. Despite the lack of clinical presentation, previous studies have observed that distinct changes to the tendon microstructure are present, and that such qualitative changes have a dose-response relationship with the level of damage accumulated. These initial findings suggest that there is value in investigating the physical nature of damage within tendon, not only to better understand the pathological process, but also to gain insight into reparative processes and develop treatments. However, a necessary first step towards carrying out these avenues of research is to develop diagnostic tools for quantitatively assessing the level of damage present. In this study, we established a dose-response relationship between a quantitative measure of structural damage and the level of global damage induced. Furthermore, we developed and validated an automated technique for quantifying matrix disorganization (damage), which correlates and co-localizes strongly with manual quantification. In combination, these findings allow us to measure the amount of damage accumulation of a region of tendon on a clinical scale, rapidly and accurately.

20232150
Second harmonic generation imaging and Fourier transform spectral analysis reveal damage in fatigue-loaded tendons.
Conventional histologic methods provide valuable information regarding the physical nature of damage in fatigue-loaded tendons, limited to thin, two-dimensional sections. We introduce an imaging method that characterizes tendon microstructure three-dimensionally and develop quantitative, spatial measures of damage formation within tendons. Rat patellar tendons were fatigue loaded in vivo to low, moderate, and high damage levels. Tendon microstructure was characterized using multiphoton microscopy by capturing second harmonic generation signals. Image stacks were analyzed using Fourier transform-derived computations to assess frequency-based properties of damage. Results showed 3D microstructure with progressively increased density and variety of damage patterns, characterized by kinked deformations at low, fiber dissociation at moderate, and fiber thinning and out-of-plane discontinuities at high damage levels. Image analysis generated radial distributions of power spectral gradients, establishing a "fingerprint" of tendon damage. Additionally, matrix damage was mapped using local, discretized orientation vectors. The frequency distribution of vector angles, a measure of damage content, differed from one damage level to the next. This study established an objective 3D imaging and analysis method for tendon microstructure, which characterizes directionality and anisotropy of the tendon microstructure and quantitative measures of damage that will advance investigations of the microstructural basis of degradation that precedes overuse injuries.

20200957
Genetically determined phenotype covariation networks control bone strength.
To identify genes affecting bone strength, we studied how genetic variants regulate components of a phenotypic covariation network that was previously shown to accurately characterize the compensatory trait interactions involved in functional adaptation during growth. Quantitative trait loci (QTLs) regulating femoral robustness, morphologic compensation, and mineralization (tissue quality) were mapped at three ages during growth using AXB/BXA Recombinant Inbred (RI) mouse strains and adult B6-i(A) Chromosome Substitution Strains (CSS). QTLs for robustness were identified on chromosomes 8, 12, 18, and 19 and confirmed at all three ages, indicating that genetic variants established robustness postnatally without further modification. A QTL for morphologic compensation, which was measured as the relationship between cortical area and body weight, was identified on chromosome 8. This QTL limited the amount of bone formed during growth and thus acted as a setpoint for diaphyseal bone mass. Additional QTLs were identified from the CSS analysis. QTLs for robustness and morphologic compensation regulated bone structure independently (ie, in a nonpleiotropic manner), indicating that each trait may be targeted separately to individualize treatments aiming to improve strength. Multiple regression analyses showed that variation in morphologic compensation and tissue quality, not bone size, determined femoral strength relative to body weight. Thus an individual inheriting slender bones will not necessarily inherit weak bones unless the individual also inherits a gene that impairs compensation. This systems genetic analysis showed that genetically determined phenotype covariation networks control bone strength, suggesting that incorporating functional adaptation into genetic analyses will advance our understanding of the genetic basis of bone strength.

20200935
Elevated serum levels of IGF-1 are sufficient to establish normal body size and skeletal properties even in the absence of tissue IGF-1.
Use of recombinant insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) as a treatment for primary IGF-1 deficiency in children has become increasingly common. When untreated, primary IGF-1 deficiency may lead to a range of metabolic disorders, including lipid abnormalities, insulin resistance, and decreased bone density. To date, results of this therapy are considered encouraging; however, our understanding of the role played by IGF-1 during development remains limited. Studies on long-term treatment with recombinant IGF-1 in both children and animals are few. Here, we used two novel transgenic mouse strains to test the long-term effects of elevated circulating IGF-1 on body size and skeletal development. Overexpression of the rat igf1 transgene in livers of mice with otherwise normal IGF-1 expression (HIT mice) resulted in approximately threefold increases in serum IGF-1 levels throughout growth, as well as greater body mass and enhanced skeletal size, architecture, and mechanical properties. When the igf1 transgene was overexpressed in livers of igf1 null mice (KO-HIT), the comparably elevated serum IGF-1 failed to overcome growth and skeletal deficiencies during neonatal and early postnatal growth. However, between 4 and 16 weeks of age, increased serum IGF-1 fully compensated for the absence of locally produced IGF-1 because body weights and lengths of KO-HIT mice became comparable with controls. Furthermore, micro-computed tomography (microCT) analysis revealed that early deficits in skeletal structure of KO-HIT mice were restored to control levels by adulthood. Our data indicate that in the absence of tissue igf1 gene expression, maintaining long-term elevations in serum IGF-1 is sufficient to establish normal body size, body composition, and both skeletal architecture and mechanical function.

20046860
Systems analysis of bone.
The genetic variants contributing to variability in skeletal traits has been well studied, and several hundred QTLs have been mapped and several genes contributing to trait variation have been identified. However, many questions remain unanswered. In particular, it is unclear whether variation in a single gene leads to alterations in function. Bone is a highly adaptive system and genetic variants affecting one trait are often accompanied by compensatory changes in other traits. The functional interactions among traits, which is known as phenotypic integration, has been observed in many biological systems, including bone. Phenotypic integration is a property of bone that is critically important for establishing a mechanically functional structure that is capable of supporting the forces imparted during daily activities. In this paper, bone is reviewed as a system and primarily in the context of functionality. A better understanding of the system properties of bone will lead to novel targets for future genetic analyses and the identification of genes that are directly responsible for regulating bone strength. This systems analysis has the added benefit of leaving a trail of valuable information about how the skeletal system works. This information will provide novel approaches to assessing skeletal health during growth and aging and for developing novel treatment strategies to reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with fragility fractures.

20018674
Involvement of the Toll-like receptor 4 pathway and use of TNF-alpha antagonists for treatment of the mucopolysaccharidoses.
Enzyme replacement therapy is currently available for three of the mucopolysaccharidoses (MPSs) but has limited effects on the skeletal lesions. We investigated the involvement of the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling pathway in the pathogenesis of MPS bone and joint disease, and the use of the anti-TNF-alpha drug, Remicade (Centocor, Inc.), for treatment. TLR4 KO (TLR4(lps-/-)) mice were interbred with MPS VII mice to produce double-KO (DKO) animals. The DKO mice had longer and thinner faces and longer femora as revealed by micro-computed tomography analysis compared with MPS VII mice. Histological analyses also revealed more organized and thinner growth plates. The serum levels of TNF-alpha were normalized in the DKO animals, and the levels of phosphorylated STAT1 and STAT3 in articular chondrocytes were corrected. These findings led us to evaluate the effects of Remicade in MPS VI rats. When initiated at 1 month of age, i.v. treatment prevented the elevation of TNF-alpha, receptor activator of NF-kappaB, and other inflammatory molecules not only in the blood but in articular chondrocytes and fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs). Treatment of 6-month-old animals also reduced the levels of these molecules to normal. The number of apoptotic articular chondrocytes in MPS VI rats was similarly reduced, with less infiltration of synovial tissue into the underlying bone. These studies revealed the important role of TLR4 signaling in MPS bone and joint disease and suggest that targeting TNF-alpha may have positive therapeutic effects.

20001599
Interindividual variation in functionally adapted trait sets is established during postnatal growth and predictable based on bone robustness.
Adults acquire unique sets of morphological and tissue-quality bone traits that are predictable based on robustness and deterministic of strength and fragility. How and when individual trait sets arise during growth has not been established. Longitudinal structural changes of the metacarpal diaphysis were measured for boys and girls from 3 mo to 8 yr of age using hand radiographs obtained from the Bolton-Brush collection. Robustness varied approximately 2-fold among boys and girls, and individual values were established by 2 yr of age, indicating that genetic and environmental factors controlling the relationship between growth in width and growth in length were established early during postnatal growth. Significant negative correlations between robustness and relative cortical area and a significant positive correlation between robustness and a novel measure capturing the efficiency of growth indicated that coordination of the subperiosteal and endocortical surfaces was responsible for this population acquiring a narrow range of trait sets that was predictable based on robustness. Boys and girls with robust diaphyses had proportionally thinner cortices to minimize mass, whereas children with slender diaphyses had proportionally thicker cortices to maximize stiffness. Girls had more slender metacarpals with proportionally thicker cortices compared with boys at all prepubertal ages. Although postnatal growth patterns varied in fundamentally different ways with sex and robustness, the dependence of trait sets on robustness indicated that children sustained variants affecting subperiosteal growth because they shared a common biological factor regulating functional adaptation. Considering the natural variation in acquired trait sets may help identify determinants of fracture risk, because age-related bone loss and gain will affect slender and robust structures differently.

19939387
Early response to tendon fatigue damage accumulation in a novel in vivo model.
This study describes the development and application of a novel rat patellar tendon model of mechanical fatigue for investigating the early in vivo response to tendon subfailure injury. Patellar tendons of adult female Sprague-Dawley rats were fatigue loaded between 1-35N using a custom-designed loading apparatus. Patellar tendons were subjected to Low-, Moderate- or High-level fatigue damage, defined by grip-to-grip strain measurement. Molecular response was compared with that of a laceration-repair injury. Histological analyses showed that progression of tendon fatigue involves formation of localized kinked fiber deformations at Low damage, which increased in density with presence of fiber delaminations at Moderate damage, and fiber angulation and discontinuities at High damage levels. RT-PCR analysis performed at 1- and 3-day post-fatigue showed variable changes in type I, III and V collagen mRNA expression at Low and Moderate damage levels, consistent with clinical findings of tendon pathology and were modest compared with those observed at High damage levels, in which expression of all collagens evaluated were increased markedly. In contrast, only type I collagen expression was elevated at the same time points post-laceration. Findings suggest that cumulative fatigue in tendon invokes a different molecular response than laceration. Further, structural repair may not be initiated until reaching end-stage fatigue life, where the repair response may unable to restore the damaged tendon to its pre-fatigue architecture.

19257833
Serum IGF-1 determines skeletal strength by regulating subperiosteal expansion and trait interactions.
Strong correlations between serum IGF-1 levels and fracture risk indicate that IGF-1 plays a critical role in regulating bone strength. However, the mechanism by which serum IGF-1 regulates bone structure and fracture resistance remains obscure and cannot be determined using conventional approaches. Previous analysis of adult liver-specific IGF-1-deficient (LID) mice, which exhibit 75% reductions in serum IGF-1 levels, showed reductions in periosteal circumference, femoral cross-sectional area, cortical thickness, and total volumetric BMD. Understanding the developmental sequences and the resultant anatomical changes that led to this adult phenotype is the key for understanding the complex relationship between serum IGF-1 levels and fracture risk. Here, we identified a unique developmental pattern of morphological and compositional traits that contribute to bone strength. We show that reduced bone strength associated with low levels of IGF-1 in serum (LID mice) result in impaired subperiosteal expansion combined with impaired endosteal apposition and lack of compensatory changes in mineralization throughout growth and aging. We show that serum IGF-1 affects cellular activity differently depending on the cortical surface. Last, we show that chronic reductions in serum IGF-1 indirectly affect bone strength through its effect on the marrow myeloid progenitor cell population. We conclude that serum IGF-1 not only regulates bone size, shape, and composition during ontogeny, but it plays a more fundamental role-that of regulating an individual's ability to adapt its bone structure to mechanical loads during growth and development.

19150422
Type 2 diabetic mice demonstrate slender long bones with increased fragility secondary to increased osteoclastogenesis.
Type 2 diabetics often demonstrate normal or increased bone mineral density, yet are at increased risk for bone fracture. Furthermore, the anti-diabetic oral thiazolidinediones (PPARgamma agonists) have recently been shown to increase bone fractures. To investigate the etiology of possible structural and/or material quality defects, we have utilized a well-described mouse model of Type 2 diabetes (MKR). MKR mice exhibit muscle hypoplasia from birth with reduced mass by the pre-diabetic age of 3 weeks. A compensatory hyperplasia ensues during early (5 weeks) development; by 6-8 weeks muscle is normal in structure and function. Adult whole-bone mechanical properties were determined by 4-point bending to test susceptibility to fracture. Micro-computed tomography and cortical bone histomorphometry were utilized to assess static and dynamic indices of structure, bone formation and resorption. Osteoclastogenesis assays were performed from bone marrow-derived non-adherent cells. The 8-week and 16-week, but not 3-week, male MKR had slender (i.e., narrow relative to length) femurs that were 20% weaker (p<0.05) relative to WT control femurs. Tissue-level mineral density was not affected. Impaired periosteal expansion during early diabetes resulted from 250% more, and 40% less of the cortical bone surface undergoing resorption and formation, respectively (p<0.05). Greater resorption persisted in adult MKR on both periosteal and endosteal surfaces. Differences were not limited to cortical bone as the distal femur metaphysis of 16 week MKR contained less trabecular bone and trabecular separation was greater than in WT by 60% (p<0.05). At all ages, MKR marrow-derived cultures demonstrated the ability for enhanced osteoclast differentiation in response to M-CSF and RANK-L. Taken together, the MKR mouse model suggests that skeletal fragility in Type 2 diabetes may arise from reduced transverse bone accrual and increased osteoclastogenesis during growth that is accelerated by the diabetic/hyperinsulinemic milieu. Further, these results emphasize the importance of evaluating diabetic bone based on morphology in addition to bone mass.

19082857
Phenotypic integration of skeletal traits during growth buffers genetic variants affecting the slenderness of femora in inbred mouse strains.
Compensatory interactions among adult skeletal traits are critical for establishing strength but complicate the search for fracture susceptibility genes by allowing many genetic variants to exist in a population without loss of function. A better understanding of how these interactions arise during growth will provide new insight into genotype-phenotype relationships and the biological controls that establish skeletal strength. We tested the hypothesis that genetic variants affecting growth in width relative to growth in length (slenderness) are coordinated with movement of the inner bone surface and matrix mineralization to match stiffness with weight-bearing loads during postnatal growth. Midshaft femoral morphology and tissue-mineral density were quantified at ages of 1 day and at 4, 8, and 16 weeks for a panel of 20 female AXB/BXA recombinant inbred mouse strains. Path Analyses revealed significant compensatory interactions among outer-surface expansion rate, inner-surface expansion rate, and tissue-mineral density during postnatal growth, indicating that genetic variants affecting bone slenderness were buffered mechanically by the precise regulation of bone surface movements and matrix mineralization. Importantly, the covariation between morphology and mineralization resulted from a heritable constraint limiting the amount of tissue that could be used to construct a functional femur. The functional interactions during growth explained 56-99% of the variability in adult traits and mechanical properties. These functional interactions provide quantitative expectations of how genetic or environmental variants affecting one trait should be compensated by changes in other traits. Variants that impair this process or that cannot be fully compensated are expected to alter skeletal growth leading to underdesigned (weak) or overdesigned (bulky) structures.

18855037
Fourier transform infrared imaging microspectroscopy and tissue-level mechanical testing reveal intraspecies variation in mouse bone mineral and matrix composition.
Fracture susceptibility is heritable and dependent upon bone morphology and quality. However, studies of bone quality are typically overshadowed by emphasis on bone geometry and bone mineral density. Given that differences in mineral and matrix composition exist in a variety of species, we hypothesized that genetic variation in bone quality and tissue-level mechanical properties would also exist within species. Sixteen-week-old female A/J, C57BL/6J (B6), and C3H/HeJ (C3H) inbred mouse femora were analyzed using Fourier transform infrared imaging and tissue-level mechanical testing for variation in mineral composition, mineral maturity, collagen cross-link ratio, and tissue-level mechanical properties. A/J femora had an increased mineral-to-matrix ratio compared to B6. The C3H mineral-to-matrix ratio was intermediate of A/J and B6. C3H femora had reduced acid phosphate and carbonate levels and an increased collagen cross-link ratio compared to A/J and B6. Modulus values paralleled mineral-to-matrix values, with A/J femora being the most stiff, B6 being the least stiff, and C3H having intermediate stiffness. In addition, work-to-failure varied among the strains, with the highly mineralized and brittle A/J femora performing the least amount of work-to-failure. Inbred mice are therefore able to differentially modulate the composition of their bone mineral and the maturity of their bone matrix in conjunction with tissue-level mechanical properties. These results suggest that specific combinations of bone quality and morphological traits are genetically regulated such that mechanically functional bones can be constructed in different ways.

18703864
Genetic variation in mouse femoral tissue-level mineral content underlies differences in whole bone mechanical properties.
A/J mice, as compared to C57BL/6J (B6) mice, have a significantly greater total femoral mineral (ash) content which correlates with an increased femoral stiffness (resistance to deformation), but also with an increased brittleness (catastrophic failure). To determine if this whole bone variation in mineral content is indicative of significant mineral and/or matrix variation at the tissue level, femora from 16-week-old female A/J and B6 mice were isolated, embedded in PMMA, sectioned and mounted on barium fluoride infrared windows for FTIRI analyses. In addition, preliminary studies of femora from C3H/HeJ (C3H) mice were conducted, since they have an ash content intermediate to A/J and B6. Mean values for mineral-to-matrix ratio were significantly different for A/J (8.4 +/- 0.8) and B6 (7.5 +/- 0.4), as were values for collagen cross-link maturity (1.8 +/- 0.05 and 3.2 +/- 0.1, respectively). C3H mice appeared to have a mineral-to-matrix ratio intermediate of A/J and B6, and cross-link maturity greater than both A/J and B6. B6 femora had similar carbonate-to-amide ratios, carbonate-to-mineral ratios and acid phosphate levels. Thus, whole bone differences in mineral content are concurrent with tissue-level variation in mineral content and collagen maturity in inbred mice. The greater stiffness and brittleness of A/J femora are likely due to differential biological control (osteoblast activity) of the amount of mineral.

18683881
Subrupture tendon fatigue damage.
The mechanical and microstructural bases of tendon fatigue, by which damage accumulates and contributes to degradation, are poorly understood. To investigate the tendon fatigue process, rat flexor digitorum longus tendons were cyclically loaded (1-16 N) until reaching one of three levels of fatigue damage, defined as peak clamp-to-clamp strain magnitudes representing key intervals in the fatigue life: i) Low (6.0%-7.0%); ii) Moderate (8.5%-9.5%); and iii) High (11.0%-12.0%). Stiffness, hysteresis, and clamp-to-clamp strain were assessed diagnostically (by cyclic loading at 1-8 N) before and after fatigue loading and following an unloaded recovery period to identify mechanical parameters as measures of damage. Results showed that tendon clamp-to-clamp strain increased from pre- to post-fatigue loading significantly and progressively with the fatigue damage level (p <or= 0.010). In contrast, changes in both stiffness and hysteresis were significant only at the High fatigue level (p <or= 0.043). Correlative microstructural analyses showed that Low level of fatigue was characterized by isolated, transverse patterns of kinked fiber deformations. At higher fatigue levels, tendons exhibited fiber dissociation and localized ruptures of the fibers. Histomorphometric analysis showed that damage area fraction increased significantly with fatigue level (p <or= 0.048). The current findings characterized the sequential, microstructural events that underlie the tendon fatigue process and indicate that tendon deformation can be used to accurately assess the progression of damage accumulation in tendons.

18348700
Genetic variation in the patterns of skeletal progenitor cell differentiation and progression during endochondral bone formation affects the rate of fracture healing.
These studies examined how genetic differences that regulate architectural and bone material properties would be expressed during fracture healing and determine whether any of these features would affect rates of healing as defined by regain of strength. Controlled fractures were generated in three inbred strains of mice: A/J, C57Bl/6J (B6), and C3H/HeJ (C3H). Both the A/J and B6 strains showed faster healing than the C3H strain based on regains in strength and stiffness. Strain-specific architectural features such as moment of inertia, cross-sectional area, and cortical thickness were all recapitulated during the development of the callus tissues. None of these traits were directly relatable to rates of fracture healing. However, rates of healing were related to variations in the temporal patterns of chondrogenic and osteogenic lineage development. The B6 strain expressed the highest percentage of cartilage gene products and had the longest period of chondrocyte maturation and hypertrophy. The slowest healing strain (C3H) had the shortest period of chondrogenic development and earliest initiation of osteogenic development. Although the A/J strain showed an almost identical pattern of chondrogenic development as the C3H strain, A/J initiated osteogenic development several days later than C3H during fracture healing. Long bone growth plates at 28 days after birth showed similar strain-specific variation in cartilage tissue development as seen in fracture healing. Thus, the B6 strain had the largest growth plate heights, cell numbers per column, and the largest cell size, whereas the C3H columns were the shortest, had the smallest number of cells per column, and showed the smallest cell sizes. These results show that (1) different strains of mice express variations of skeletal stem cell lineage differentiation and (2) that these variations affect the rate of fracture healing.

17557179
Genetic randomization reveals functional relationships among morphologic and tissue-quality traits that contribute to bone strength and fragility.
We examined femora from adult AXB/BXA recombinant inbred (RI) mouse strains to identify skeletal traits that are functionally related and to determine how functional interactions among these traits contribute to genetic variability in whole-bone stiffness, strength, and toughness. Randomization of A/J and C57BL/6J genomic regions resulted in each adult male and female RI strain building mechanically functional femora by assembling unique sets of morphologic and tissue-quality traits. A correlation analysis was conducted using the mean trait values for each RI strain. A third of the 66 correlations examined were significant, indicating that many bone traits covaried or were functionally related. Path analysis revealed important functional interactions among bone slenderness, cortical thickness, and tissue mineral density. The path coefficients describing these functional relations were similar for both sexes. The causal relationship among these three traits suggested that cellular processes during growth simultaneously regulate bone slenderness, cortical thickness, and tissue mineral density so that the combination of traits is sufficiently stiff and strong to satisfy daily loading demands. A disadvantage of these functional interactions was that increases in tissue mineral density also deleteriously affected tissue ductility. Consequently, slender bones with high mineral density may be stiff and strong but they are also brittle. Thus, genetically randomized mouse strains revealed a basic biological paradigm that allows for flexibility in building bones that are functional for daily activities but that creates preferred sets of traits under extreme loading conditions. Genetic or environmental perturbations that alter these functional interactions during growth would be expected to lead to loss of function and suboptimal adult bone quality.

