21443463
Regulation and Function of FoxO Transcription Factors in Normal and Cancer Stem Cells: What Have We Learned?
Forkhead FoxO transcription factors exert critical biological functions in response to genotoxic stress. In mammals four FoxOs proteins are known. FoxOs induce cell cycle arrest, repair damaged DNA, or initiate apoptosis by modulating genes that control these processes. In particular, FoxO proteins are critical regulators of oxidative stress by modulating the expression of several anti-oxidant enzyme genes. This function of FoxO is essential for the regulation of stem and progenitor cell pool in the hematopoietic system and possibly other stem cells. Overall functions of FoxOs are consistent with their role as tumor suppressors as has been shown in animal models. As such, FoxOs are suppressed in various cancer cells. However, recent reports strongly suggest that FoxOs are critical for the maintenance of leukemic stem cells. The diverse functions of FoxOs are orchestrated by tight regulations of expression and activity of its family members. Here we discuss the recent progress in understanding the function of FoxOs specifically in normal and cancer stem cells and what is known about the regulation of these proteins in various cell types and tissues including in the physiological setting of primary cells in vivo. These studies underscore the importance of regulation of FoxO proteins and whether these factors play distinct or redundant functions. Understanding how FoxOs are modulated is critical for devising novel therapies based on targeted restoration/or inhibition of FoxO function in cancer and in other diseased cells in which FoxOs have a key function.

21113129
ROS-mediated amplification of AKT/mTOR signalling pathway leads to myeloproliferative syndrome in Foxo3(-/-) mice.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) participate in normal intracellular signalling and in many diseases including cancer and aging, although the associated mechanisms are not fully understood. Forkhead Box O (FoxO) 3 transcription factor regulates levels of ROS concentrations, and is essential for maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells. Here, we show that loss of Foxo3 causes a myeloproliferative syndrome with splenomegaly and increased hematopoietic progenitors (HPs) that are hypersensitive to cytokines. These mutant HPs contain increased ROS, overactive intracellular signalling through the AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin signalling pathway and relative deficiency of Lnk, a negative regulator of cytokine receptor signalling. In vivo treatment with ROS scavenger N-acetyl-cysteine corrects these biochemical abnormalities and relieves the myeloproliferation. Moreover, enforced expression of Lnk by retroviral transfer corrects the abnormal expansion of Foxo3(-/-) HPs in vivo. Our combined results show that loss of Foxo3 causes increased ROS accumulation in HPs. In turn, this inhibits Lnk expression that contributes to exaggerated cytokine responses that lead to myeloproliferation. Our findings could explain the mechanisms by which mutations that alter Foxo3 function induce malignancy. More generally, the work illustrates how deregulated ROS may contribute to malignant progression.

19679564
Stra13 regulates oxidative stress mediated skeletal muscle degeneration.
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD), caused by loss of dystrophin is characterized by progressive muscle cell necrosis. However, the mechanisms leading to muscle degeneration in DMD are poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that Stra13 protects muscle cells from oxidative damage, and its absence leads to muscle necrosis in response to injury in Stra13-deficient mice. Interestingly, Stra13-/- mutants express elevated levels of TNFalpha, reduced levels of heme-oxygenase-1, and display apparent signs of oxidative stress prior to muscle death. Moreover, Stra13-/- muscle cells exhibit an increased sensitivity to pro-oxidants, and conversely, Stra13 overexpression provides resistance to oxidative damage. Consistently, treatment with anti-oxidant N-acetylcysteine ameliorates muscle necrosis in Stra13-/- mice. We also demonstrate that Stra13 expression is elevated in muscles from dystrophin-deficient (mdx) mice, and mdx/Stra13-/- double mutants exhibit an early onset of muscle degeneration. Our studies underscore the importance of oxidative stress-mediated muscle degeneration in muscular dystrophy, and reveal the contribution of Stra13 in maintenance of muscle integrity.

18707226
Oxidative stress in the regulation of normal and neoplastic hematopoiesis.
Recent evidence suggests that oxidative stress contributes significantly to the regulation of hematopoietic cell homeostasis. In particular, red blood cells and hematopoietic stem cells are highly sensitive to deregulated accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Unchecked ROS accumulation often leads to hemolysis, that is, to destruction and shortened life span of red blood cells. In addition, the process of erythroid cell formation is sensitive to ROS accumulation. Similarly, ROS buildup in hematopoietic stem cells compromises their function as a result of potential damage to their DNA leading to loss of quiescence and alterations of hematopoietic stem cell cycling. These abnormalities may lead to accelerated aging of hematopoietic stem cells or to hematopoietic malignancies.

18424439
Foxo3 is essential for the regulation of ataxia telangiectasia mutated and oxidative stress-mediated homeostasis of hematopoietic stem cells.
Unchecked accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) compromises maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells. Regulation of ROS by the tumor suppressor protein ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is critical for preserving the hematopoietic stem cell pool. In this study we demonstrate that the Foxo3 member of the Forkhead Box O (FoxO) family of transcription factors is essential for normal ATM expression. In addition, we show that loss of Foxo3 leads to defects in hematopoietic stem cells, and these defects result from an overaccumulation of ROS. Foxo3 suppression of ROS in hematopoietic stem cells is mediated partly by regulation of ATM expression. We identify ROS-independent modulations of ATM and p16(INK4a) and ROS-mediated activation of p53/p21(CIP1/WAF1/Sdi1) tumor suppressor pathways as major contributors to Foxo3-null hematopoietic stem cells defects. Our studies demonstrate that Foxo3 represses ROS in part via regulation of ATM and that this repression is required for maintenance of the hematopoietic stem cell pool.

17671650
Foxo3 is required for the regulation of oxidative stress in erythropoiesis.
Erythroid cells accumulate hemoglobin as they mature and as a result are highly prone to oxidative damage. However, mechanisms of transcriptional control of antioxidant defense in erythroid cells have thus far been poorly characterized. We observed that animals deficient in the forkhead box O3 (Foxo3) transcription factor died rapidly when exposed to erythroid oxidative stress-induced conditions, while wild-type mice showed no decreased viability. In view of this striking finding, we investigated the potential role of Foxo3 in the regulation of ROS in erythropoiesis. Foxo3 expression, nuclear localization, and transcriptional activity were all enhanced during normal erythroid cell maturation. Foxo3-deficient erythrocytes exhibited decreased expression of ROS scavenging enzymes and had a ROS-mediated shortened lifespan and evidence of oxidative damage. Furthermore, loss of Foxo3 induced mitotic arrest in erythroid precursor cells, leading to a significant decrease in the rate of in vivo erythroid maturation. We identified ROS-mediated upregulation of p21(CIP1/WAF1/Sdi1) (also known as Cdkn1a) as a major contributor to the interference with cell cycle progression in Foxo3-deficient erythroid precursor cells. These findings establish an essential nonredundant function for Foxo3 in the regulation of oxidative stress, cell cycle, maturation, and lifespan of erythroid cells. These results may have an impact on the understanding of human disorders in which ROS play a role.

