18760458
Myosin light chain is a novel shrimp allergen, Lit v 3.
Shellfish allergy is a prevalent, long-lasting disorder usually persisting throughout life. Few options are available for treatment, and avoidance is the only therapy recommended. We sought to identify relevant crustacean allergens for use as diagnostic and safe immunotherapeutic agents for subjects with shellfish allergy. Thirty-eight patients were selected with immediate allergic reactions to shrimp and increased shrimp-specific serum IgE levels. One-dimensional and 2-dimensional electrophoresis of shrimp extracts were followed by IgE immunoblotting. Protein identification was done with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-mass spectrometry and Edman sequencing. A cDNA library was generated from white pacific shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei) and screened with primers designed on the basis of internal sequences obtained from 2-dimensional tryptic digests. Full-length cDNA clones were isolated from the library and sequenced. Recombinant protein was expressed and tested with sera from patients with shrimp allergy. Immunoblotting demonstrated IgE binding to a 20-kDa shrimp protein by 21 (55%) of 38 sera. Tryptic digestion of the protein followed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-mass spectrometric analysis and Edman sequencing identified it as a myosin light chain (MLC). Screening of the shrimp cDNA library resulted in isolation of a novel protein cDNA. Open reading frame translation provided the amino acid sequence of a new allergenic shrimp protein with high similarity to Bla g 8 (cockroach MLC). Recombinant protein was recognized by 17 patients, confirming the allergenicity of shrimp MLC. We have identified and cloned a new major shrimp allergen, Lit v 3.0101, an MLC protein.

19522997
Identification of two pistachio allergens, Pis v 1 and Pis v 2, belonging to the 2S albumin and 11S globulin family.
IgE-mediated allergic reactions to pistachio appear to be occurring more frequently; however, little is known about its allergenic proteins. We attempted to identify pistachio allergens and to clone the encoding genes. Pistachio proteins were extracted and separated by SDS-PAGE. Immunolabelling was performed with sera from 28 pistachio-allergic individuals. Proteins of interest were further analysed by Edman sequencing and mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (MS/MS). In parallel, a cDNA library was generated from immature pistachios and screened with primers designed on the basis of internal sequences and peptide spectra. Full-length cDNA clones were isolated from the library and sequenced. Recombinant proteins were expressed and tested with sera from pistachio-allergic patients. Nineteen out of 28 patients (68%) showed IgE binding to a 7 kDa protein fraction, while 14 (50%) showed specific IgE to a 32 kDa protein fraction. Analysis by Edman sequencing and MS/MS revealed that these proteins were homologue to the cashew nut allergens Ana o 3 and Ana o 2, respectively. Screening of the pistachio cDNA library resulted in isolation of novel protein cDNAs. Open-reading frame translation provided the complete amino acid sequences of two new allergenic pistachio proteins. Recombinant proteins were recognized by six out of six selected patients. Therefore, these new allergens were named Pis v 1 and Pis v 2 by the Allergen Nomenclature Subcommittee. Novel allergens in pistachio, Pis v 1 and Pis v 2, which belong to 2S albumin and 11S globulin family, respectively, were isolated and the genes encoding these allergens were identified.

18186809
Identification of amino acids critical for IgE-binding to sequential epitopes of bovine kappa-casein and the similarity of these epitopes to the corresponding human kappa-casein sequence.
The delineation of allergenic (i.e. IgE-binding) epitopes in cow's milk proteins and the amino acids (AAs) critical for IgE-binding is necessary to understand better the structural properties of an allergen and to develop more efficacious immunotherapeutic reagents. Furthermore, this information may enable us to understand better cross-sensitivity between different allergens. Eleven peptides, 10-14 AAs in length, representing the IgE-binding epitopes of kappa-casein were synthesized on a derivatized cellulose membrane with single AA substitutions at each position. Membranes were incubated with pooled sera from 15 milk-allergic patients and individual sera from 10 of the patients included in the pool. For 10/11 allergenic peptides, one to five different single AA substitutions resulted in elimination of IgE-binding of pooled patient sera. Overall at least one mutated peptide could be found for these 10 IgE-binding sites that resulted in a reduction of IgE-binding in at least 80% of the patients who recognized the native protein. Furthermore, the IgE-binding region at AA104-112 on bovine kappa-casein showed a high degree of similarity with the human kappa-casein, respectively, including the AAs critical for IgE-binding. This finding suggests that critical AAs should be assessed with both pooled and individual patient sera to account for the B-cell epitope heterogeneity between patients, with cow's milk allergy. In addition, we identified two potentially cross-reactive peptides between bovine and human caseins of unknown clinical relevance.

17573723
Specificity of IgE antibodies to sequential epitopes of hen's egg ovomucoid as a marker for persistence of egg allergy.
Approximately two-thirds of egg-allergic infants become tolerant within the first 5 years of life. We sought (1) to compare the recognition of sequential (linear) and conformational binding sites of ovomucoid, ovalbumin and ovotransferrin, by IgE antibodies of children with persistent and transient egg allergy, (2) to identify immunodominant IgE-and IgG-binding epitopes of ovomucoid, and (3) to compare epitope-specificity of IgE antibodies between patients with differing natural histories of egg allergy. Using immunodot-blots or ImmunoCAPs, IgE-antibodies against conformational (native) and sequential (reduced and alkylated) egg proteins were determined at the time of clinical reactivity in patients who retained their allergy and in those who developed clinical tolerance. IgE- and IgG-binding epitopes were mapped for ovomucoid using overlapping decapeptides on SPOTs membranes. Recognition of the major IgE-binding epitopes were compared between patients with differing natural histories of egg allergy. The patients with long-lasting egg allergy had a higher concentrations of IgE antibodies against sequential and native ovomucoid and ovalbumin than the children who subsequently gained tolerance (P < 0.01). Four major IgE-binding epitopes were identified in ovomucoid at amino acid 1-10, 9-20, 47-56, and 113-124. IgE antibodies of all seven patients with persistent egg allergy recognized these epitopes whereas none of the 11 children who outgrew their egg allergy did so. Patients with persistent egg allergy develop IgE antibodies against more sequential and conformational epitopes of ovomucoid and ovalbumin. The presence of serum IgE antibodies to specific sequential epitopes of ovomucoid may be used as a screening instrument for persistent egg allergy.

17517096
Mutational analysis of immunoglobulin E-binding epitopes of beta-casein and beta-lactoglobulin showed a heterogeneous pattern of critical amino acids between individual patients and pooled sera.
For immunotherapeutic approaches, 'critical' amino acids (AAs) within allergenic epitopes are replaced with alternate AAs to eliminate IgE antibody binding. To determine the critical AAs for IgE binding in beta-casein and beta-lactoglobulin (BLG). Peptides of 10-14 AAs in length were synthesized on a derivatized cellulose membrane with single AA substitutions (alanine or glycine) at each position. Membranes were incubated with a pool of sera from 15 cow's milk-allergic patients and individual sera from six of the 15 patients. In cases where no decrease in binding occurred with a single AA substitution, peptides with two AA substitutions were generated and labelled. Using pooled patient sera, single AA substitutions led to complete elimination of binding to six of 11 peptides for beta-casein and to all six peptides for BLG. Substituting two AAs led to an elimination of binding to four of the remaining five beta-casein epitopes. However, in three of the 11 modified beta-casein peptides and five of the six BLG peptides, no decrease in IgE binding occurred in at least one individual patient. For these patients, critical AAs other than those defined by the patient serum pool were identified, indicating a heterogeneous pattern of IgE recognition. These results indicate that AAs critical for IgE binding are more heterogeneous than initially defined by pooled milk-allergic patient sera. For future immunotherapeutic interventions with mutated peptides, critical AAs should also be identified with individual patient sera to account for heterogeneity of IgE binding between patients.

