18690019
Mechanism of PLC-mediated Kir3 current inhibition.
A large number of ion channels maintain their activity through direct interactions with phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2). For such channels, hydrolysis of PIP2 causes current inhibition. It has become controversial whether the inhibitory effects on channel activity represent direct effects of PIP2 hydrolysis or of downstream PKC action. We studied Phospholipase C (PLC)-dependent inhibition of G protein-activated inwardly rectifying K+ (Kir3) channels. By monitoring simultaneously channel activity and PIP2 hydrolysis, we determined that both direct PIP2 depletion and PKC actions contribute to Kir3 current inhibition. We show that the PKC-induced effects strongly depend on PIP2 levels in the membrane. At the same time, we show that PKC destabilizes Kir3/PIP2 interactions and enhances the effects of PIP2 depletion on channel activity. These results demonstrate that PIP2 depletion and PKC-mediated effects reinforce each other and suggest that both of these interdependent mechanisms contribute to Kir3 current inhibition. This mechanistic insight may explain how even minor changes in PIP2 levels can have profound effects on Kir3 activity. We also show that stabilization of Kir3/PIP2 interactions by Gbetagamma attenuates both PKC and Gq-mediated current inhibition, suggesting that diverse pathways regulate Kir3 activity through modulation of channel interactions with PIP2.

18478542
Interactions between the L1 cell adhesion molecule and ezrin support traction-force generation and can be regulated by tyrosine phosphorylation.
An Ig superfamily cell-adhesion molecule, L1, forms an adhesion complex at the cell membrane containing both signaling molecules and cytoskeletal proteins. This complex mediates the transduction of extracellular signals and generates actin-mediated traction forces, both of which support axon outgrowth. The L1 cytoplasmic region binds ezrin, an adapter protein that interacts with the actin cytoskeleton. In this study, we analyzed L1-ezrin interactions in detail, assessed their role in generating traction forces by L1, and identified potential regulatory mechanisms controlling ezrin-L1 interactions. The FERM domain of ezrin binds to the juxtamembrane region of L1, demonstrated by yeast two-hybrid interaction traps and protein binding analyses in vitro. A lysine-to-leucine substitution in this domain of L1 (K1147L) shows reduced binding to the ezrin FERM domain. Additionally, in ND7 cells, the K1147L mutation inhibits retrograde movement of L1 on the cell surface that has been linked to the generation of the traction forces necessary for axon growth. A membrane-permeable peptide consisting of the juxtamembrane region of L1 that can disrupt endogenous L1-ezrin interactions inhibits neurite extension of cerebellar cells on L1 substrates. Moreover, the L1-ezrin interactions can be modulated by tyrosine phosphorylation of the L1 cytoplasmic region, namely, Y1151, possibly through Src-family kinases. Replacement of this tyrosine together with Y1176 with either aspartate or phenylalanine changes ezrin binding and alters colocalization with ezrin in ND7 cells. Collectively, these data suggest that L1-ezrin interactions mediated by the L1 juxtamembrane region are involved in traction-force generation and can be regulated by the phosphorylation of L1.

