21536742
Pretransplant CSF-1 therapy expands recipient macrophages and ameliorates GVHD after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation.
Acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) results from the attack of host tissues by donor allogeneic T cells and is the most serious limitation of allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (allo-HCT). Host antigen-presenting cells are thought to control the priming of alloreactive T cells and the induction of acute GVHD after allo-HCT. However, whereas the role of host DC in GVHD has been established, the contribution of host macrophages to GVHD has not been clearly addressed. We show that, in contrast to DC, reducing of the host macrophage pool in recipient mice increased donor T cell expansion and aggravated GVHD mortality after allo-HCT. We also show that host macrophages that persist after allo-HCT engulf donor allogeneic T cells and inhibit their proliferation. Conversely, administration of the cytokine CSF-1 before transplant expanded the host macrophage pool, reduced donor T cell expansion, and improved GVHD morbidity and mortality after allo-HCT. This study establishes the unexpected key role of host macrophages in inhibiting GVHD and identifies CSF-1 as a potential prophylactic therapy to limit acute GVHD after allo-HCT in the clinic.

21105125
Melanoma immunotherapy.
Melanoma immunotherapy has been an area of intense research for decades, and this work is now yielding more tangible results for patients. Work has focused on 4 main areas: cytokine therapy, administration of immune-modulating antibodies, adoptive T-cell therapy, and vaccines. Cytokine therapy is an established treatment for advanced melanoma, and immune-modulating antibodies have recently emerged as an exciting new area of drug development with efficacy now established in a phase III trial. Adoptive T-cell therapy provides the proof of principle that T cells can attack and eliminate tumors. It has been challenging, however, to adapt this treatment for widespread use. Vaccines have generally yielded poor results, but intratumor pathogen-based strategies have shown encouraging results in recent trials, perhaps due to stronger immune stimulation. A review of the field of melanoma immunotherapy is provided here, with emphasis on those agents that have reached clinical testing. Novel strategies to induce the immune system to attack melanomas are reviewed. In the future, it is envisioned that immunotherapy will have further application in combination with cytotoxic and targeted therapies.

20515292
Herpes simplex virus oncolytic vaccine therapy in melanoma.
Advanced melanoma is a devastating disease with a five year survival for Stage IV disease of 10 - 20% and a median survival of 6 - 18 months depending on sub-stage. Current FDA approved therapies demonstrate limited response rates, few complete remissions and no proven survival benefit. New therapies are clearly needed. JSI/34.5-/47-/GM-CSF is a herpes simplex virus-1 (OncoVEX(GM-CSF)) oncolytic vaccine therapy designed to induce local and systemic anti-tumor immune responses. Evolution of current herpes simplex virus oncolytic vaccines from preclinical to clinical studies from 1994 to 2010. Preclinical studies have shown that herpes simplex virus-1 oncolytic vaccines generate local tumor destruction through the lytic action of the virus and local and systemic immune responses. Phase I studies demonstrated limited toxicities with no neurotoxicty. Phase II studies demonstrated durable regressions in patients with metastatic melanoma. A Phase III trial in melanoma is ongoing to determine clinical effectiveness, and a Phase III trial in head and neck cancer will initiate during 2010. JSI/34.5-/47-/GM-CSF is a new generation herpes simplex virus-1 oncolytic vaccine that demonstrates direct tumor lysis and systemic immune responses. Early clinical studies have yielded preliminary evidence of activity.

