21460517
Factors associated with unprotected exposure to 2009 H1N1 influenza A among healthcare workers during the first wave of the pandemic.
Protecting healthcare workers (HCWs) from occupational exposure to 2009 H1N1 influenza was a challenge. During the first wave of the pandemic, many HCWs reported that they had been exposed to 2009 H1N1 when they were not using respiratory personal protective equipment. Unprotected exposures tended to be more frequent among HCWs caring for patients with atypical clinical presentations.

20442598
Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae.
Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae, particularly Klebsiella pneumoniae, are rapidly emerging as significant health care-associated pathogens. Because of the adverse impact that infection caused by these extensively drug-resistant organisms can have on patient outcomes, efforts to prevent further transmission of these pathogens within the health care setting are urgently needed. In this article, the epidemiology, detection, and prevention of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae are described.

18973455
Outcomes of carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae infection and the impact of antimicrobial and adjunctive therapies.
Carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae is an emerging healthcare-associated pathogen. To describe the epidemiology of and clinical outcomes associated with carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection and to identify risk factors associated with mortality among patients with this type of infection. Mount Sinai Hospital, a 1,171-bed tertiary care teaching hospital in New York City. Two matched case-control studies. In the first matched case-control study, case patients with carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection were compared with control patients with carbapenem-susceptible K. pneumoniae infection. In the second case-control study, patients who survived carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection were compared with those who did not survive, to identify risk factors associated with mortality among patients with carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection. There were 99 case patients and 99 control patients identified. Carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection was independently associated with recent organ or stem-cell transplantation (P=.008), receipt of mechanical ventilation (P=.04), longer length of stay before infection (P=.01), and exposure to cephalosporins (P=.02) and carbapenems (P<.001). Case patients were more likely than control patients to die during hospitalization (48% vs 20%; P<.001) and to die from infection (38% vs 12%; P<.001). Removal of the focus of infection (ie, debridement) was independently associated with patient survival (P=.002). The timely administration of antibiotics with in vitro activity against carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae was not associated with patient survival. Carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection is associated with numerous healthcare-related risk factors and with high mortality. The mortality rate associated with carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection and the limited antimicrobial options for treatment of carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection highlight the need for improved detection of carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae infection, identification of effective preventive measures, and development of novel agents with reliable clinical efficacy against carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae.

18840090
Strategies to prevent transmission of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in acute care hospitals.


18763846
Clostridium difficile: a reemerging pathogen.
Clostridium difficile is an important health care-associated pathogen, especially among older adults who are disproportionately affected by C difficile infection (CDI). During the current decade, there has been a dramatic increase in the incidence and severity of health care-associated CDI. These clinically relevant changes are temporally associated with the emergence of a hypervirulent strain of C difficile that has now become widely disseminated. The increased burden of disease and incidence of adverse patient outcomes and the limitations of currently available therapeutic options highlight the importance of preventing transmission of C difficile within health care facilities, including long-term care facilities where unique challenges for infection prevention may be present. Prevention efforts should address patient-specific and facility-related risk factors. This article reviews the epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of C difficile infection.

17520559
Pseudo-outbreak of Bordetella bronchiseptica infection associated with contaminated rabbit blood used as a broth culture supplement.
A cluster of clinical isolates of Bordetella bronchiseptica was identified by microbiology laboratory personnel. A clinical and molecular epidemiologic study determined that this cluster represented a pseudo-outbreak due to bacterial contamination of rabbit blood used as a broth culture supplement. This pseudo-outbreak highlights the importance of quality assurance programs in the laboratory.

