21219560
Liver and combined lung and liver transplantation for cystic fibrosis: Analysis of the UNOS database.
Arnon R, Annunziato RA, Miloh T, Padilla M, Sogawa H, Batemarco L, Willis A, Suchy F, Kerkar N. Liver and combined lung and liver transplantation for cystic fibrosis: Analysis of the UNOS database. Pediatr Transplantation 2011: 15: 254-264. © 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Abstract:? A proportion of patients with CF develop cirrhosis and portal hypertension. LT and combined LLT are rarely performed in patients with CF. To determine the outcome of LT and LLT in patients with CF. Patients with CF who had LT or LLT between 10/1987 and 5/2008 were identified from UNOS database. A total of 182 children (<18?yr) and 48 adults underwent isolated LT for CF. Seven more children and eight adults with CF underwent combined LLT. One- and five-yr patient and graft survival were not significantly different in patients who underwent LT in comparison with patients who underwent LLT (patient survival: LT; 83.9%, 75.7%, LLT; 80%, 80%; graft survival: LT; 76.1%, 67.0%, LLT; 80.0%, 80.0%, respectively). The two major causes of death after LT were pulmonary disease (15 patients, 22.7%) and hemorrhage (12 patients, 18.2%). Bilirubin was identified as a risk factor for death, and previous liver transplant and prolonged cold ischemic time were identified as risk factors for graft loss in LT patients. LT is a viable option for children and young adults with CF and end-stage liver disease. Outcome of LLT patients with CF was comparable to the outcome of patients with CF who underwent isolated LT.

20441725
A randomized controlled trial of the safety and promise of cognitive-behavioral therapy using imaginal exposure in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder resulting from cardiovascular illness.
We investigated the physical safety of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) utilizing imaginal exposure in patients who suffered from posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) following a life-threatening cardiovascular event. In this phase I, prospective, single-blind trial conducted from April 2006 through April 2008, we randomly assigned 60 patients to receive either 3 to 5 sessions of imaginal exposure therapy (experimental group) or 1 to 3 educational sessions only (control group). Criteria for PTSD and other mental health disorders were evaluated according to DSM-IV using the full Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID). Safety assessments included patients' blood pressure and pulse before and after each study session and the occurrence of deaths, hospitalizations, repeat myocardial infarctions, or invasive procedures. We also investigated the effects of the treatment on PTSD symptoms (Impact of Event Scale and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Scale), depression (Beck Depression Inventory-II), and the Clinical Global Impressions-Severity of Illness (CGI-S) scale. There were no significant differences between the experimental and control groups and between exposure and nonexposure sessions in any of the safety measures. In addition, confidence intervals were such that the nonsignificant effects of exposure therapy were not of clinical concern. For example, the mean difference in systolic pressure between control and exposure sessions was 0.5 mm Hg (95% CI, -6.1 to 7.1 mm Hg). Nonsignificant improvements were found on all psychiatric measures in the experimental group, with a significant improvement in CGI-S in the entire cohort (mean score difference, -0.6; 95% CI, -1.1 to -0.1; P = .02) and a significant improvement in PTSD symptoms in a subgroup of patients with acute unscheduled cardiovascular events and high baseline PTSD symptoms (mean score difference, -1.2; 95% CI, -2.0 to -0.3; P = .01). Cognitive-behavioral therapy that includes imaginal exposure is safe and promising for the treatment of posttraumatic stress in patients with cardiovascular illnesses who are traumatized by their illness. clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00364910.

18794506
Site matters: winning the hearts and minds of patients in a cardiology clinic.
In medical care settings, mental health symptoms of depression and distress are associated with poor medical outcomes, yet they are often underrecognized. Authors sought to examine the effect of having immediate mental-health screening in the cardiology clinic. The Patient Health Questionnaire and the Impact of Event Scale were used to screen for depression and distress in 316 patients at an urban cardiology clinic. Because of poor follow-up rates, a psychiatrist was placed on the premises of the cardiology clinic to facilitate referrals. Placing a psychiatrist within the cardiology clinic significantly improved the rate of successful referrals. Because 45 patients (14%) endorsed suicidal thoughts, authors conclude that mental health screening programs should include an immediate evaluation by a clinician.

18435606
Transitioning health care responsibility from caregivers to patient: a pilot study aiming to facilitate medication adherence during this process.
Transition in pediatric transplant recipients consists of both a physical shift in medical care location as well as a transition in health care responsibilities from caregivers to patients. The purpose of the present study was to test the feasibility of a pilot intervention aiming to facilitate the transition in health care responsibilities from caregivers to patients while patients are still receiving pediatric services. Twenty-two patients were enrolled in a two-session educational protocol aiming to facilitate transition of responsibility. Patients were recruited from an outpatient transplant clinic. Ten were referred because of suspected difficulty in transitioning of care, and 12 were consecutively recruited without any specific a priori concerns. Medication adherence, measured through the use of standard deviations of tacrolimus blood levels, and ALT levels were the medical outcome measures. Complete data are available for 20 patients. Mean ALT levels improved after the follow-up period. For referred patients, adherence and ALT levels improved. Standard deviation of tacrolimus decreased from 3.33 to 2.23, t = 2.52, p = 0.04. Mean ALT decreased from 120.33 to 63.99, t = 3.01, p = 0.01. Maximal ALT values decreased overall from 284.10 to 101.20, t = 2.61, p = 0.03. Our findings suggest that targeted education regarding transition in responsibility for adolescents' own health care is feasible in the outpatient environment and may assist families who are facing this potentially challenging process. A randomized, controlled study with a substantial number of enrolled patients is needed to establish the efficacy of this or other approaches.

18049321
Examining the effects of maternal chronic illness on child well-being in single parent families.
Chronic illness is highly prevalent among adults with children. It is therefore important to understand how parental illness may or may not have an impact on affected families. Findings thus far have suggested that differences between children with and without a sick parent are minimal, but there are individual and familial moderators of outcome. It is unclear whether these results are generalizable to single-parent families. The purpose of the present study was to examine whether maternal chronic illness affects multiple aspects of child functioning in a large, ethnically diverse sample of single-parent families compared to those not affected by illness. Potential moderators of differences, including maternal distress, parenting variables (aggravation and warmth), functional impairment related to illness, and demographic characteristics were also tested. Using data from the Child Development Study (CDS), 812 mother-child pairs were studied. Mothers completed measures of child internalizing, externalizing, and positive behaviors, while children completed a measure of depression. The results indicated that overall there were no differences between children with or without a sick mother on the measures of well-being. Higher symptom levels among both cohorts were associated with maternal distress and aggravation in parenting only. However, children with a sick mother were more likely to have a consultation due to emotional difficulties. Several areas for future work on how illness affects single-parent families were identified such as prospectively studying illnesses with a variable course and determining which protective factors promote resiliency for children in this difficult situation.

17885569
Childhood abuse, nonadherence, and medical outcome in pediatric liver transplant recipients.
The study assessed the relationship between a history of child abuse, nonadherence to medications, and medical outcome in children who had a liver transplant. Abuse history for children and adolescents ages 8 to 21 who underwent a liver transplantation at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York was obtained in interviews in 2002. Adherence to tacrolimus was assessed from January 1 to December 31, 2003 by computing the SD of a series of medication blood levels for each patient. Biopsy-proven rejection episodes, degree of fluctuation of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and maximal ALT levels were recorded as indicators of medical outcome. Of 72 eligible patients, 56 were evaluated. Five had documented abuse. Abused children were less adherent to their medication regimen (p = .02; 95% confidence interval [CI] -2.66 to -0.24), had poor disease control (higher maximal ALT, p <.01; 95% CI -613.72 to -249.55), had greater fluctuation in ALT levels (p <.01; 95% CI -151.19 to -65.91), and suffered more biopsy-proven rejection episodes (two episodes in the abused cohort versus none in the rest) in 2003. A history of child abuse is a significant risk factor for poor outcome posttransplantation and should be evaluated routinely. Adherence to medications can be a target for intervention in patients with a history of abuse.

17682356
A comparison of weight-control behaviors in African American and Caucasian women.
The purpose of the present study was to examine whether there are overall differences in help-seeking, in specific weight control behaviors used, and in predictors of seeking professional help for weight loss between African American and Caucasian women. Cross-sectional study. Participants were recruited from community sources in Philadelphia. One hundred twenty female participants were studied. Of these, 58% were African American. Participants completed a packet of measures assessing weight-control behaviors, body mass index, co-morbid medical conditions, socioeconomic status, disordered eating behavior, and body image. Caucasian women were significantly more likely to be classified as high help-seekers than were African American women, X2 = 4.27, P = .04. Caucasian women were more likely to use commercial weight loss programs, X2 = 4.25, P = .04, while African American women were more likely to try herbal supplements for weight control, X2 = 6.21, P = .01. Higher scores on a measure of body image, responsiveness to the food environment, and the disinhibition and hunger subscales of the Three-Factor Eating Questionnaire (TFEQ) predicted seeking professional help for Caucasian women only. The results indicate that African American and Caucasian women differ in overall weight-control efforts as well as in specific behaviors used. Furthermore, interactions were found between some factors associated with help-seeking and ethnicity. A better understanding of how available programs could be augmented to address the needs of African American and other minority groups is necessary.

17663682
Adherence and medical outcomes in pediatric liver transplant recipients who transition to adult services.
Non-adherence to medications is associated with poor medical outcomes in adolescent transplant recipients. It is unclear whether non-adherence is further compromised when transplant recipients transition to the adult health care system. The purpose of the present study was to examine whether adherence changes during transition. We reviewed the medical records of 14 recently transitioned patients and compared their adherence and corresponding medical outcomes before and after transition. These outcomes were also compared with two cohorts of patients receiving care solely in pediatric or adult services. Medication adherence, measured through the use of standard deviations of tacrolimus blood levels, was examined for all patients. We found that adherence to tacrolimus significantly decreased after transition. After transitioning, patients furthermore exhibited poorer adherence than patients in the other two cohorts did over time. This small retrospective study suggests that the period of transition from pediatric to adult transplant clinics is a vulnerable one. Larger, prospective investigations of the transition process are necessary before recommendations are made regarding interventions.

17336789
Taking action to lose weight: toward an understanding of individual differences.
The purpose of the present study was to understand differences in obese/overweight individuals who do and do not seek ongoing external assistance for weight loss. Help-seeking was examined as a dichotomous and as a continuous variable. Measures of body mass index, comorbid medical conditions, socioeconomic status, psychological distress, disordered eating behavior, body image, and obesity-related knowledge were administered to a community sample of 120 overweight women (age: 22-65 y, BMI: 25-63 kg/m(2)). Fewer predictors of help-seeking were identified when measuring help-seeking as a dichotomy than when measuring it as a continuum. All predictors were from psychosocial domains, with obesity-related knowledge being the strongest, most consistent predictor. Help-seeking for weight control in a community sample of overweight and obese individuals appears to be motivated by psychological aspects of obesity, rather than obesity's physical or medical burden.

18435607
Improving adherence to medications in pediatric liver transplant recipients.
We describe results from a clinical program, which aimed at improving adherence to medications in children who had a liver transplant. We followed the medical outcomes of 23 children and adolescents who participated in a clinical adherence-improvement protocol during the years 2001-2002. The protocol included identification of non-adherent patients by examining tacrolimus blood levels and intervention by increasing the frequency of clinic visits for non-adherent patients. In the two-yr preintervention (1999-2000), there was no improvement in any of the outcomes. After the intervention, the number of patients with high alanine aminotransferase levels (100 and above) decreased significantly, from eight before the intervention to four afterwards. Other outcomes, including the number of rejection episodes (three before, none after) and the degree of adherence to tacrolimus, also improved, but the improvement did not reach statistical significance. Although non-adherent patients were called to clinic more often under the protocol, the intervention did not lead to increased outpatient costs. This adherence--improvement intervention appears to be promising in improving outcomes in pediatric liver transplant recipients. Larger, controlled studies are needed to establish the efficacy of this or other approaches.

