19387847
Rapid response to perturbation of chromosome frequencies in natural populations of Drosophila robusta.
Perturbation of gene or chromosome frequencies in natural populations is one of the most powerful ways of demonstrating whether natural selection maintains genetic polymorphism or if other evolutionary forces are at work. Gene arrangement frequencies in two natural populations of Drosophila robusta were perturbed multiple times by releasing adult flies with contrasting karyotypes and carefully monitoring post-perturbation presence of hybrids and chromosome frequencies. In all cases, frequencies quickly returned to pre-perturbation levels, and in the following sampling periods, no evidence of the introduced chromosomes was apparent. Analysis of post-perturbation frequency changes included tests for heterogeneity among chromosome arrangements in rates of return to equilibrium values using population admixture analysis. In several cases, significant heterogeneity was detected indicating some form of natural selection was operating. Technical challenges to carrying out perturbation experiments in the wild are also discussed.

17248850
Studies of Linkage in Populations. IX. the Effect of Altitude on X-Chromosomal Arrangement Combinations in DROSOPHILA ROBUSTA.
Data are presented concerning the gene arrangements in both arms of the X-chromosome of Drosophila robusta in eight altitudinal transects. The major change appears to be the increase of gene arrangement XL-1 (and decrease in XL, sometimes also XL-2) with increasing altitude. In each transect only one combination of XL-1 with a right arm arrangement seems primarily responsible for the increases with altitudinal change, and only one combination of XL for the decreases. In four of the transects the increasing combination appears to be XL-1.XR, XL-1.XR-2 in the other four. A substantial decrease with elevation in XL-2.XR-2 occurs only in the four areas where XL-1.XR exhibits the major increase. These results indicate that interactions between arrangements play a significant role in the adaptation of this species to altitude. The interactions appear related to the X-chromosomal linkage equilibriums in these regions. The data also suggest that the species employs its inversions in different methods of adaptation in the Appalachian Mountains from those it uses in other parts of the range.

