21146680
Diagnostic value of coronary artery calcium scoring in low-intermediate risk patients evaluated in the emergency department for acute coronary syndrome.
Early and accurate triage of patients with possible ischemic chest pain remains challenging in the emergency department because current risk stratification techniques have significant cost and limited availability. The aim of this study was to determine the diagnostic value of the coronary artery calcium score (CACS) for the detection of obstructive coronary artery disease (CAD) in low- to intermediate-risk patients evaluated in the emergency department for suspected acute coronary syndromes. A total of 225 patients presenting to the emergency department with acute chest pain and Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) scores <4 who underwent non-contrast- and contrast-enhanced coronary computed tomographic angiography were included. CACS was calculated from the noncontrast scan using the Agatston method. The prevalence of obstructive CAD (defined from the contrast scan as ? 50% maximal reduction in luminal diameter in any segment) was 9% and increased significantly with higher scores (p <0.01 for trend). CACS of 0 were observed in 133 patients (59%), of whom only 2 (1.5%) had obstructive CAD. The diagnostic accuracy of CACS to detect obstructive CAD was good, with an area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve of 0.88 and a negative predictive value of 99% for a CACS of 0. In a multivariate model, CACS was independently associated with obstructive CAD (odds ratio 7.01, p = 0.02) and provided additional diagnostic value over traditional CAD risk factors. In conclusion, CACS appears to be an effective initial tool for risk stratification of low- to intermediate-risk patients with possible acute coronary syndromes, on the basis of its high negative predictive value and additive diagnostic value.

20494662
Comparison of frequency of inducible myocardial ischemia in patients presenting to emergency department with typical versus atypical or nonanginal chest pain.
The present study was designed to assess the value of the presenting symptom of "typical" anginal pain, "atypical/nonanginal" pain, or the lack of chest pain in predicting the presence of inducible myocardial ischemia using cardiac stress testing in emergency department patients being evaluated for possible acute coronary syndrome. We performed a retrospective observational study of adult patients who were evaluated for acute coronary syndrome in an emergency department chest pain unit. The presenting symptoms were obtained from a structured questionnaire administered before stress testing. Patient chest pain was categorized according to the presence of substernal chest pain or discomfort that was provoked by exertion or emotional stress and was relieved by rest and/or nitroglycerin. Chest pain was classified as "typical" angina if all 3 descriptors were present and "atypical" or "nonanginal" if <3 descriptors were present. All patients underwent serial biomarker and cardiac stress testing before discharge. A total of 2,525 patients met the eligibility criteria. Inducible ischemia on stress testing was found in 33 (14%, 95% confidence interval 10% to 19%) of the 231 patients who had typical anginal pain, 238 (11%, 95% confidence interval 10% to 13%) of the 2,140 patients presenting with atypical/nonanginal chest pain, and 25 (16%, 95% confidence interval 11% to 22%) of the 153 patients who had no complaint of chest pain on presentation. Compared to patients with atypical or no chest pain, patients with typical chest pain were not significantly more likely to have inducible ischemia on stress testing (likelihood ratio +1.25, 95% confidence interval 0.89 to 1.78). In conclusion, in our study, the patients who presented with "typical" angina were no more likely to have inducible myocardial ischemia on stress testing than patients with other presenting symptoms.

19231025
The limited utility of routine cardiac stress testing in emergency department chest pain patients younger than 40 years.
This is a study designed to evaluate the utility of routine provocative cardiac testing in low-risk young adult (younger than 40 years) patients evaluated for an acute coronary syndrome in an emergency department (ED) setting. This was a retrospective observational study of patients aged 23 to 40 years who were evaluated for acute coronary syndrome in an ED-based chest pain unit from March 2004 to September 2007. All patients had serial cardiac biomarker testing to rule out myocardial infarction and then underwent provocative cardiac testing to identify the presence of myocardial ischemia. Patients were excluded from the study if they had known coronary artery disease, had ECG findings diagnostic of myocardial infarction or ischemia, or self-admitted, or tested positive for cocaine use. Of the 220 patients who met inclusion criteria, 6 patients (2.7%; 95% confidence interval 1% to 5.8%) had positive stress test results. Among these 6 patients, 4 underwent subsequent coronary angiography that demonstrated no obstructive coronary disease, suggesting the initial provocative study was falsely positive. For the remaining 2 patients, no diagnostic angiography was performed. Discounting the patients who had negative angiography results, only 2 of 220 study patients (0.9%; 95% confidence interval 0.1% to 3.2%) had a provocative test result that was positive for myocardial ischemia. In our study, a combination of age younger than 40 years, nondiagnostic ECG result, and 2 sets of negative cardiac biomarker results at least 6 hours apart identified a patient group with a very low rate of true-positive provocative testing. Routine stress testing added little to the diagnostic evaluation of this patient group and was falsely positive in all patients who consented to diagnostic coronary angiography (4 of 6 cases).

17512864
Images in emergency medicine. Hemorrhagic pancreatitis.


