19800298
Synovial sarcoma of the thoracic spine.
Synovial sarcoma is an uncommon malignant neoplasm occurring chiefly in young adults. It often presents as a solid well-circumscribed soft-tissue mass in the extremities of young adults. Despite its proximity to joints, it has been well established that the tumor cells do not display features of synovial differentiation but instead appear to have a primitive epithelial phenotype. There is no report of a lower thoracic paravertebral synovial sarcoma in an adult male. To describe our management in a patient with a synovial sarcoma of the thoracic spine and to review previously published cases. Case report. A 60-year-old man presented with a 5-month history of right upper quadrant abdominal pain radiating to his back in a band-like fashion; shortness of breath on exertion; and increasing pain when standing, sitting, or walking. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a large right-sided paraspinal mass sitting on the eighth and ninth ribs, pressing on the T9 vertebrae and abutting the T7 and T8 vertebral level exhibiting "Triple Intensity." Plain films demonstrated a right-sided paraspinal mass extending from the T7-T8 level to T10. Bone scintigraphy showed increased uptake on the right thoracic spine at T7-T8 to T10. Computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed a right paraspinal mass with lytic changes in the T9 vertebral bodies. A right-sided thoracotomy was performed, and the patient underwent subsequent radiation therapy. Absence of the tumor was shown by an MRI scan after the operation. Complete resolution of the patient's complaints was achieved. The diagnosis is supported by plain radiographs, bone scintigraphy, magnetic resonance and CT imaging studies, and histologic and immunohistochemical evidence. Synovial sarcomas are rarely present in the paravertebral region of the thoracic spine. A careful radiographic study of the tumor permitted early preliminary diagnosis, confirmed upon histopathologic analysis. Despite lytic changes, removal of a periosteal layer permitted sparing of the vertebral bodies.

18831501
Video-assisted thoracic surgery lobectomy: centers of excellence or excellence of centers?
VATS lobectomy, as defined by CALGB 39802, provides the same oncologic surgery as that performed through a thoracotomy. Standardizing the terminology is the first step that must be undertaken to standardize the operation. VATS lobectomy is the use of technology to aid in performing an established procedure. This technology and development of the skills required to perform a safe VATS lobectomy must be carefully monitored to protect the quality of the product, which ultimately is defined as patient outcome. "Center of Excellence" is a determination used in several other specialties to provide quality assurance for new procedures or technologies, or for those surgeries not widely performed, such as esophageal surgery. The authors believe that the profession should designate Centers of Excellence based on the credentialing guideline discussed earlier. The authors do believe that the current residency and fellowship training will provide, in time, ample surgeons skilled in VATS lobectomy. As these surgeons become certified and disseminate throughout the country, it is expected that VATS lobectomy will be readily available in most institutions. Over time this will allow VATS lobectomy to evolve from specific Centers of Excellence to a broader group of hospitals based on widespread availability ofa surgeon certified in VATS lobectomy. During this transition, the authors would encourage the community of surgeons performing this procedure to submit their statistics to a nationwide database. This will provide an excellent database for evidence-based medicine. Such rigorous data collection should permit thoracic surgeons to be appropriately compensated for performing these technically challenging procedures.

18222219
Airway stents.
Airway stenting has been well used in the treatment and palliation of patients with malignant stenoses and to a lesser extent in those with benign disease causing airway compromise. Stents are either constructed of silicone or metal, usually a nitinol, a nickel and titanium alloy. The different categories of stents have positive and negative attributes that play a role in choosing the proper stent. This article aims to discuss these issues with regards to malignant and benign tracheobronchial disease.

