21346734
Pimozide augmentation of clozapine inpatients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder unresponsive to clozapine monotherapy.
Despite its superior efficacy, clozapine is helpful in only a subset of patients with schizophrenia unresponsive to other antipsychotics. This lack of complete success has prompted the frequent use of various clozapine combination strategies despite a paucity of evidence from randomized controlled trials supporting their efficacy. Pimozide, a diphenylbutylpiperidine, possesses pharmacological and clinical properties distinct from other typical antipsychotics. An open-label trial of pimozide adjunctive treatment to clozapine provided promising pilot data in support of a larger controlled trial. Therefore, we conducted a double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-designed 12-week trial of pimozide adjunctive treatment added to ongoing optimal clozapine treatment in 53 patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder partially or completely unresponsive to clozapine monotherapy. An average dose of 6.48?mg/day of pimozide was found to be no better than placebo in combination with clozapine at reducing Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale total, positive, negative, and general psychopathology scores. There is no suggestion from this rigorously conducted trial to suggest that pimozide is an effective augmenting agent if an optimal clozapine trial is ineffective. However, given the lack of evidence to guide clinicians and patients when clozapine does not work well, more controlled trials of innovative strategies are warranted.

20634363
The effects of hypertension and body mass index on cognition in schizophrenia.
In recent years there has been a greater appreciation of the elevated prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors in the schizophrenia population and the liability some treatments have for their development. These vascular risk factors are in turn important risk factors in the development of dementia and more subtle cognitive impairments. However, their impact on the cognitive functions of patients with schizophrenia remains underexplored. The authors investigated whether vascular risk factors influence the cognitive impairments of schizophrenia and whether their effects on cognition in schizophrenia are different from those observed in nonpsychiatric comparison subjects. The authors compared 100 patients with schizophrenia and 53 comparison subjects on cognitive test performance in 2×2 matrices composed of individual vascular risk factors and group (schizophrenia patients and comparison subjects). Hypertension exerted a significant negative effect on immediate delayed and recognition memory in both groups. Patients with schizophrenia and hypertension were adversely affected in recognition memory, whereas comparison subjects were not. A body mass index above 25 was associated with negative effects on delayed memory in both groups, although the association fell short of statistical significance. Given that patients with schizophrenia have a higher prevalence of vascular risk factors than the general population and are undertreated for them, treatment of these risk factors may significantly improve cognitive outcome in schizophrenia.

19896333
Cortical neuritic plaques and hippocampal neurofibrillary tangles are related to dementia severity in elderly schizophrenia patients.
Cognitive decline has been described in elderly patients with schizophrenia, but the underlying pathology remains unknown. Some studies report increases in plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, but there is no evidence for an increased risk for Alzheimer's disease (AD) in elderly schizophrenics. Models of a decreased cerebral reserve suggest that increases in AD-related neuropathology below the threshold for a neuropathological diagnosis could be related to dementia severity in elderly schizophrenia patients. We tested this hypothesis in 110 autopsy specimens of schizophrenia patients, without a neuropathological diagnosis of AD or other neurodegenerative disorders. Furthermore, we assessed the effects of apolipoprotein E (ApoE) status, a known genetic risk factor for AD. Measures of density of neuritic plaques were obtained in five cortical regions, and the degree of hippocampal neurofibrillary tangles was rated. Dementia severity was measured prior to postmortem using the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale. multivariate analyses of variance were conducted with the factors dementia severity, by ApoE4 carrier status. Hippocampal neurofibrillary tangles correlated with increased dementia severity (p<.05). Neuritic plaque density increased with greater dementia severity (p<.005), and ApoE4 carrier status (p<.005), and these differences were magnified by the ApoE4 carrier status (p<.01). Even below the threshold for a neuropathological diagnosis of AD, neuritic plaques and hippocampal neurofibrillary tangles are associated with dementia severity in schizophrenia patients, even more so in the presence of genetic risk factors, suggesting that a decreased cerebral reserve in elderly schizophrenics may increase susceptibility for dementia.

19622684
Changes in relative glucose metabolic rate following cortisol administration in aging veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder: an FDG-PET neuroimaging study.
The authors aimed to examine central glucocorticoids effects by measuring relative glucose metabolic rate (rGMR) in the hippocampus, amygdala, and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the relationship between amygdala and ACC activity. The participants were male combat veterans with and without PTSD, 52 to 81 years old. The authors utilized randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled examinations of the rGMR response to 17.5 mg hydrocortisone (HCORT) using 2-Deoxy-2-[(18)F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) Positron Emission Tomography (PET) neuroimaging. Group differences in hemispheric laterality of rGMR were observed following placebo administration, reflecting lower rGMR in the right hippocampus and ventral amygdala, and higher rGMR in the left ventral amygdala in the PTSD+ group compared to the PTSD- group. HCORT reduced these group differences in laterality. The net effect of HCORT was to restore a normal inverse association between the ACC and amygdala in the PTSD+ group, but disrupt this neural network in the PTSD- group. The magnitude of improvement in working memory correlated with greater hemispheric laterality in the dorsal amygdala following HCORT in both groups. The restorative effects of HCORT on metabolism and working memory provide a rationale for examining the therapeutic benefits of glucocorticoid manipulation in aging PTSD patients.

19196927
Depression in schizophrenia: methodological artifact or distinct feature of the illness?
In schizophrenia, there is a conceptual overlap between depressive and negative symptoms. This study examined the dimensional structure of depressive symptoms and their overlap with negative symptoms in a large sample of older medicated schizophrenia outpatients. Self-reported depression was obtained with the Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II). Three components from this scale (i.e., dysphoria, psychosomatic and regret domains) showed excellent factorability and good consistency. However, adequate construct validity and correlates with outcomes were found for the dysphoria and regret domains, but not for the total score or the psychosomatic domain. Thus, the evaluation of domains within the BDI-II provides a more pure and clinically-relevant assessment of depressed mood in schizophrenia than the use of this scale as a whole.

18766013
Temporal characteristics of tract-specific anisotropy abnormalities in schizophrenia.
White matter abnormalities have been detected using diffusion tensor imaging in a variety of locations in the brains of patients with schizophrenia. Studies that included first-episode patients report less severe or no abnormalities but more pronounced deficits in chronic patients. Here, we investigated these abnormalities in a very large group of patients with schizophrenia who had both large ranges in age and in duration of illness. A highly reproducible diffusion tensor imaging tractography technique was used to quantify the fractional anisotropy of the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum as well as the bilateral pyramidal tracts. We found a decline in fractional anisotropy that correlated with the duration of illness in the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum but not in the pyramidal tracts. The findings suggest that there are white matter tract-specific degenerative mechanisms that may be present at the point of illness onset and may progress throughout the illness.

18571378
Communication abnormalities predict functional outcomes in chronic schizophrenia: differential associations with social and adaptive functions.
Communication abnormalities are hallmark features of schizophrenia. Despite the prevalence and persistence of these symptoms, little is known about their functional implications. In this study, we examined, in a sample of chronically institutionalized schizophrenia patients (N=317), whether two types of communication abnormalities (i.e., verbal underproductivity and disconnected speech) had differential relationships with social and adaptive outcomes. Baseline ratings of verbal underproductivity, disconnected speech, global cognitive performance, and clinical symptoms, were entered into stepwise regression analyses to examine their relationship with 2.5 year social and adaptive outcomes. At baseline, disconnected speech was significantly associated with socially impolite behavior, while verbal underproductivity was associated with social disengagement and impaired friendships. Both types of communication abnormalities were significantly associated with other types of social skills. Verbal underproductivity predicted follow-up social skills, social engagement, and friendships, accounting for more variance than. cognition or symptoms. In contrast to social outcomes, adaptive outcomes were predicted by baseline neurocognition and clinical symptoms, but not communication abnormalities. These findings provide evidence for specific relationships of communication disorder subtypes with diverse impairments in social functions. In this chronically institutionalized sample, communication disorder was a stronger predictor of social, but not adaptive, outcomes than neurocognition or clinical symptoms.

18558643
Diffusion tensor imaging findings in first-episode and chronic schizophrenia patients.
Comparisons of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) data between first-episode and chronic schizophrenia patients assessed in different studies have led to the suggestion that the decreased fractional anisotropy observed in chronic schizophrenia patients is less pronounced in first-episode patients. However, such comparisons of imaging data generated across studies are susceptible to numerous confounders, which may limit the interpretation of any differences. In order to address these issues and determine whether the DTI abnormalities of chronic schizophrenia are present at illness onset, the authors conducted a DTI investigation of the largest cohort of first-episode schizophrenia patients yet reported in conjunction with a group of chronic schizophrenia patients and healthy subjects for comparison. Fractional anisotropy data generated by diffusion tensor imaging with a 3-T Siemens Allegra head-dedicated MRI system were compared between 40 first-episode schizophrenia patients and 39 age- and gender-matched healthy comparison subjects and between 40 chronic schizophrenia patients and 40 age- and gender-matched healthy comparison subjects. The following regions of interest were assessed: forceps minor (bilaterally), forceps major (bilaterally), inferior longitudinal fasciculus (bilaterally), and the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum. In most regions, chronic schizophrenia patients showed significant or trend-level lower fractional anisotropy than healthy comparison subjects, whereas the first-episode schizophrenia patients showed only trend-level lower fractional anisotropy in the inferior longitudinal fasciculus. The cross-sectional data reported here suggest less widespread changes in white matter at illness onset in schizophrenia which progress in more chronic states. More definitive conclusions will require follow-up imaging of first-episode schizophrenia patients.

18204342
A pilot study of adjunctive atomoxetine treatment to second-generation antipsychotics for cognitive impairment in schizophrenia.
Relationships between altered prefrontal cortical dopamine, norepinephrine, and some of the cognitive impairments of schizophrenia support an approach for pharmacological remediation of cognitive symptoms through manipulations of prefrontal cortical dopamine and norepinephrine. Atomoxetine, a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, produces a widespread increase in brain norepinephrine and a secondary and selective increase in prefrontal dopamine. Given this, we evaluated atomoxetine's cognitive effects in a pilot placebo-controlled trial in patients with schizophrenia. Moreover, a functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation was undertaken to assess the neural mechanisms underlying the cognitive effects of atomoxetine. Twenty participants with schizophrenia were randomized to treatment with placebo or atomoxetine 80 mg daily for an 8-week parallel-designed treatment trial. Cognitive performance was assessed with the Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia. No significant cognitive improvement was associated with atomoxetine treatment. However, atomoxetine treatment was associated with significantly greater increases in working memory-related activation of the left dorsolateral prefrontal and left posterior cingulate cortices. The negative results of this study conflict with the effectiveness of amphetamine in enhancing the cognitive abilities of schizophrenic patients and may be related to the differential pattern of cortical activation and deactivation produced by amphetamine.

17915967
Managing cognitive deficits and functioning in patients with schizophrenia.


17723032
Neuropsychological impairments in schizophrenia: Integration of performance-based and brain imaging findings.
Until recently, the dominant view was that schizophrenia patients have limited, if any, neuropsychological impairments, and those that are observed are only secondary to the florid symptoms of the disorder. This view has dramatically changed. This review integrates recent evidence demonstrating the severity and profile of neuropsychological impairments in schizophrenia. We present quantitative evaluation of the literature demonstrating that the most severe impairments are apparent in episodic memory and executive control processes, evident on a background of a generalized cognitive deficit. The neuropsychological impairments potentially represent genetic liability to the disorder, as similar, yet milder, impairments are evident in schizophrenia patients even before the onset of psychotic symptoms, as well as in the nonpsychotic relatives of schizophrenia patients. Corresponding cognitive neuroimaging literature on executive functions, episodic memory, and working memory in schizophrenia documenting abnormalities in frontal and medial temporal lobes is summarized, and current models integrating neuropsychological and neuroimaging data are discussed.

17716076
Cognition and aging in psychopathology: focus on schizophrenia and depression.
Aging has effects on many features of normal functioning, particularly in the domains of cognition and adaptive life skills. Several psychiatric conditions also affect cognition and adaptive functioning; most of the research on these topics has been performed on patients early in their lives. The amount of research on older patients is smaller than in younger patients, but there is a developing research literature in several aspects of aging and psychopathology. This chapter reviews aging effects on two major psychiatric conditions: schizophrenia and depression. We examine changes in symptoms and cognitive functioning with aging and the functional implications of the development or worsening of cognitive performance. We also identify risk factors for cognitive changes within each condition and examine the implication of early- versus late-life onset. We believe that cognitive changes with aging are potentially predictable, possibly sharing a mechanism with normal aging-related changes and certainly laden with prognostic implications. We see cognitive changes as a possible commonality across persistent psychiatric disorders as well as healthy aging in late life.

17662256
Predicting schizophrenia patients' real-world behavior with specific neuropsychological and functional capacity measures.
Significant neuropsychological (NP) and functional deficits are found in most schizophrenia patients. Previous studies have left questions as to whether global NP impairment or discrete domains affect functional outcomes, and none have addressed distinctions within and between ability and performance domains. This study examined the different predictive relationships between NP domains, functional competence, social competence, symptoms, and real-world behavior in domains of work skills, interpersonal relationships, and community activities. Two hundred twenty-two schizophrenic outpatients were tested with an NP battery and performance-based measures of functional and social competence and rated for positive, negative, and depressive symptoms. Case managers generated ratings of three functional disability domains. Four cognitive factors were derived from factor analysis. Path analyses revealed both direct and mediated effects of NP on real-world outcomes. All NP domains predicted functional competence, but only processing speed and attention/working memory predicted social competence. Both competence measures mediated the effects of NP on community activities and work skills, but only social competence predicted interpersonal behaviors. The attention/working memory domain was directly related to work skills, executive functions had a direct effect on interpersonal behaviors, and processing speed had direct effects on all three real-world behaviors. Symptoms were directly related to outcomes, with fewer relationships with competence. Differential predictors of functional competence and performance were found from discrete NP domains. Separating competence and performance provides a more precise perspective on correlates of disability. Changes in specific NP or functional skills might improve specific outcomes, rather than promoting global functional improvement.

17406468
Administration and interpretation of the Trail Making Test.
Measurement of cognitive functions is an increasingly important goal for clinicians and researchers. Many neuropsychological test batteries are comprehensive and require specialized training to administer and interpret. The Trail Making Test is an accessible neuropsychological instrument that provides the examiner with information on a wide range of cognitive skills and can be completed in 5-10 min. Its background, psychometric properties, administration procedures and interpretive guidelines are provided in this protocol.

20711330
Will improving cognition change functional outcomes in schizophrenia?


17392739
Enhanced effects of cortisol administration on episodic and working memory in aging veterans with PTSD.
Though both glucocorticoid alterations and memory impairments have been noted in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), it is not clear if these phenomena are causally linked. As there is emerging evidence that these domains become further altered in PTSD with increasing age, it is of interest to examine these relationships in an older cohort. Aging (mean age, 62.7+/-8.9; range, 52-81) combat veterans with (n=13) and without (n=17) PTSD received an intravenous bolus of 17.5 mg hydrocortisone (cortisol), a naturally occurring glucocorticoid, or placebo in a randomized, double-blind manner, on two mornings approximately 1-2 weeks apart. Neuropsychological testing to evaluate episodic and working memory performance was performed 75 min later. Cortisol enhanced episodic memory performance in both groups of subjects, but enhanced elements of working memory performance only in the PTSD+ group. The preferential effect of cortisol administration on working memory in PTSD may be related to the superimposition of PTSD and age, as cortisol had impairing effects on this task in a previously studied, younger cohort. The findings suggest that there may be opportunities for developing therapeutic strategies using glucocorticoids in the treatment of aging combat veterans.

17325500
Postoperative cognitive dysfunction in patients with preoperative cognitive impairment: which domains are most vulnerable?
The authors explored the database of the first International Study of Postoperative Cognitive Dysfunction study to specify the domains of cognitive function that were most vulnerable and to determine the pattern of deterioration in patients with preoperative cognitive impairment. One thousand two hundred eighteen patients were included in the first International Study of Postoperative Cognitive Dysfunction, where neuropsychological testing was performed at entry to the study, at 1 week, and at 3 months after surgery. The authors' analyses determined the extent to which seven neuropsychological measures changed after surgery with focus on the relation with preoperative cognitive impairment, defined as a preoperative score 1.5 SD below healthy controls in the memory test. Preoperative cognitive impairment was found in 74 patients at baseline. At 1 week, cognitive deterioration was seen in all tests, but in particular in the Letter Digit Coding and the time of the Stroop interference test, with 14% and 16% of the total sample (n = 1,016) exceeding 2 SD, respectively. At 3 months, deterioration was more uniform. Significantly fewer in the preoperative cognitive impairment group had deterioration in the memory test, both at 1 week and at 3 months, with no patient displaying a deterioration exceeding 2 SD. Postoperative cognitive deterioration was seen in all tests, although most commonly in attention and cognitive speed at 1 week. Deterioration in memory was difficult to detect after surgery in patients with preoperative cognitive impairment.

20805921
Cognitive impairments in major depression and bipolar disorders.


19412501
Cognitive deficits and functional outcome in schizophrenia.
Cognitive dysfunction is a core feature of schizophrenia. Deficits are moderate to severe across several domains, including attention, working memory, verbal learning and memory, and executive functions. These deficits pre-date the onset of frank psychosis and are stable throughout the course of the illness in most patients. Over the past decade, the focus on these deficits has increased dramatically with the recognition that they are consistently the best predictor of functional outcomes across outcome domains and patient samples. Recent treatment studies, both pharmacological and behavioral, suggest that cognitive deficits are malleable. Other research calls into question the meaningfulness of cognitive change in schizophrenia. In this article, we review cognitive deficits in schizophrenia and focus on their treatment and relationship to functional outcome.

20877543
Current Status of the MATRICS/ TURNS Initiative.


16445942
Hippocampal volume in aging combat veterans with and without post-traumatic stress disorder: relation to risk and resilience factors.
To examine whether there are post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) related differences in hippocampal volume in middle-aged and elderly veterans and to examine the relationship of neuroendocrine activity, memory performance, and measures of risk and resilience for PTSD to hippocampal volume in this cohort. Seventeen veterans with chronic PTSD and 16 veterans without chronic PTSD received an MRI scan followed by neuroendocrine assessment (24-h urinary cortisol excretion and the lysozyme IC(50-DEX), a measure of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) responsiveness), and cognitive testing. Veterans with PTSD did not differ from those without PTSD in hippocampal volume, but they did show significantly lower urinary cortisol levels, and poorer memory performance on the Wechsler Logical Memory test and Digit Span test. Smaller left hippocampal volumes were observed in veterans who developed PTSD in response to their first reported traumatic exposure, compared to veterans who had first experienced a traumatic event to which they did not develop PTSD, prior to experiencing a subsequent event that led to PTSD. In contrast, the two neuroendocrine measures were associated with risk factors related to early trauma exposure. Although hippocampal volume was not found to differ between subjects with and without PTSD, smaller hippocampal volumes in PTSD may be associated with specific risk and resilience factors. These may be distinct from vulnerability markers associated with increased responsiveness to glucocorticoids and/or other neuroendocrine measures that have been observed in combat-related PTSD.

18028386
New insights into the link between cardiovascular disease and depression.
Although the association between depression and cardiovascular disease (CVD) is well documented, the underlying mechanisms for this relationship remain unclear. In this paper, we present three possible models which account for the comorbidity between depression and cardiovascular disease. The first model outlines depression as a risk factor for CVD and the second model presents CVD as a risk factor for depression. The third model proposes a common underlying pathway related to the effects of chronic stress on the body in manifesting as depression or cardiovascular disease. If the proposed model holds true, it may be possible that an intervention initiated before overt manifestations of CVD or depression become apparent, may delay or prevent the onset of these serious clinical entities.

