19733098
Cultured bilayered skin allograft for vaginal construction.
This is the first report of live human cultured bilayered skin allograft (taken from another person) (LHCBSA) to line a dissected space to create a vagina. A 19-year-old with Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome (MRKH syndrome) of vaginal and uterine agenesis had a space dissected and lined with LHCBSA. Although the lining devitalized within 2 weeks, there was a rapid ingrowth of vaginal mucosal cells from the vaginal dimple with an excellent long-term result. This is the first report that LHCBSA is able to stimulate vaginal mucosal cell growth for a neovagina. It is possible that it might stimulate other surface tissue lining to cover adjacent raw areas such as bladder or esophagus.

19616457
Squamous papilloma with hyperpigmentation in the skin graft of the neovagina in Rokitansky syndrome: literature review of benign and malignant lesions of the neovagina.
It is rare for a benign or malignant neoplasm to develop in a neovagina. This is the first report of a squamous papilloma with hyperpigmentation which developed in the neovagina 12 years after a McIndoe procedure was done with a split-thickness skin graft from the patient's buttock. The patient had congenital absence of the vagina and uterus (Rokitansky syndrome, Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome, MRKH syndrome). It presented as post-coital blood spotting for 3 months. As a routine, all cases of vaginal construction regardless of the reason for the surgery or the lining of the neovagina should have a continuous annual examination and careful inspection of the entire vagina. Biopsy of any unusual finding should be done. Despite the dark color of the vaginal lesion, bleeding and rapid appearance our patient had a benign tumor. Radiation therapy to the neovagina and prolonged treatment with podophyllin and cauterization should be avoided.

19576808
Successful pregnancy following surgery in the obstructed uterus in a uterus didelphys with unilateral distal vaginal agenesis and ipsilateral renal agenesis: case report and literature review.
After surgical correction of unilateral distal vaginal agenesis, the obstructed didelphic uterus was able to harbor 2 subsequent pregnancies. There was a congenital anomaly syndrome of uterus didelphys, unilateral distal vaginal aplasia, and ipsilateral renal aplasia. Intuition suggests that later pregnancy would be in the unobstructed uterus. The purpose is to report pregnancy occurring twice in a previously obstructed didelphic uterus after surgical correction. A girl aged 13 years, 8 months presented with the syndrome of didelphic uterus, upper right hematocolpos, and right renal aplasia. Right vaginal marsupialization was done. Subsequently, she had 2 pregnancies in the right didelphic uterus. Pregnancy occurred in the obstructed uterus despite a large hematometra, extensive right pelvic peritoneal endometriosis, and hematocolpos. The surgeon should make every effort to preserve the obstructed uterus.

17920404
Stage I ovarian carcinoma: different clinical pathologic patterns.
To analyze clinicopathologic patterns of early ovarian carcinoma. Retrospective chart and histopathology review. Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York and the Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont Ferrand, France. Seventy-six consecutive cases of Fédération Internationale de Gynécologie et d'Obstétrique stage I ovarian carcinoma. Surgical staging. Symptomatology, pathology, and histology analysis. Twenty-two cases (29%) were serous papillary carcinomas and 54 were nonserous carcinomas (71%) (40 endometrioid, 10 clear cell, and 4 mixed endometrioid and clear cell carcinomas). Ninety-eight percent of ovarian endometriosis, 95% of endometrial carcinomas, and 83% of endometrial polyps and hyperplasias were associated with nonserous carcinomas. Most patients with serous papillary carcinoma presented with asymptomatic pelvic masses; patients with nonserous carcinomas presented with pelvic pain or abnormal vaginal bleeding with or without pelvic mass. Over two thirds of stage I ovarian carcinomas were nonserous, and were diagnosed because of associated symptoms: pelvic pain with endometriosis and/or adnexal masses, or vaginal bleeding from endometrial pathology. Serous papillary carcinomas were often asymptomatic and diagnosed during follow-up evaluations in breast cancer patients. Stage I ovarian carcinoma has different clinical and pathologic patterns than advanced ovarian carcinoma. The risk of ovarian and endometrial malignancy should be taken into consideration during evaluation of patients with endometriosis and breast cancer histories.

17601903
Prepubertal unilateral fibrous hyperplasia of the labium majus: report of eight cases and review of the literature.
To report and propose a consensus term for eight cases of a newly recognized, asymptomatic, rapidly growing unilateral labium majus mass without palpable borders in prepubertal girls, appearing to be temporally associated with the physiologic increase of adrenal hormones. Histologic examination, special stains, and immunohistochemistry were performed on all cases. In our personal cases, electron microscopy and chromosomal analysis were also performed, together with pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), inguinal exploration, vaginoscopy with biopsies, and adrenal hormone levels. Of the eight cases, seven were Ashkenazi Jewish girls from the same area in New York City. The unilateral masses were asymptomatic, soft, without palpable borders. The overlying skin had a slightly tan peau d'orange surface. The masses could not be completely excised because they extended into the contiguous pelvic floor. Histologically, the masses were composed of bland hypocellular fibrous tissue extending into the deep subcutaneous tissue. The masses blended into the surrounding tissue and adjacent pelvic floor as shown by MRI preoperatively and postoperatively. Residual tissue did not progress after incomplete resection. These fibrous lesions develop in months at the time of physiologic increase in adrenal hormone secretion just before puberty and subsequently appear to stop growing. The surgeon should not attempt a complete removal but simply excise sufficient tissue for a reasonable cosmetic result and to confirm the diagnosis. The lesions reflect fibroblastic hyperplasia, which is possibly hormone-driven. The ethnic and geographic clustering of cases raises consideration of environmental exposures or genetic predisposition.

