21572265
Hepatocellular Carcinoma Arising in a Pigmented Telangiectatic Adenoma With Nuclear ?-catenin and Glutamine Synthetase Positivity: Case Report and Review of the Literature.
Telangiectatic hepatocellular adenoma is a rare, recently recognized subtype of hepatocellular adenoma that is often underrecognized by pathologists. We report a case of hepatocellular carcinoma arising within a pigmented telangiectatic hepatocellular adenoma in a noncirrhotic man with diffuse glutamine synthetase and nuclear ?-catenin positivity. This case highlights malignant transformation of telangiectatic adenomas, and describes a previously unreported association between pigment deposition and telangiectatic adenoma. Radiology, gross pathology, and histopathology are shown. Review of the literature with attention to ?-catenin and glutamine synthetase staining, malignant transformation, patient characteristics, the presence of Dubin-Johnson-like pigment, and genetic characteristics of telangiectatic adenomas are discussed.

21563296
Overdose with suicidal intent: Ethical considerations for liver transplant programs.
Liver transplant programs encounter patients with fulminant hepatic failure (FHF) resulting from acetaminophen or multidrug ingestions as a part of suicide attempts. Members of the transplant team often have different opinions as to whether such patients should be offered a transplant. Disagreements can delay transfer to the transplant facility and negatively impact patient management. Currently, no guidelines exist to help transplant programs navigate their decisions as to the appropriateness of liver transplantation for these patients. In what follows, we present a clinical case encountered at our facility and discuss the ethical principles that should help programs make informed decisions concerning the transplantation of such patients. Liver Transpl, 2011. © 2011 AASLD.

21416246
The management of hospitalized patients with cirrhosis: the mount sinai experience and a guide for hospitalists.
Cirrhosis and chronic liver disease carry appreciable morbidity and mortality. Cirrhotic patients frequently require hospitalization and their care is both extremely complex and labor-intensive. We seek to provide a review for gastroenterologists, hepatologists, internists, and hospitalists on the approach to care in patients hospitalized for complications related to end-stage liver disease. The Mount Sinai Medical Center's inpatient liver service has developed an integrated team approach for cirrhotic patients and throughout the years has educated fellows-in-training and medical house staff on both the treatment principles and "pearls" in managing the hospitalized cirrhotic patient. We reviewed the literature and provide recommendations on the management of complications of end-stage liver disease. Additionally, we provide a review of the protocols used at our institution in the care for cirrhotic patients. Major complications of advanced liver disease include infection, ascites, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, hepatic encephalopathy, portal hypertension, variceal hemorrhage, hepatorenal syndrome, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Management of these complications involves selecting the appropriate diagnostic studies and prompt administration of therapy. There are many complications of cirrhosis. Management of these complications can be complex and are targeted at stabilizing the patient's clinical condition. Liver transplantation remains the only definitive treatment.

21236310
Increasing hepatic arteriole wall thickness and decreased luminal diameter occur with increasing age in normal livers.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: There is no data to suggest that the size of bile ducts, portal venules, and hepatic arterioles varies according to age in the normal human liver. We sought to examine whether hepatic arteriolar size, wall thickness, and luminal diameter change with increasing age. METHODS: Histologically normal liver specimens from 90 live and deceased donors were separated into three groups of thirty: donor age<30, 31-60, and>60years old. Trichrome-stained slides were de-identified and assessed by a liver pathologist blinded to donor age. Morphometric measurements were taken of the hepatic arteriole, the cross-sectional diameter, and its wall thickness. The arteriole was measured at its widest diameter, the arteriolar wall at its thickest portion, and the luminal diameter between its widest points. RESULTS: There was no difference in number of arterioles or bile ducts or in arteriolar cross-sectional diameter among the groups and no correlation with age was found. An increasing arteriolar wall thickness and a decrease in luminal diameter with advancing age were noted; no difference in bile duct size among the groups was found. There was a significant difference in wall thickness/total cross-sectional diameter with extremes in age (21-30 age group vs. 71-80 age group, p=0.0009) with an accompanying significant decrease in luminal diameter/cross-sectional diameter between the same groups (p=0.00002). CONCLUSIONS: Increasing hepatic arteriolar wall thickness and decreased arteriolar cross-sectional diameter occur with increasing age in the normal human liver.

21057809
The development of hepatoportal sclerosis and portal hypertension due to didanosine use in HIV.
Hepatoportal sclerosis (HPS) is one of several entities known to cause noncirrhotic portal hypertension. To date, its etiology is unknown. There have been increasing reports of HPS occurring in patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently issued an advisory regarding the development of noncirrhotic portal hypertension in association with didanosine (ddI) use. We report on a patient with HIV who had taken ddI for 4 years and who developed portal hypertension. Histopathological review of paired liver biopsies showed an initial drug hepatotoxicity, microvascular liver injury, and the presence of HPS. Despite cessation of ddI, the latter biopsy showed resolution of the drug-induced injury, but it also showed progression of the HPS. The patient's portal hypertension also progressed suggestive of an unremitting vascular injury. This case demonstrates the development of HPS resulting from a drug-induced microvascular injury. The paired biopsies demonstrate that the initial vascular injury may disappear but that the portal hypertension and HPS progress.

21034775
Cross-genotypic polyclonal anti-HCV antibodies from human ascitic fluid.
Many anti-HCV antibodies are available, but more are needed for research and clinical applications. This study examines whether ascitic fluid from cirrhotic patients could be a source of reagent-grade antibodies. Ascitic fluid from 29 HCV patients was screened by ELISA for anti-HCV antibodies against three viral proteins: core, NS4B, and NS5A. Significant patient-to-patient variability in anti-HCV antibody titers was observed. Total ascitic fluid IgG purified by Protein-A chromatography reacted with HCV proteins in immunoblots, cell extracts, and replicon-expressing cells. Affinity-purification using synthetic peptides as bait allowed the preparation of cross-genotypic antibodies directed against pre-selected regions of HCV core, NS4B, and NS5A proteins. The performance of the polyclonal antibodies was comparable to that of monoclonal antibodies. Anti-NS4B antibody preparations reacted with genotype 1a, 1b, and 2a NS4B proteins in immunoblots and allowed NS4B to be localized in replicon-expressing cells. Ascitic fluid is an abundant source of human polyclonal cross-genotypic antibodies that can be used as an alternative to blood. This study shows the utility of selectively purifying human polyclonal antibodies from ascitic fluid. Affinity purification allows antibodies to be selected that are comparable to monoclonal antibodies in their ability to react with targeted regions of viral proteins.

20567576
A new approach for treatment of hepatitis C in hepatitis C-autoimmune hepatitis overlap syndrome.


20364454
Transplant tourism.
Because of the ongoing organ donor shortage, transplant tourism is occurring at an increasing rate both in the USA and abroad. To date, there have been little published data to help guide the programmatic philosophy of the USA transplant centers regarding transplant tourism. We summarize position statements from several transplant societies regarding transplant tourism and specifically transplantation occurring in China (because of the use of executed prisoners as organ donors). Transplant tourism is ever increasing and patients may be at risk for greater post-transplant morbidity as well as inadequate follow up care. Transplant centers require some guidance with regard of how to deal with these patients. Transplant tourism is an increasing reality facing the USA transplant centers. Most professional societies do not condone it yet cannot abrogate a physician's right to care for such patients. Ethical principles mandate transplant physicians provide adequate care for returning transplant tourists. Better ways of assessing the scope of the problem are necessary. Transplant tourism may exist because of the disparity between the need for organ donors and their availability and is thus is likely to continue into the future.

20104478
The dilemma and reality of transplant tourism: an ethical perspective for liver transplant programs.
Transplant programs are likely to encounter increasing numbers of patients who return after receiving an organ transplant abroad. These patients will require ongoing medical care to monitor their immunosuppression and to provide treatment when the need arises. Transplant societies have condemned transplantation with organs purchased abroad and with organs procured from executed prisoners in China. Nevertheless, transplant programs require guidance on how to respond to the needs of returning transplant tourists and to the needs of patients who may choose to become transplant tourists. This discussion presents a case that raised such issues in our program. It goes on to offer reasons for considering a program's responses in terms of the most relevant principles of medical ethics, namely beneficence and nonjudgmental regard.

21442058
Hemophagocytic syndrome occurring in an adult liver transplant recipient having Still's disease.
Hemophagocytic syndrome is a potentially fatal complication that rarely occurs after liver transplantation. We present a 25-year-old man with a history of Still's disease who presented with fever, arthralgia, and elevated serum ferritin levels 6 months after undergoing liver transplantation for fulminant hepatic failure due to autoimmune hepatitis potentially triggered by infliximab therapy. Liver biopsy demonstrated features consistent with hemophagocytic syndrome. The patient was successfully treated with a course of high dose steroids and had complete resolution of his symptoms and normalization of liver chemistry test abnormalities. Patients with Still's disease may rarely complicate with fulminant hepatic failure with infliximab therapy. Hemophagocytic syndrome a rare potentially life threatening condition may occur in such patients following liver transplantation.

20006168
Intranasal desmopressin versus blood transfusion in cirrhotic patients with coagulopathy undergoing dental extraction: a randomized controlled trial.
Cirrhotic patients waiting for liver transplantation who need dental extractions are given fresh frozen plasma and/or platelets to correct coagulopathy. This is costly and may be associated with transfusion reactions and fluid overload. We evaluated the efficacy of intranasal desmopressin as an alternative to transfusion to correct the coagulopathy of cirrhotic patients undergoing dental extraction. Cirrhotic patients with platelet counts of 30,000 to 50,000/microL and/or international normalized ratio (INR) 2.0 to 3.0 were enrolled in a prospective, controlled, randomized clinical trial. Blood transfusion (fresh frozen plasma 10 mL/kg and/or 1 unit of single donor platelets, respectively) or intranasal desmopressin (300 microg) were given before dental extraction. A standard oral and maxillofacial surgical treatment protocol was performed by the same surgeon. Patients were followed for postextraction bleeding and side-effects over the next 24 to 48 hours. No significant differences were noted between the 2 groups in gender, age, INR, platelet count, creatinine, total bilirubin, ALT, albumin, MELD score, or number of teeth removed (median 3 vs 4). The number of teeth removed ranged between 1 and 31 in the desmopressin group and 1 and 22 in the transfusion group. No patients in desmopressin group required rescue blood transfusion after extraction. One patient in the transfusion group had bleeding after the procedure and required an additional transfusion. Another patient experienced an allergic reaction at the end of transfusion, which was effectively treated with diphenhydramine. Treatment associated average costs were lower for desmopressin ($700/patient) compared with transfusion ($1,173/patient). Intranasal desmopressin was as effective as blood transfusion in achieving hemostasis in cirrhotic patients with moderate coagulopathy undergoing dental extraction. Intranasal desmopressin was much more convenient, less expensive, and well tolerated.

19938116
Plasma cell hepatitis in hepatitis C virus patients post-liver transplantation: case-control study showing poor outcome and predictive features in the liver explant.
Plasma cell hepatitis (PCH) is characterized by plasma cell infiltration seen in allografts of patients who underwent liver transplantation (LT) for conditions other than autoimmune hepatitis. We identified 40 PCH patients who underwent LT for hepatitis C virus (HCV) by searching our pathology database (1994-2006) for the keywords liver allograft, lymphoplasmacytic, and plasma cell(s). We selected 2 control patients who received LT for HCV for each PCH case. The control patients were matched according to date of LT and availability of biopsy material at the time interval to development of PCH in PCH patients. Explant and post-LT biopsy slides were blindly reviewed by 2 liver pathologists and the severity of the plasma cell infiltrate was scored. A score of 3 (plasma cells composing >30% of the infiltrate) defined PCH in allograft biopsies. Five random areas of dense inflammation were also examined in explant livers and the highest score was used. Poor outcome was defined as death or advanced fibrosis (stage >or= 4 of 6). We found that PCH patients were more likely to have worse outcomes than control patients (65% versus 40%, P < 0.01), including increased mortality (50% versus 30%, P < 0.05). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed significantly worse survival for PCH patients from 4 to 10 years post-LT (P < 0.05). Explants from 40% of PCH patients had a score of 3 compared to 18% of control patients (P < 0.01). We found that the development of PCH is associated with poor outcome in patients undergoing LT for HCV. The association of significant plasma cell infiltrates in native livers of HCV patients developing PCH suggests that some patients may have a predisposition to developing PCH.

19479807
Graft rejection occurring in post-liver transplant patients receiving cytotoxic chemotherapy: a case series.
Liver transplant recipients are known to be at increased risk for the development of de novo neoplasms or the recurrence of preexisting malignancies, and this is possibly related to the use of immunosuppressive medication. Little is known about the effects of cytotoxic chemotherapy on graft function after transplantation. A retrospective chart and pathology database review was undertaken to identify post-liver transplant patients developing rejection during chemotherapy. All liver biopsies were reviewed by a hepatopathologist. Three patients were identified. All patients were diagnosed with cancer within 7 years of liver transplantation; two-thirds died soon after the diagnosis of malignancy. Rejection occurred soon after chemotherapy was started. All patients were receiving prednisone and tacrolimus (trough levels: 2.1-4.8 ng/mL). One patient developed plasma cell hepatitis (de novo autoimmune hepatitis). There was no histologic evidence of hepatotoxicity due to the chemotherapeutic agents. Cytotoxic chemotherapy should be used in liver transplant recipients with caution, and immunosuppressant doses should be maintained at therapeutic levels, as patients may be at risk for allograft rejection. Treatment of rejection or plasma cell hepatitis in this setting should be undertaken in a timely and aggressive fashion to prevent chronic ductopenic rejection.

19418102
Rapid reversal of parenteral-nutrition-associated cirrhosis following isolated intestinal transplantation.
Liver disease and the development of hepatic fibrosis are complications associated with total parenteral nutrition (TPN). Patients developing cirrhosis and portal hypertension in the setting of intestinal failure have a high mortality and may require combined liver and intestinal transplantation which carries much higher morbidity and mortality than isolated intestinal transplantation. Recently, regression of hepatic fibrosis in patients with TPN liver disease has been described following intestinal transplantation. To date, there has been no demonstration of the reversal of established cirrhosis due to long-term TPN injury. Herein, we describe a patient with intestinal failure who developed cirrhosis from long-standing TPN injury and underwent isolated intestinal transplantation. He had no overt clinical stigmata of portal hypertension and had preserved liver function. Serial liver biopsies were reviewed and assessed with standard histology and quantitation of fibrosis using image analysis. Dramatic regression of fibrosis and reversal of cirrhosis were observed 17 months posttransplantation. Image analysis demonstrated a 14% total decrease in the percentage area of fibrosis. Cirrhosis related to TPN may be rapidly reversible after isolated intestinal transplantation. Such patients may be able to undergo isolated intestinal transplantation if they do not have hepatic synthetic compromise or clinical stigmata of portal hypertension.

18674734
Regression of hepatic fibrosis after intestinal transplantation in total parenteral nutrition liver disease.
Hepatic fibrosis may occur in patients with intestinal failure requiring total parenteral nutrition, leading to liver dysfunction necessitating combined intestinal and liver transplantation. The decision to perform combined transplantation as opposed to an isolated intestinal transplant is based on the presence of hyperbilirubinemia, portal hypertension, and advanced hepatic fibrosis. We identified 4 patients who underwent isolated intestinal transplantation having significant liver fibrosis. A novel image analysis technique was applied to serial liver biopsies to more precisely quantitate posttransplantation fibrosis regression separately within both portal and centrilobular areas. All patients were found to have significant portal and centrilobular fibrosis regression, which occurred more rapidly in the former. Two patients had improvement in fibrosis despite infections and continuation of total parenteral nutrition, suggesting that hepatic fibrosis associated with intestinal failure may in part be related to adequate anatomic and functional bowel length. Significant hepatic fibrosis and liver dysfunction may regress after intestinal transplantation and fibrosis regresses more rapidly in portal areas. This suggests that some patients with intestinal failure and associated liver disease may safely undergo isolated intestinal transplant without the need for concurrent liver transplantation and its attendant higher morbidity and mortality.

18581483
Ethics and liver transplantation: a new section in our journal.


18508382
Posttransplant plasma cell hepatitis (de novo autoimmune hepatitis) is a variant of rejection and may lead to a negative outcome in patients with hepatitis C virus.
De novo autoimmune hepatitis has been described in both pediatric and adult liver transplantation (LT) recipients. Studies of small numbers of patients have proposed it to be an alloimmune hepatitis or form of chronic rejection. We have recently noted an increasing number of patients with post-LT recurrent hepatitis C virus (HCV) developing this, with an apparent negative impact on outcome and survival. We term this entity posttransplant plasma cell hepatitis (PCH). A search of our institution's pathology database was performed with the terms "plasma cell(s)," "lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate," and "liver allograft." A histological scoring system was devised to more reliably diagnose PCH in the setting of recurrent HCV. Thirty-eight patients were identified, and their clinical data were analyzed. Sixty percent had a negative outcome as defined by the development of cirrhosis, need for retransplantation, or death. Eighty-two percent had recent lowering of immunosuppression or subtherapeutic calcineurin inhibitor levels; 58% developed PCH within 2 years post-LT. Histologic resolution of PCH was associated with good outcome (P < 0.001). Patients not receiving treatment had a negative outcome (P = 0.007) as did patients receiving corticosteroids as therapy (P = 0.02). Persistence (P = 0.007) or recurrence of PCH was associated with negative outcome. In conclusion, PCH is a histologic variant of rejection. On liver biopsy, PCH can at times be difficult to diagnose, and the use of a standardized scoring system is recommended to differentiate it from other forms of allograft dysfunction. Treatment by optimization of immunosuppression without the use of corticosteroids appears effective. The development of PCH in the setting of recurrent HCV is a negative prognostic factor for patient outcome and allograft failure.

17969202
Use of splenic artery embolization to relieve tense ascites following liver transplantation in a patient with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Recurrent venous thrombosis following liver transplantation for Budd-Chiari syndrome is common, particularly in the setting of an underlying myeloproliferative disorder. We describe a patient who developed refractory ascites due to portal vein thrombosis following liver transplantation for Budd-Chiari syndrome in the setting of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Extensive portal vein thrombosis, dense abdominal adhesions, and portosystemic collaterals precluded the use of a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt or surgical portosystemic shunt to manage the patient's ascites. Splenic artery embolization to decrease portal hypertension was performed, and this resulted in complete resolution of ascites. This case demonstrates the successful use of splenic artery embolization to manage ascites due to portal vein thrombosis following liver transplantation. Splenic artery embolization may be considered as an alternative option for the management of refractory ascites due to portal hypertension in patients who are unable to undergo safe transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt or surgical shunt placement.

17763386
Excellent results of cardiac surgery in patients with previous liver transplantation.
Cardiovascular diseases requiring surgical therapy in patients with prior liver transplantation are rare. Little is known about the outcome of patients with liver allograft undergoing cardiac surgery. Herein we report our experience in this patient population with an emphasis on operative outcomes and mid-term survival. Between January 1998 and December 2004, 12 patients (mean +/- standard deviation age 68 +/- 9 years, 7 [58%] male) with previous liver transplantation who underwent cardiac surgery were identified. Main outcome measures were hospital mortality, postoperative complications, allograft function, and long-term survival. There was no in-hospital mortality. Three major complications (25%) occurred, including 1 each (8%) of respiratory failure, renal failure, and biliary leakage. All complications were resolved by the time of discharge. Allograft dysfunction determined by an increase of liver function parameters was noticed in 4 (33%) and recovered before discharge. The average length of stay in intensive care unit was 72 +/- 45 hours, and the mean length of stay in hospital was 22 +/- 17 days. One- and 5-year survival was 91% +/- 8% and 67% +/- 14%, respectively. Cardiac surgery can be performed safely in liver transplant recipients with extremely low mortality and acceptable morbidities. Allograft dysfunction is a common finding, but it is transient, with early functional recovery. Five-year survival of liver recipients undergoing cardiac procedures is similar to that of the general population undergoing cardiac surgery. Our data suggest that these patients should be considered for cardiac surgery in reference centers with expertise in complex cardiac procedures and perioperative management of these highly specific patients.

17667809
Chronic ductopenic rejection in patients with recurrent hepatitis C virus treated with pegylated interferon alfa-2a and ribavirin.
Interferon use for post liver transplantation (LT) recurrent hepatitis C (HCV) has not consistently been associated with acute cellular rejection (ACR). We examined the incidence of chronic ductopenic rejection (CR) in patients receiving pegylated interferon alfa-2a and ribavirin (PEG) to treat recurrent HCV. A chart review of 12 patients developing CR while receiving an escalating dose regimen of PEG with protocol liver biopsies every 6 months was conducted. Values are shown as median (range). Twelve of the 70 patients treated with PEG developed CR. Median age at LT was 53 (37-63) years; immunosuppression consisted of tacrolimus or cyclosporine with prednisone. PEG was started at 3.6 (0.2-13.5) years after LT. Two patients had one episode of ACR before PEG. Four patients had first ACR while receiving PEG. CR was diagnosed after 12 (4-17) months of PEG; by then 8 patients had undetectable HCV-RNA. Tacrolimus and cyclosporine levels (ng/mL) were 7.9 (3.2-18.9) and 76 (71-93) before PEG, and 6.9 (3.7-9.7) and 130 (81-153) at CR. Six patients were treated more than 1 year with PEG; three had undetectable HCV-RNA when CR was diagnosed. Five patients are being treated for CR; one has been listed for LT; two patients were retransplanted. Five patients died as a result of sepsis partially related to CR. Treatment with pegylated-interferon alpha-2a and ribavirin may trigger rapidly progressive CR in patients with therapeutic immunosuppressive trough levels, with or without first inducing ACR.

17640321
Hepatoportal sclerosis as a cause of noncirrhotic portal hypertension in patients with HIV.
Hepatoportal sclerosis (HPS) is a cause of noncirrhotic portal hypertension, with patients typically presenting with variceal bleeding. It is idiopathic in nature but is felt to be due to an abnormality of the intrahepatic vasculature. HPS is characterized by varying degrees of portal fibrosis, sclerosis of portal vein branches and dilatation of sinusoidal spaces. Nodular regenerative hyperplasia (NRH), another cause of noncirrhotic portal hypertension, has also been recently described in HIV patients initially diagnosed as having cryptogenic liver disease. We describe four cases of HIV+ patients presenting with noncirrhotic portal hypertension; liver biopsies were reviewed by an experienced liver pathologist and found to be consistent with HPS. No other etiologies for their liver disease were found. HPS has been recently identified as a cause of noncirrhotic portal hypertension in patients with HIV. It should be considered in the differential diagnosis of HIV patients presenting with variceal bleeding. We postulate that it may be due to intrahepatic microthrombosis or an altered hepatic fibrogenesis related to highly active antiretroviral therapy or due to HIV itself.

17606214
Long-term care of the liver transplant recipient.
As survival increases after liver transplantation, common issues that arise involve immunosuppression-related complications and primary health care. Proper emphasis on the prevention and treatment of post-liver transplant complications, such as diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, renal dysfunction, osteoporosis, and obesity, requires careful screening and long-term surveillance to minimize the progression of these complications. Active involvement by internists and subspecialists is necessary and a multidisciplinary approach should be undertaken. Liver transplantation should be viewed as a lifelong commitment by both patient and physician.

17539015
Rapidly progressive recurrent hepatitis C virus infection starting 9 days after liver transplantation.
Early histological recurrence of hepatitis C after liver transplantation (LT) has a negative impact on patient and graft survival. We report a case of histological recurrence of HCV occurring in the second week after LT. A 75-year-old woman with chronic HCV and hepatocellular carcinoma underwent LT with an organ from a 75-year-old HCV-negative deceased donor. After an uneventful early postoperative period, an increase in the transaminases was observed, and on postoperative day 9 day, the alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was 673 IU/mL and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 300 IU/mL, with normal alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin. Analysis of liver biopsy samples showed diffuse necroinflammatory changes with acidophilic bodies and concomitant mild acute cellular rejection. Subsequently there was a further increase in the transaminases, and on postoperative day 13, the AST rose to 445 IU/mL and ALT to 992 IU/mL. Repeat biopsy was performed, and analysis of the samples revealed lymphocytic portal inflammation with lymphoid aggregates and mild interface hepatitis, parenchymal necrosis, activation of sinusoidal lining cells, and mild steatosis. The biopsy sample was characteristic for HCV recurrence. The HCV RNA level was 84,000,000 copies/mL, and markers for other viral causes were not present. The patient became jaundiced and her course progressively worsened. She died on day 87 after transplantation. To our knowledge, this is the earliest reported case of histological recurrence of HCV after LT. It illustrates the importance of older donor and recipient age in the same patient as cofactors for early HCV recurrence and poor outcome.

17414109
Liver failure and need for liver transplantation in patients with advanced hepatoportal sclerosis.
Hepatoportal sclerosis (HPS) is one of the causes of noncirrhotic portal hypertension. In general, hepatic synthetic function is preserved and treatment is aimed at relief of the portal hypertension. In this study, we present the clinical and pathologic features of HPS cases who underwent liver transplantation (LT). LT cases with confirmed gross and microscopic diagnosis of HPS are included. Weight of the explanted liver, presence of thrombi in the main blood vessels, and gross and microscopic characteristics were assessed. Clinical information was gathered from chart review. From 1995 to 2004, 8 LT patients were diagnosed with HPS. Cirrhosis resulting from alcohol (2), autoimmune hepatitis (2), and hepatitis B (1), or cryptogenic cirrhosis (3) was the presumed diagnoses pre-LT. Seven patients presented with bleeding varices and 5 had concomitant ascites. At the time of LT, mean values were: prothrombin time of 15.2 seconds, serum albumin 3.2 g/dL, serum bilirubin 3.5 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase 140 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase 39.4 IU/L, and alanine aminotransferase 34.7 IU/L. Explanted livers were shrunken, with weights ranging from 715 to 1199 g (mean 934). Nonocclusive portal vein thrombosis was present in 2 patients. On histologic examination, there was dense portal fibrosis, marked phlebosclerosis, and presence of variable degrees of megasinusoid formation. Four livers also had features of incomplete septal cirrhosis. None showed histologic features of the presumed underlying liver disease. In conclusion, HPS can cause hepatic synthetic dysfunction that may necessitate LT. Small liver volume, significant portal fibrosis, and phlebosclerosis may contribute to hepatic parenchymal loss and subsequent synthetic compromise.

20477101
Hepatitis C immune globulin (human) for the prevention of viral recurrence after liver transplantation.
Immunoglobulin therapy has been used extensively in the treatment of infectious diseases. Hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIg) reduces the onset of infection in post-percutaneous exposure to Hepatitis B virus (HBV) and in infants of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive mothers; it also significantly reduces the risk of recurrent HBV infection in liver transplant recipients, thus increasing the survival rate of this population. Prior to 1990, when plasma donors were not screened for the hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody, the prevalence of HCV viremia after a liver transplant was found to be lower in those patients receiving HBIg containing anti-HCV antibodies. Phase I trials with chimpanzees demonstrated the ability of hepatitis C immune globulin (human) to decrease hepatic inflammation and to neutralize the HCV antibody, but this effect was not sustained over time. Phase I/II human studies have currently been unable to replicate the animal studies, but further trials are planned.

17171533
Exacerbation of sickle cell disease itself as a cause of abnormal liver chemistry tests.
Liver pathology occurring in patients with sickle cell disease is commonly related to viral hepatitis or hepatic iron deposition due to repeated transfusions; cholestasis and cirrhosis may also occur. Consequently, the differential diagnosis of abnormal liver tests in patients with sickle cell anemia is often complicated. We report the case of a patient presenting with jaundice and abnormal liver biochemistries, without typical evidence of the liver diseases associated with sickle cell anemia. Biochemical markers for viral hepatitis were negative. CT scan only showed hepatomegaly. The liver biopsy revealed marked sinusoidal congestion with red blood cells without significant steatosis or increased iron deposition. The patient's medical history corroborated with biochemical tests and histological examination of the liver suggested that worsening hemolysis related to increased sickling of erythrocytes intrahepatically led to sinusoidal dilatation and probably caused the abnormal liver tests.

16967310
De novo hepatocellular carcinoma occurring in a transplanted liver: case report and review of the literature.


21206125
Pneumatosis intestinalis and mesenteric venous gas - a manifestation of bacterascites in a patient with cirrhosis.
We herein report a patient with decompensated cirrhosis secondary to autoimmune hepatitis, who presented with pneumatosis intestinalis (PI) and portal venous gas. Mesenteric ischemia has been recognized as a common and life-threatening cause of PI which portends a grave prognosis. The patient was found to have bacterascites and recovered after appropriate antibiotic therapy. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis/bacterascites with gas-forming organisms manifesting as PI has not been previously reported.

20620520
Factors associated with persistent thrombocytopenia after liver transplantation.
Thrombocytopenia typically resolves with resolution of portal hypertension after liver transplantation (LT) but persists in some patients. Identifying risk factors associated with persistent post- LT thrombocytopenia may provide important information about its pathogenesis. Cirrhotic adults with platelet levels of <150,000 mu/L at the time of LT and followed at least 1 year were studied. A retrospective analysis of lab values, radiologic spleen index (SI), and donor data using nonparametric methods was performed to characterize patients having persistent thrombocytopenia, defined as persistently low platelet levels at 3 and 12 months after LT. One hundred patients were studied: mean age 55 y (range 23-75 y); platelet count at LT 62,000/microL (range 14,000- 148,000/microL; mean total bilirubin 2.6 mg/dL; mean Mayo end-stage liver disease score 29; SI 1,476 (range 347-4,843 mL; normal 120-480 mL). Platelet count at 3 and 12 months after LT correlated with SI (r = -0.41 and -0.54; P < .001). Fifty-seven patients had persistent thrombocytopenia. Compared with patients whose platelet levels normalized by month 3 or 12, they had higher SI and lower platelet count before LT (P < .001). The SI and platelet levels at the time of LT were independent predictive factors for platelet levels at 3 and 12 months after LT (P < .001). High SI and low platelet count at the time of LT are associated with persistent thrombocytopenia after LT. They are also independent predictive factors of platelet levels at 3 and 12 months after LT. This suggests that patients may have persistent thrombocytopenia after LT owing to persistence of some degree of hypersplenism and incomplete resolution of splenomegaly.

18638191
Image segmentation of liver fibrosis.
Quantitation of connective tissue versus parenchymal tissue compartments is important in assessment of fibrosis (scarring) and its progression in liver disease. This paper presents a two-step algorithm for quantifying fibrosis in liver biopsies stained with Sirius red. With this staining technique, collagen and cell nuclei appear similarly stained, whereas cytoplasm appears pale. The first step of the algorithm is to separate similarly stained areas occupied by collagen and hepatocyte nuclei. Since the total area of the combined collagen and cell nuclei is usually much smaller than the remaining liver parenchyma, a non-linear intensity mapping is applied to enhance the smaller cluster in order to match the larger one in both intensity and size. The second step is to differentiate the fibrotic areas usually having irregular shapes from hepatocyte nuclei that have relatively uniform size and have circular shape. The proposed algorithm has been applied to quantify the development of progressive fibrosis and its possible regression in liver biopsy specimens from patients with parenteral-induced liver injury undergoing intestinal transplantation.

18589139
Effect of ischemia-reperfusion on the incidence of acute cellular rejection and timing of histologic hepatitis C virus recurrence after liver transplantation.
Because of a critical shortage of deceased donor (DD) livers, more extended criteria allografts are being utilized; these allografts are at increased risk for ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI). We assessed whether, in a large cohort of patients transplanted for hepatitis C virus (HCV) either via a DD or live donor (LD), there was a relationship between the degree of IRI and the frequency and timing of acute cellular rejection (ACR) and histologic HCV recurrence. During an 8-year study, patients were separated into four groups based on peak alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels and three groups based on severity of IRI on postreperfusion liver biopsy. The mean follow-up time of 433 DD and 44 LD recipients was 1212 days. We noted a strong correlation in DD between peak ALT and the histologic degree of IRI (P = .01). There was no difference in the incidence or grade of ACR among the four groups. There was no correlation between the severity of IRI and the incidence or time to histologic recurrence of HCV. The magnitude of peak ALT correlated with the severity of IRI on postreperfusion liver biopsy. Among this large HCV cohort, there was no correlation between the severity of IRI and the incidence or timing of histologic HCV recurrence or incidence of ACR.

18589138
The burden of chronic kidney disease in long-term liver transplant recipients.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is an important risk factor for morbidity and mortality post-liver transplantation (OLT). This study focused on investigating the incidence and risk factors associated with the development CKD after OLT. We performed a retrospective cohort study of recipients followed at least 5 years at our institution. CKD was diagnosed and classified according to National Kidney Foundation and the Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative guidelines. There were 231 patients, 64% men, 67% Caucasian, 16% African-American, and 17% others, with a mean age of 56 +/- 13 years. The mean glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of the population was 56 +/- 28 mL/min/1.73 m2. CKD was defined as GFR less than 60 mL/min; 144 patients (61%) were identified as having CKD. When these patients were compared to the non-CKD group, the former were significantly older (62 +/- 9 vs 52 +/- 12 years, P = .03), more likely to be hypertensive (59% vs 38%, P = .003), and required more antihypertensive medications (0.83 +/- 0.81 vs 0.52 +/- 0.77, P = .02); 26% of all patients had diabetes. However, the incidence of diabetes (43.3% vs 19.3%, P = .02) as well as the incidence of insulin dependency (21.6% vs 12.5%, P = .001) was significantly higher in the CKD population. Mean uric acid levels were higher in CKD patients compared to non-CKD patients (8.00 +/- 2.00 mg/dL vs 6.70 +/- 1.99 mg/dL respectively, P = .001); patients with uric acid more than 6.0 had a 1.7 risk of having CKD. CKD defined as GFR < 60 mL/min is highly prevalent in long-term OLT survivors. Older age, elevated systolic blood pressure, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and elevated uric acid levels are independently associated with CKD.

18089367
Comparison of hepatitis C histological recurrence rates and patient survival between split and deceased donor liver transplantation.
Controversy exists as to whether there is an increased severity or frequency of recurrent hepatitis C viral (HCV) infection in recipients of adult living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) grafts. We sought to examine the time to histological recurrence and survival in HCV (+) patients who underwent split liver transplantation (SLT), which is technically similar to what occurs in the LDLT procedure. Twenty four HCV (+) adult recipients were identified through the UNOS database as having had SLT procedures at three centers: Mount Sinai Medical Center, University of Chicago, and University of California at Los Angeles. Of these, 17 patients with comprehensive data were matched to 32 HCV (+) patients who underwent whole deceased donor liver transplantation (DDLT) during the same time period. Outcome and time to initial HCV recurrence as documented by liver biopsy were assessed. Liver biopsy was performed when clinically indicated. Patients who had SLT were significantly older (P=.01). There was no difference in number of rejection episodes (P=.40). Fifteen of 17 SLT (88%) versus 24/32 DDLT (75%) patients had documented HCV recurrence by biopsy (P=.46). The time to median cumulative incidence of recurrence of HCV post-liver transplantation was 12.6 months (SLT) versus 39.8 months (DDLT) patients. There was no difference in survival between SLT and DDLT patients (47 vs 70 months, P=.62) nor in cumulative incidence of histological HCV recurrence at 1, 2, and 3 years (P=.198, .919, and .806, respectively). There is no difference in the cumulative incidence of histological recurrence of HCV post-liver transplant or in survival between recipients of deceased donor and split liver transplants.

17916116
Development of hepatic granulomas in patients receiving pegylated interferon therapy for recurrent hepatitis C virus post liver transplantation.
Infrequently, hepatitis C (HCV) appears to be the cause of hepatic granulomas. Interferon therapy for HCV has been increasingly associated with the development of sarcoidosis. We sought to determine the incidence of hepatic granulomas in patients with recurrent HCV post liver transplantation (LT). Between 1994 and 2005, 820 patients were transplanted for HCV at our institution. The pathology database was searched for patients having recurrent HCV and granulomas. At Mount Sinai Medical Center, protocol biopsies have been performed for the last 2 years in patients receiving pegylated interferon-alpha2b and ribavirin (PEG) for recurrent HCV. Review of slides from explanted livers, pre- and post-perfusion biopsies, and all allograft biopsies were evaluated. Lipogranulomas were excluded because of their frequent association with steatosis. A total of 10,225 liver biopsies were performed on HCV patients, and 25 (0.24%) showed non-caseating epithelioid granulomas. Hepatic granulomas were detected in 14 post-LT HCV patients; 9 patients received PEG. Typically, only 1 lobular granuloma was found. None of these patients had granulomas in the native liver or in any biopsy before interferon therapy; 6/9 patients had undetectable HCV-RNA levels, and 4 had sustained viral response. No other cause for granuloma formation was identified in the 6 patients. Hepatic granulomas are infrequently found in HCV liver biopsies and rarely found in post-LT biopsies with recurrent HCV. When present, they occur more commonly in patients receiving and virologically responding to PEG therapy. The presence of granulomas in patients with HCV being treated with PEG may not warrant an extensive etiologic work-up for granulomatous hepatitis unless otherwise clinically indicated.

17451560
Review article: drug hepatotoxicity.
Drug toxicity is the leading cause of acute liver failure in the United States. Further understanding of hepatotoxicity is becoming increasingly important as more drugs come to market. (i) To provide an update on recent advances in our understanding of hepatotoxicity of select commonly used drug classes. (ii) To assess the safety of these medications in patients with pre-existing liver disease and in the post-liver transplant setting. (iii) To review relevant advances in toxicogenomics which contribute to the current understanding of hepatotoxic drugs. A Medline search was performed to identify relevant literature using search terms including 'drug toxicity, hepatotoxicity, statins, thiazolidinediones, antibiotics, antiretroviral drugs and toxicogenomics'. Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid is one of the most frequently implicated causes of drug-induced liver injury worldwide. Statins rarely cause clinically significant liver injury, even in patients with underlying liver disease. Newer thiazolidinediones are not associated with the degree of liver toxicity observed with troglitazone. Careful monitoring for liver toxicity is warranted in patients who are taking antiretrovirals, especially patients who are co-infected with hepatitis B and C. Genetic polymorphisms among enzymes involved in drug metabolism and HLA types may account for some of the differences in individual susceptibility to drug hepatotoxicity. Drug-induced hepatotoxicity will remain a problem that carries both clinical and regulatory significance as long as new drugs continue to enter the market. Future results from ongoing multicentre collaborative efforts may help contribute to our current understanding of hepatotoxicity associated with drugs.

