20061276
Adrenocorticotropic hormone-independent Cushing syndrome manifesting during pregnancy.
To report a case of adrenocorticotropic hormone-independent Cushing syndrome (CS) diagnosed and treated surgically during the third trimester of pregnancy and resulting in delivery of a healthy baby boy. We present a detailed case report, and we review and evaluate the English-language literature on CS during pregnancy. During pregnancy, the occurrence of CS is a rare event. The diagnosis of CS during pregnancy is difficult to establish because of the normal physiologic hypercortisolemia of pregnancy. In our patient, laboratory testing revealed a random serum cortisol level of 56.5 microg/dL, a suppressed plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone level (<5 pg/mL), and a substantially elevated 24-hour urinary cortisol (1,708 microg). Noncontrast magnetic resonance imaging of the abdomen disclosed a 3.5-cm left adrenal mass. Laparoscopic left adrenalectomy was successfully performed during the early third trimester, and a healthy baby was born at 36 weeks of gestation by means of a cesarean delivery. The occurrence of CS during pregnancy is rare; however, when it does occur, adrenal tumors are more common than pituitary tumors. Caution should be used during interpretation of laboratory tests to evaluate for CS during pregnancy because of the normal increase in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function during pregnancy. The current case demonstrates the safety and utility of noncontrast magnetic resonance imaging for localization of a tumor during pregnancy, as well as the safe use of laparoscopic surgical treatment of CS during the early third trimester.

17988195
Metastasis of uterine leiomyosarcoma to the thyroid gland: case report and review of the literature.
Metastasis of uterine leiomyosarcoma to the thyroid is extremely rare. Only three cases have been previously reported. We present a case of uterine leiomyosarcoma metastatic to the thyroid gland and review the current literature on this topic.

19342543
The significance and management of incidental [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose-positron-emission tomography uptake in the thyroid gland in patients with cancer.
Incidental positron-emission tomography (PET) uptake in the thyroid bed represents a diagnostic dilemma. Currently, there is no consensus regarding the significance of this finding or the most appropriate approach to management. The purpose of this study was to determine the significance of incidental fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the thyroid gland on [(18)F]FDG-positron-emission tomography (FDG-PET/CT) in patients being initially staged for lymphomas and/or cancers other than of thyroid origin. A retrospective review was conducted on patients who were incidentally found to have focal FDG uptake in the thyroid bed on initial staging for cancer. Patient records were assessed for age, sex, clinical presentation, standard uptake values (SUV(max)), on FDG-PET/CT, and CT findings in those patients undergoing FDG-PET/CT, fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology, and surgical pathologic examination. Thirty patients were identified with incidental FDG-PET uptake in the thyroid bed from 630 studies performed for evaluation of cancer between March 2004 and June 2006. Complete records were available for 18 patients (6 men, 12 women). Five (27.8%) of 18 patients with incidental focal FDG-PET/CT uptake in the thyroid gland demonstrated papillary thyroid carcinoma on final pathologic findings. The mean and SD of SUV(max) was 3.0 +/- 1.8 (range, 1.1-7.4) overall, 2.9 +/- 1.6 (range, 1.1-6.8) in the patients without malignant growth, and 3.4 +/- 2.6 (range, 1.1-7.4) in the 5 patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma. No statistical difference in SUV(max) was noted between patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma and patients with benign pathologic findings (P = .63). Incidental FDG-PET uptake in the thyroid gland in patients with cancer of nonthyroidal origin is associated with a 27.8% risk for well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma; however, there seems to be no correlation between intensity of FDG uptake and the risk for a malignant process.

