21481422
Increased macrophage infiltration and neovascularization in congenital bicuspid aortic valve stenosis.
OBJECTIVES: Patients with congenital bicuspid aortic valves have aortic valve stenosis at a relatively young age compared with patients with tricuspid aortic valves. We hypothesize that aortic valve stenosis evolves from a more aggressive inflammatory process, with increased macrophage/T-cell and neovessel content in congenital bicuspid aortic valveswhen compared with that seen in tricuspid valves. METHODS: Fifty-one severely stenotic aortic valves were obtained at the time of aortic valve replacement. A total of 17 bicuspid and 34 tricuspid aortic valves were evaluated. Macrophage/T-cell infiltration (CD68 plus CD3) and neovessel density (CD34) were evaluated with immunohistochemical staining. Leaflet calcification and ossification were also quantified. Real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to assess expression of chondromodulin 1 and vascular endothelial growth factor. RESULTS: The density of macrophages/T cells was greater in congenital bicuspid aortic valves than in tricuspid valves (51 ± 31 vs 23 ± 13 cells/mm(2), P = .002). Neovascularization was more frequently noted in congenital bicuspid aortic valves when compared with tricuspid valves (31 ± 10 vs 21 ± 9 vessels/mm(2), P = .0005), and calcification was more severe (P = .03). Expression of chondromodulin 1 demonstrated a 6-fold downregulation (P = .0003) and expression of vascular endothelial growth factor demonstrated a 2-fold increase (P = .02) in congenital bicuspid aortic valves compared with that seen in tricuspid valves. Multivariable analyses demonstrated significant associations between bicuspid aortic valve anatomy and increased inflammatory cell infiltration (? = 25.8, P = .0007) and neovascularization (? = 9.4, P = .001), despite adjusting for measured covariates. CONCLUSIONS: The pathogenesis of aortic valve stenosis in bicuspid aortic valves is associated with a more aggressive inflammatory process with increased macrophage infiltration and neovascularization when compared with that seen in tricuspid valves.

21413131
A novel clinical prediction rule for 30-day mortality following balloon aortic valuloplasty: The CRRAC the AV score.
Objectives: We seek to identify predictors of 30-day mortality after balloon aortic valvuloplasty (BAV). Background: To date, there is no validated method of predicting patient outcomes after percutaneous aortic valve interventions. Methods: Data for consecutive patients with severe aortic stenosis who underwent BAV at the Mount Sinai Medical Center from January 2001 to July 2007 were retrospectively reviewed. Cox-proportional hazards regression was used to identify significant predictors of 30-day mortality, and the resultant model was compared to the EuroSCORE using Akaike's Information Criterion and area under the receiver-operating curve (AUC). Results: The analysis included 281 patients (age 83 ± 9 years, 61% women, aortic valve area: 0.64 ± 0.2 cm(2) ) and 36 (12.8%) of whom died within 30 days of BAV. With identified risk factors for 30-day mortality, critical status, renal dysfunction, right atrial pressure, and cardiac output, we constructed the CRRAC the AV risk score. Thirty-day survival was 72% in the highest tertile versus 94% in the lower two tertiles of the score. Compared to the additive and logistic EuroSCORE, the risk score demonstrated superior discrimination (AUC = 0.75 vs. 0.60 and 0.63, respectively). Conclusions: We derived a risk score, the CRRAC the AV score that identifies patients at high-risk of 30-day mortality after BAV. Validation of the developed risk prediction score, the CRRAC the AV score, is needed in other cohorts of post-BAV patients and potentially in patients undergoing other catheter-based valve interventions. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

21070928
Bisphosphonate Use and Prevalence of Valvular and Vascular Calcification in Women MESA (The Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis).
the aim of this study was to determine whether nitrogen-containing bisphosphonate (NCBP) therapy is associated with the prevalence of cardiovascular calcification. cardiovascular calcification correlates with atherosclerotic disease burden. Experimental data suggest that NCBP might limit cardiovascular calcification, which has implications for disease prevention. the relationship of NCBP use to the prevalence of aortic valve, aortic valve ring, mitral annulus, thoracic aorta, and coronary artery calcification (AVC, AVRC, MAC, TAC, and CAC, respectively) detected by computed tomography was assessed in 3,710 women within the MESA (Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis) with regression modeling. Analyses were age-stratified, because of a significant interaction between age and NCBP use (interaction p values: AVC p < 0.0001; AVRC p < 0.0001; MAC p = 0.002; TAC p < 0.0001; CAC p = 0.046). After adjusting for age; body mass index; demographic data; diabetes; smoking; blood pressure; cholesterol levels; and statin, hormone replacement, and renin-angiotensin inhibitor therapy, NCBP use was associated with a lower prevalence of cardiovascular calcification in women ? 65 years of age (prevalence ratio: AVC 0.68 [95% confidence interval (CI): 0.41 to 1.13]; AVRC 0.65 [95% CI: 0.51 to 0.84]; MAC 0.54 [95% CI: 0.33 to 0.93]; TAC 0.69 [95% CI: 0.54 to 0.88]; CAC 0.89 [95% CI: 0.78 to 1.02]), whereas calcification was more prevalent in NCBP users among the 2,181 women <65 years of age (AVC 4.00 [95% CI: 2.33 to 6.89]; AVRC 1.92 [95% CI: 1.42 to 2.61]; MAC 2.35 [95% CI: 1.12 to 4.84]; TAC 2.17 [95% CI: 1.49 to 3.15]; CAC 1.23 [95% CI: 0.97 to 1.57]). among women in the diverse MESA cohort, NCBPs were associated with decreased prevalence of cardiovascular calcification in older subjects but more prevalent cardiovascular calcification in younger ones. Further study is warranted to clarify these age-dependent NCBP effects.

20350701
The effects of race on peak oxygen consumption and survival in patients with systolic dysfunction.
The relationship of peak exercise oxygen consumption (VO(2)) to survival in black heart failure (HF) patients is not well established. We examined the effects of race on peak VO(2) values and survival in HF patients with systolic dysfunction. This study evaluated consecutive ambulatory HF patients who underwent symptom-limited stress tests with breath-by-breath expired gas analyses using ramped treadmill protocols. The relationship between cardiopulmonary exercise parameters and patient transplant-free survival was assessed by race. This study included 580 HF patients (mean age 52 +/- 12 years; 28% females; 22% blacks; mean left ventricular ejection fraction 26 +/- 12%; mean body mass index 28.7 +/- 5.4; 73% on beta-blocker). Black patients had a significantly lower peak VO(2) than white patients (14.2 +/- 5.2 versus 16.4 +/- 7.0; P < .0001), despite adjusting for identified covariates. However, there was no significant difference in the 1-year transplant-free survival between black and white HF patients (87% versus 85%; P = NS). Peak VO(2) was significantly associated with survival in both racial groups. Black HF patients had significantly lower peak VO(2), but yet had equivalent survival rates at 1 year. Further study is warranted to clarify the impact of these racial differences on the timing of cardiac transplantation black HF patients.

20304838
Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano rapidly reverses aortic valve stenosis and decreases leaflet inflammation in an experimental rabbit model.
Aortic stenosis (AS) is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano (rApoA-I(M)) induces atherosclerotic plaque regression. The aims of this study were to determine the effects of rApoA-I(M) on experimental aortic valve degeneration and its mechanisms of action. New Zealand White rabbits (n = 20) were fed an atherogenic diet for 9 months and then randomized to either placebo or rApoA-I(M). Echocardiography was used to assess the effect of the treatments on AS. Porcine aortic valve myofibroblasts (PAVMF) treated with oxidized low-density lipoprotein served to define the effects of rApoA-I(M) on the expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB, and alkaline phosphatase (AP). Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano increased aortic valve area (AVA) by 32% (0.25 +/- 0.05 to 0.34 +/- 0.07 cm(2), P < 0.01); whereas AVA remained unchanged in the placebo group (0.24 +/- 0.05 to 0.26 +/- 0.04 cm(2), P = 0.58). Histopathological examination of aortic valves in the rApoA-I(M) animals showed significantly less leaflet thickening, inflammation, and calcification vs. the placebo group. In vitro, rApoA-I(M) significantly inhibited MCP-1, AP, and NF-kappaB and decreased intracellular cholesterol content in PAVMF. Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano treatment reverses AS in this experimental rabbit model. The beneficial effects seem to be mediated by enhanced cholesterol removal and by reduced inflammation and calcification.

20009070
Giant T-wave inversions and extreme QT prolongation.


19621012
Cardiovascular risk factors in patients with chronic kidney disease.
Patients with chronic kidney disease have a higher burden of cardiovascular disease, which increases in a dose-dependent fashion with worsening kidney function. Traditional cardiovascular risk factors, including advanced age, diabetes mellitus, hypertension and dyslipidemia, have an important role in the progression of cardiovascular disease in patients who have a reduced glomerular filtration rate, especially in those with mild-to-moderate kidney disease. In patients with severe kidney disease, nontraditional or 'novel' risk factors, including inflammation, oxidative stress, vascular calcification, a prothrombotic milieu, and anemia, seem to confer additional risk. In this Review, we highlight factors that increase cardiovascular risk in patients with a reduced estimated glomerular filtration rate. In addition, we discuss therapeutic strategies for reducing cardiovascular risk in patients with kidney disease, whose unique atherosclerotic phenotype might require an approach that differs from traditional models developed in populations with normal kidney function. Therapeutic paradigms for patients with chronic kidney disease and cardiovascular risk factors must be evaluated in randomized trials, from which such patients have often been excluded.

19204318
Academic careers in cardiovascular medicine.


18094672
Late medical versus interventional therapy for stable ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction.
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) is associated with high morbidity and mortality, but timely reperfusion is known to result in dramatically improved patient outcomes. As many as 40% of patients with STEMI, however, present late after symptom onset, which reduces the likelihood of them receiving reperfusion therapy. The past two decades have been plagued with controversy regarding the relative benefits of reperfusion therapy after 12 h from symptom onset. Despite considerable data supporting late reperfusion and the 'late open-artery hypothesis', recent studies have demonstrated a lack of benefit with late reperfusion. Moreover, advances in the medical management of STEMI have dramatically reduced morbidity and mortality, further challenging the need for more-invasive techniques. Numerous questions have arisen regarding the appropriate management and risk stratification of asymptomatic post-STEMI patients who present late after symptom onset. In light of recent data, we present a Review of late reperfusion in STEMI, specifically highlighting the effects of current medical therapies, risk-stratification techniques, and indications for the use of late reperfusion over medical management.

17888836
Insights into degenerative aortic valve disease.
Despite the dramatic decline of rheumatic heart disease over the past 5 decades, there has not been a concordant decline in the prevalence of valvular heart disease. Degenerative aortic valve disease (DAVD) has become the most common cause of valvular heart disease in the Western world, causing significant morbidity and mortality. No longer considered a benign consequence of aging, valve calcification is the result of an active process that, much like atherosclerotic vascular disease, is preceded by basement membrane disruption, inflammatory cell infiltration, and lipid deposition and is associated with diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, and tobacco use. These realizations, in addition to pathological insights gained from emerging imaging modalities, have lead to the exploration of a variety of therapeutic interventions to delay or prevent the progression of DAVD. Inhibitors of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase, angiotensin-converting enzyme, and matrix metalloproteinase have all been studied as potential disease modifiers. Moreover, tissue engineering, aided by emerging stem cell technology, holds immense potential for the treatment of valvular heart disease as adjuncts to surgical interventions. Here we review the epidemiology and pathophysiology of DAVD, in addition to highlighting emerging therapeutic interventions for this growing problem.

20620559
Disseminated intravascular coagulation complicating Epstein-Barr virus infection in a cardiac transplant recipient: a case report.
Viral infections are particularly common after cardiac transplantation. Herein we have presented a case of Epstein-Barr infection that presented as a viral syndrome with respiratory symptoms, but was complicated by multiorgan failure and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Transplant physicians should be aware of this unique complication of an otherwise self-limited infection.

