21519031
sPLA2-IIa Amplifies Ocular Surface Inflammation in the Experimental Dry Eye (DE) BALB/c Mouse Model.
Purpose. sPLA2-IIa is a biomarker for many inflammatory diseases in humans and is found at high levels in human tears. However, its role in ocular surface inflammation remains unclear. An experimentally-induced BALB/c mouse dry eye (DE) model was utilized to elucidate the role of sPLA2-IIa in ocular surface inflammation. Methods. BALB/c mice were subcutaneously injected with scopolamine and placed in a daytime air-drying device for 5 to 10 days. Control mice received no treatment. DE status was evaluated with tear production by the Pheno-Red Thread METHOD: Tear inflammatory cytokines were quantified by multiplex immunoassays. Ocular surface inflammation and sPLA2-IIa expression were examined by immune-staining and quantitative (q)RT(2)-PCR. Conjunctiva (CNJ) of the mice was cultured for prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) production induced by sPLA2-IIa with various amount of sPLA2-IIa inhibitor, S-3319. Results. Treated mice produced less tears and heavier corneal (CN) fluorescein staining than the un-treated controls (p<0.001). They also revealed lower goblet cell density (p<0.001) with greater inflammatory cell infiltration within the conjunctiva, and higher concentration of tear inflammatory cytokines than the controls. Moreover, treated mice showed heavier sPLA2-IIa immune-staining than the controls in the CNJ epithelium, but not in the CN epithelium or the lacrimal gland (LG). Treated mice exhibited up-regulated sPLA2-IIa and cytokine gene transcription. Furthermore, CNJ cultures treated with sPLA2-IIa inhibitor showed significantly reduced sPLA2-IIa-induced inflammation. Conclusions. This is the first report regarding sPLA2-IIa in the regulation of ocular surface inflammation. The findings may therefore lead to new therapeutic strategies for ocular surface inflammation, such as DE disease.

20162838
Analysis of inflammatory cytokines in the tears of dry eye patients.
To determine the levels of 8 important cytokines and 1 chemokine in tears of patients with dry eye disease. Tear samples were collected from 7 patients with dry eye disease and 7 healthy volunteers, and impression cytology samples were collected from 3 of the dry eye patients and 3 of the normal controls. Tears were analyzed for the presence of 8 cytokines [interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, interferon (IFN)-gamma, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, IL-1 beta] and 1 chemokine (IL-8). The cytokines and chemokine in each tear sample were measured using Invitrogen's Multiplex Bead Immunoassays. The impression cytology samples were analyzed for IL-1 beta, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-alpha mRNA expression using real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analysis. All cytokines and the chemokine measured were significantly increased in the tears of dry eye patients as compared to normal controls. mRNA of all four markers was increased, and the fold increase correlated well with the fold increase of the cytokine concentration found in the tear samples. Tears from dry eye patients contain significantly increased concentrations of cytokines that show correlation to severity of the disease. The upregulation of their respective genes in the conjunctiva suggests that the concentration increase is not the result of evaporative effects, but of overproduction. These findings suggest that cytokines may play an important role in dry eye disease and topical cytokine modulators may be explored as a therapeutic approach to dry eye disease.

19724208
Analysis of inflammatory cytokines in the tears of dry eye patients.
To determine the levels of 8 important cytokines and 1 chemokine in tears of patients with dry eye disease. Tear samples were collected from 7 patients with dry eye disease and 7 healthy volunteers, and impression cytology samples were collected from 3 of the dry eye patients and 3 of the normal controls. Tears were analyzed for the presence of 8 cytokines [interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, interferon (IFN)-gamma, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, IL-1beta] and 1 chemokine (IL-8). The cytokines and chemokine in each tear sample were measured using Invitrogen's Multiplex Bead Immunoassays. The impression cytology samples were analyzed for IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-alpha mRNA expression using real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction anlaysis. All cytokines and the chemokine measured were significantly increased in the tears of dry eye patients as compared to normal controls. mRNA of all four markers was increased, and the fold increase correlated well with the fold increase of the cytokine concentration found in the tear samples. Tears from dry eye patients contain significantly increased concentrations of cytokines that show correlation to severity of the disease. The upregulation of their respective genes in the conjunctiva suggests that the concentration increase is not the result of evaporative effects, but of overproduction. These findings suggest that cytokines may play an important role in dry eye disease and topical cytokine modulators may be explored as a therapeutic approach to dry eye disease.

19116146
sPLA2-IIa is an inflammatory mediator when the ocular surface is compromised.
sPLA2-IIa is an enzyme at high concentration in tears that has been known as an innate barrier of the ocular surface against microbial infection. sPLA2-IIa and other enzymes in the same protein family are known to hydrolyze fatty acids resulting in the generation of free arachidonic acid (AA) and lysophospholipids, which are the precursors of pro-inflammatory lipid mediators, such as PGE(2). sPLA2-IIa has been shown to be an inflammatory mediator in non-ocular inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA). It was also found to be increased in the tears of the patients with dry eye disease, chronic blepharitis and contact lens intolerance. However, the role of sPLA2-IIa in chronic ocular surface inflammation has yet to be determined. In the current study, we examined the potential role of sPLA2-IIa in inflammation of ocular surface diseases. Our results show that the activity of sPLA2-IIa was significantly increased in tears from dry eye disease patients compared with that from normal subjects. Also, sPLA2-IIa stimulated the production of PGE(2) in ocular surface epithelial cell cultures. The stimulating effect was markedly enhanced when the cells or tissues were pre-compromised with TNF-alpha, IL-1beta or desiccation. Furthermore, sPLA2-IIa stimulated inflammatory cytokine production in the ocular surface epithelial cell cultures in vitro. To our knowledge, this is the first report regarding the role of sPLA2-IIa as an inflammatory mediator in ocular surface inflammation. These findings indicate that sPLA2-IIa may play an important role in chronic ocular surface inflammation, especially when the ocular surface is compromised.

17600061
Three putative cation/proton antiporters from the soda lake alkaliphile Alkalimonas amylolytica N10 complement an alkali-sensitive Escherichia coli mutant.
Attempts to identify members of the antiporter complement of the alkali- and saline-adapted soda lake alkaliphile Alkalimonas amylolytica N10 have used screens of DNA libraries in antiporter-deficient Escherichia coli KNabc. Earlier screens used Na(+) or Li(+) for selection but only identified one NhaD-type antiporter whose properties were inconsistent with a robust role in pH homeostasis. Here, new screens using elevated pH for selection identified three other putative antiporter genes that conferred resistance to pH >or=8.5 as well as Na(+) resistance. The three predicted gene products were in the calcium/cation antiporter (CaCA), cation/proton antiporter-2 (CPA2) and cation/proton antiporter-1 (CPA1) families of membrane transporters, and were designated Aa-CaxA, Aa-KefB and Aa-NhaP respectively, reflecting homology within those families. Aa-CaxA conferred the poorest Na(+) resistance and also conferred modest Ca(2+) resistance. Aa-KefB and Aa-NhaP inhibited growth of a K(+) uptake-deficient E. coli mutant (TK2420), suggesting that they catalysed K(+) efflux. For Aa-NhaP, the reversibility of the growth inhibition by high K(+) concentrations depended upon an organic nitrogen source, e.g. glutamine, rather than ammonium. This suggests that as well as K(+) efflux is catalysed by Aa-NhaP. Vesicles of E. coli KNabc expressing Aa-NhaP, which conferred the strongest alkali resistance, exhibited K(+)/H(+) antiport activity in a pH range from 7.5 to 9.5, and with an apparent K(m) for K(+) of 0.5 mM at pH 8.0. The properties of this antiporter are consistent with the possibility that this soda lake alkaliphile uses K(+)( )/H(+) antiport as part of its alkaline pH homeostasis mechanism and part of its capacity to reduce potentially toxic accumulation of cytoplasmic K(+) or respectively, under conditions of high osmolarity or active amino acid catabolism.

