20461228
Estimating the amount of information carried by a neuronal population.
Although all brain functions require coordinated activity of many neurons, it has been difficult to estimate the amount of information carried by a population of spiking neurons. We present here a Fourier-based method for estimating the information delivery rate from a population of neurons, which allows us to measure the redundancy of information within and between functional neuronal classes. We illustrate the use of the method on some artificial spike trains and on simultaneous recordings from a small population of neurons from the lateral geniculate nucleus of an anesthetized macaque monkey.

18249089
Improved mapping of information distribution across the cortical surface with the support vector machine.
The early visual cortices represent information of several stimulus attributes, such as orientation and color. To understand the coding mechanisms of these attributes in the brain, and the functional organization of the early visual cortices, it is necessary to determine whether different attributes are represented by different compartments within each cortex. Previous studies addressing this question have focused on the information encoded by the response amplitude of individual neurons or cortical columns, and have reached conflicting conclusions. Given the correlated variability in response amplitude across neighboring columns, it is likely that the spatial pattern of responses across these columns encodes the attribute information more reliably than does the response amplitude. Here we present a new method of mapping the spatial distribution of information that is encoded by both the response amplitude and the spatial pattern. This new method is based on a statistical learning approach, the Support Vector Machine (SVM). Application of this new method to our optical imaging data suggests that information about stimulus orientation and color are distributed differently in the striate cortex, and this observation is consistent with the hypothesis of segregated representations of orientation and color in this area. We also demonstrate that SVM can be used to extract "single-condition" activation maps from noisy images of intrinsic optical signals.

17763931
A simple model of retina-LGN transmission.
To gain a deeper understanding of the transmission of visual signals from retina through the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), we have used a simple leaky integrate and-fire model to simulate a relay cell in the LGN. The simplicity of the model was motivated by two questions: (1) Can an LGN model that is driven by a retinal spike train recorded as synaptic ('S') potentials, but does not include a diverse array of ion channels, nor feedback inputs from the cortex, brainstem, and thalamic reticular nucleus, accurately simulate the LGN discharge on a spike-for-spike basis? (2) Are any special synaptic mechanisms, beyond simple summation of currents, necessary to model experimental recordings? We recorded cat relay cell responses to spatially homogeneous small or large spots, with luminance that was rapidly modulated in a pseudo-random fashion. Model parameters for each cell were optimized with a Simplex algorithm using a short segment of the recording. The model was then tested on a much longer, distinct data set consisting of responses to numerous repetitions of the noisy stimulus. For LGN cells that spiked in response to a sufficiently large fraction of retinal inputs, we found that this simplified model accurately predicted the firing times of LGN discharges. This suggests that modulations of the efficacy of the retino-geniculate synapse by pre-synaptic facilitation or depression are not necessary in order to account for the LGN responses generated by our stimuli, and that post-synaptic summation is sufficient.

17276087
Hue maps in primate striate cortex.
The macaque striate cortex (V1) contains neurons that respond preferentially to various hues. The properties of these hue-selective neurons have been studied extensively at the single-unit level, but it is unclear how stimulus hue is represented by the distribution of activity across neuronal populations in V1. Here we use the intrinsic optical signal to image V1 responses to spatially uniform stimuli of various hues. We found that (1) each of these stimuli activates an array of patches in the supragranular layers of the parafoveal V1; (2) the patches activated by different hues overlapped partially; 3) the peak locations of these patches were determined by stimulus hue. The peaks associated with various hues form well-separated clusters, in which nearby peaks represent perceptually similar hues. Each cluster represents a full gamut of hue in a small cortical area ( approximately 160 microm long). The hue order is preserved within each peak cluster, but the clusters have various geometrical shapes. These clusters were co-localized with regions that responded preferentially to chromatic gratings compared with achromatic ones. Our results suggest that V1 contains an array of hue maps, in which the hue of a stimulus is represented by the location of the peak response to the stimulus. The orderly, organized hue maps in V1, together with the recently discovered hue maps in the extrastriate cortical area V2, are likely to play an important role in hue perception in primates.

