20722243
Resistant disease or resistant patient: problems with adherence to cardiovascular medications in the elderly.
When faced with difficult-to-control cardiovascular risk factors, clinicians need to address the potential role of patient adherence to medication. Among the elderly in particular, careful consideration must be paid to accurately diagnosing an adherence problem in the context of often worsening atherosclerosis. This process includes moving beyond relying on clinical intuition to ascertain whether a patient has "real" (e.g., identifiable) reasons for suboptimal risk factor control and becoming comfortable using evidence-based questions and other ancillary data, when available, to more objectively identify patients with adherence issues. Once identified, a tailored search for an etiology that explores elderly specific patient, physician, and health care system factors needs to be conducted to understand why adherence is a problem for the patient. Finally, clinicians should employ simple tools and clear communication to work with patients and to help them overcome the relevant barriers.

20702755
Predictors of nonadherence to statins: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Nonadherence to statins limits the benefits of this common drug class. Individual studies assessing predictors of nonadherence have produced inconsistent results. To identify reliable predictors of nonadherence to statins through systematic review and meta-analysis. Multiple databases, including MEDLINE, EMBASE, and PsycINFO, were searched (from inception through February 2009) to identify studies that evaluated predictors of nonadherence to statins. Studies were selected using a priori defined criteria, and each study was reviewed by 2 authors who abstracted data on study characteristics and outcomes. Relative risks were then pooled, using an inverse-variance weighted random-effects model. Twenty-two cohort studies met inclusion criteria. Age had a U-shaped association with adherence; the oldest (>/=70 years) and youngest (<50 years) subjects had lower adherence than the middle-aged (50-69 years) subjects. Women and patients with lower incomes were more likely to be nonadherent than were men (odds of nonadherence 1.07; 95% CI 1.04 to 1.11) and those with higher incomes (odds of nonadherence 1.18; 95% CI 1.10 to 1.28), respectively. A history of cardiovascular disease predicted better adherence to statins (odds of nonadherence 0.68; 95% CI 0.66 to 0.78). Similarly, a diagnosis of hypertension or diabetes was associated with better adherence. Although there were too few studies for quantitative pooling, increased testing of lipid levels and lower out-of-pocket costs appeared to be associated with better adherence. There was substantial (I(2) range 68.7-96.3%) heterogeneity between studies across factors. Several sociodemographic, medical, and health-care utilization characteristics are associated with statin nonadherence. These factors may be useful guides for targeting statin adherence interventions.

20628087
Impact of A1C screening criterion on the diagnosis of pre-diabetes among U.S. adults.
New clinical practice recommendations include A1C as an alternative to fasting glucose as a diagnostic test for identifying pre-diabetes. The impact of these new recommendations on the diagnosis of pre-diabetes is unknown. Data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1999-2006 (n = 7,029) were analyzed to determine the percentage and number of U.S. adults without diabetes classified as having pre-diabetes by the elevated A1C (5.7-6.4%) and by the impaired fasting glucose (IFG) (fasting glucose 100-125 mg/dl) criterion separately. Test characteristics (sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values) using IFG as the reference standard were calculated. The prevalence of pre-diabetes among U.S. adults was 12.6% by the A1C criterion and 28.2% by the fasting glucose criterion. Only 7.7% of U.S. adults, reflecting 61 and 27% of those with pre-diabetes by A1C and fasting glucose, respectively, had pre-diabetes according to both definitions. A1C used alone would reclassify 37.6 million Americans with IFG to not having pre-diabetes and 8.9 million without IFG to having pre-diabetes (46.5 million reclassified). Using IFG as the reference standard, pre-diabetes by the A1C criterion has 27% sensitivity, 93% specificity, 61% positive predictive value, and 77% negative predictive value. Using A1C as the pre-diabetes criterion would reclassify the pre-diabetes diagnosis of nearly 50 million Americans. It is imperative that clinicians and health systems understand the differences and similarities in using A1C or IFG in diagnosis of pre-diabetes.

20375194
Comparative validity of 3 diabetes mellitus risk prediction scoring models in a multiethnic US cohort: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis.
Several models for estimating risk of incident diabetes in US adults are available. The authors aimed to determine the discriminative ability and calibration of published diabetes risk prediction models in a contemporary multiethnic cohort. Participants in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis without diabetes at baseline (2000-2002; n = 5,329) were followed for a median of 4.75 years. The predicted risk of diabetes was calculated using published models from the Framingham Offspring Study, the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study, and the San Antonio Heart Study. The mean age of participants was 61.6 years (standard deviation, 10.2); 29.3% were obese, 53.1% had hypertension, 34.9% had a family history of diabetes, 27.5% had high triglyceride levels, 33.8% had low high density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, and 15.3% had impaired fasting glucose. There were 446 incident cases of diabetes (fasting glucose level >or=126 mg/dL or initiation of antidiabetes medication use) diagnosed during follow-up. C statistics were 0.78, 0.84, and 0.83 for the Framingham, ARIC, and San Antonio risk prediction models, respectively. There were significant differences between observed and predicted diabetes risks (Hosmer-Lemeshow goodness-of-fit chi-squared test for each model: P < 0.001). The recalibrated and best-fit models achieved sufficient goodness of fit (each P > 0.10). The Framingham, ARIC, and San Antonio models maintained high discriminative ability but required recalibration in a modern, multiethnic US cohort.

19959322
The Statin Choice decision aid in primary care: a randomized trial.
To assess the impact of a decision aid on perceived risk of heart attacks and medication adherence among urban primary care patients with diabetes. We randomly allocated 150 patients with diabetes to participate in a usual primary care visit either with or without the Statin Choice tool. Participants completed a questionnaire at baseline and telephone follow-up at 3 and 6 months. Intervention patients were more likely to accurately perceive their underlying risk for a heart attack without taking a statin (OR: 1.9, CI: 1.0-3.8) and with taking a statin (OR: 1.4, CI: 0.7-2.8); a decline in risk overestimation among patients receiving the decision aid accounts for this finding. There was no difference in statin adherence at 3 or 6 months. A decision aid about using statins to reduce coronary risk among patients with diabetes improved risk communication, beliefs, and decisional conflict, but did not improve adherence to statins. Decision aid enhanced communication about the risks and benefits of statins improved patient risk perceptions but did not alter adherence among patients with diabetes.

19852197
Assessing the validity of self-reported medication adherence among inner-city asthmatic adults: the Medication Adherence Report Scale for Asthma.
A validated tool to assess adherence with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) could help physicians and researchers determine whether poor asthma control is due to poor adherence or severe intrinsic asthma. To assess the performance of the Medication Adherence Report Scale for Asthma (MARS-A), a 10-item, self-reported measure of adherence with ICS. We interviewed 318 asthmatic adults receiving care at 2 inner-city clinics. Self-reported adherence with ICS was measured by MARS-A at baseline and 1 and 3 months. ICS adherence was measured electronically in 53 patients. Electronic adherence was the percentage of days patients used ICS. Patients with a mean MARS-A score of 4.5 or higher or with electronic adherence of more than 70% were defined as good adherers. We assessed internal validity (Cronbach alpha, test-retest correlations), criterion validity (associations between self-reported adherence and electronic adherence), and construct validity (correlating self-reported adherence with ICS beliefs). The mean patient age was 47 years; 40% of patients were Hispanic, 40% were black, and 18% were white; 53% had prior asthma hospitalizations; and 70% had prior oral steroid use. Electronic substudy patients were similar to the rest of the cohort in age, sex, race, and asthma severity. MARS-A had good interitem correlation in English and Spanish (Cronbach alpha = 0.85 and 0.86, respectively) and good test-retest reliability (r = 0.65, P < .001). According to electronic measurements, patients used ICS 52% of days. Continuous MARS-A scores correlated with continuous electronic adherence (r = 0.42, P<.001), and dichotomized high self-reported adherence predicted high electronic adherence (odds ratio, 10.6; 95% confidence interval, 2.5-44.5; P < .001). Construct validity was good, with self-reported adherence higher in those saying daily ICS use was important and ICS were controller medications (P = .04). MARS-A demonstrated good psychometric performance as a self-reported measure of adherence with ICS among English- and Spanish-speaking, low-income, minority patients with asthma.

19184390
Predictors of adherence to diabetes medications: the role of disease and medication beliefs.
Despite the effectiveness of drug therapy in diabetes management high rates of poor adherence persist. The purpose of this study was to identify potentially modifiable patient disease and medication beliefs associated with poor medication adherence among people with diabetes. A cohort of patients with diabetes was recruited from an urban primary-care clinic in New York City. Patients were interviewed in English or Spanish about: disease beliefs, medication beliefs, regimen complexity, diabetes knowledge, depression, self-efficacy, and medication adherence (Morisky scale). Logistic regression was used to identify multivariate predictors of poor medication adherence (Morisky > 1). Patients (n = 151) had diabetes for an average of 13 years with a mean HgA1C of 7.6 (SD 1.7). One-in-four (28%) were poor adherers to their diabetes medicines. In multivariate analyses, predictors of poor medication adherence were: believing you have diabetes only when your sugar is high (OR = 7.4;2-27.2), saying there was no need to take medicine when the glucose was normal (OR = 3.5;0.9-13.7), worrying about side-effects of diabetes medicines (OR = 3.3;1.3-8.7), lack of self-confidence in controlling diabetes (OR = 2.8;1.1-7.1), and feeling medicines are hard to take (OR = 14.0;4.4-44.6). Disease and medication beliefs inconsistent with a chronic disease model of diabetes were significant predictors of poor medication adherence. These suboptimal beliefs are potentially modifiable and are logical targets for educational interventions to improve diabetes self-management.

19131457
Misconceptions about diabetes and its management among low-income minorities with diabetes.
To determine diabetic patients' knowledge and beliefs about the disease and medications that could hinder optimal disease management. A cross-sectional survey of 151 type 2 diabetic patients characterizing diabetes knowledge and beliefs about the disease and medications was conducted. Mean diabetes duration was 13 years. Over half of the patients (56%) believed that normal glucose is <or=200 mg/dl, 54% reported being able to feel when blood glucose levels are high, 36% thought that they will not always have diabetes, 29% thought that their doctor will cure them of diabetes, one in four (23%) said there is no need to take diabetes medications when glucose levels are normal, and 12% believed they have diabetes only when glucose levels are high. Diabetes knowledge and beliefs inconsistent with a chronic disease model of diabetes were prevalent in this sample. Suboptimal knowledge and beliefs are potentially modifiable and are logical targets for educational interventions to improve diabetes self-management.

17673064
Dietary indiscretion and statin use.
To determine whether statin use leads to dietary indiscretion, this longitudinal cohort study examined the impact of statin initiation on saturated fat intake. We interviewed 71 patients who had received a new prescription for statins for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease, first at the time of prescription and then again 3 and 6 months later. Patients were asked about their beliefs regarding diet and medications as well as their diet during the past 24 hours in all interviews and about their adherence to statins in the 3- and 6-month follow-up interviews. At the time of statin prescription, 54 participants (76 percent) wanted to reduce dietary fat, 50 (70 percent) believed statin use could cure their hyperlipidemia, and 31 (44 percent) thought that physicians prescribed statins to them despite their preference to continue to try dietary changes. After 6 months of statin use, no significant change in saturated fat intake was noted.

17665294
Predictors of adherence to statins for primary prevention.
Statins are potent drugs for reducing cholesterol and cardiovascular disease; however, their effectiveness is significantly compromised by poor adherence. This prospective study was designed to identify potentially modifiable patient factors including medication, disease, and diet beliefs related to statin adherence. Veterans (n = 71) given their first prescription of a statin for primary prevention were interviewed at baseline, 3 months, and 6 months regarding medication, disease, and diet beliefs along with self-reported statin adherence. At 6-month follow-up, 55% of the cohort was non-adherent with 10% reporting never having started their statin, 50% reporting misconceptions about the duration of treatment and a median use of <2 months among those who discontinued their statin. Multivariate predictors of non-adherence were expected short treatment duration (OR = 3.6, 1.4-9.4), low perceived risk of myocardial infarction (OR = 3.1, 1.1-8.7), concern about potential harm from statins (OR = 2.5, 1.0-6.3), being Hispanic (OR = 3.9, 1.0-15.2), and younger age (OR = 4.2, 1.1-15.8). Poor adherence to statins was common in this primary prevention population with frequent early discontinuation despite access to low-cost medicines. Patient factors regarding the perception of risk, toxic effects of medication, expected treatment duration, as well as socio-demographic factors, were significant predictors of poor adherence and warrant further exploration.

17372816
Inverse relationship between lipid-lowering drugs and saturated fat intake in US adults.
While lipid-lowering drugs reduce cardiovascular risk, there is concern that their use may discourage dietary restriction of saturated fat (SF). The purpose of this analysis was to evaluate the association between taking lipid-lowering drugs and SF intake. We analyzed cross-sectional data on cholesterol and diet from 6,473 adult respondents in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999-2002. Respondents were classified into three groups: (1) no history of high cholesterol (Desirable Cholesterol or DC), (2) history of high cholesterol without current drug treatment (Non-Drug Treated or NDT), and (3) history of high cholesterol with active lipid-lowering medication use (Drug-Treated or DT). Regression models were used to compare the mean percentage of daily kilocalories from SF among the three groups while controlling for confounders. Unadjusted analyses revealed significantly lower mean daily intake of SF (% of Kcal/day) among DT respondents compared to both DC (-.40 SF; 95% Confidence Interval [CI], -0.71 to -0.08) and NDT respondents [-.36 SF; CI, -0.79 to 0.06]. The complete multivariate model controlling for all covariates (age, sex, education, race/ethnicity, current smoking, alcohol use, BMI, physical activity, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, hypertension) attenuated the relationship compared to D (-.35 SF, CI -0.7 to -0.01) and NDT (-.25 SF, CI -0.62 to 0.12) individuals. Taking lipid-lowering medications is associated with a lower intake of SF. However, a prospective study of diet and medication use is needed to definitively evaluate the relationship between lipid-lowering medications and SF intake.

20642704
Preventing diabetes complications: are we too glucocentric?


