20421485
ACTH protects against glucocorticoid-induced osteonecrosis of bone.
We report that adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) protects against osteonecrosis of the femoral head induced by depot methylprednisolone acetate (depomedrol). This therapeutic response likely arises from enhanced osteoblastic support and the stimulation of VEGF by ACTH; the latter is largely responsible for maintaining the fine vascular network that surrounds highly remodeling bone. We suggest examining the efficacy of ACTH in preventing human osteonecrosis, a devastating complication of glucocorticoid therapy.

18384746
TNF-induced gene expression oscillates in time.
With only few exceptions that include Hes-1 p53, and IkappaB, the expression of genes has never been shown to be oscillatory. Here, we show that the inflammatory cytokine TNF triggers oscillations in >5000 genes. We utilize microarrays at 30-min intervals to analyze the pattern of global gene expression in murine macrophages. We find that 15% of genes in the genome underwent a significant >3-fold increase in expression, with 89% of these displaying oscillations at frequencies as low as every 50min. We analyze further two sub-clusters of genes that either began oscillating early or after a lag phase. Through the use of quantitative PCR, we confirm the oscillations and show that the oscillations are continuous. Moreover, we show that these continuous oscillations are not unique to TNF, but that related cytokines such as RANK-L produces oscillations with a unique induction profile. In the two papers accompanying this one, we analyze the mechanism of these oscillations and find that TNF also triggers oscillations in the phosphorylation of MAP kinases, and that these oscillations combine to recruit transcription factors to promoters in a cyclical fashion. The results presented here suggest that gene transcription is a highly dynamic processes, with thousands of genes displaying rapid (<60min) oscillations over time. Considering this dynamism, time-resolved measurements of gene transcription should become the experimental norm.

18384744
TNF-induced oscillations in combinatorial transcription factor binding.
We have shown in two accompanying papers that TNF induces oscillations in (1) approximately 13% of the genome, and (2) the activation of MAP kinase and NF-kappaB signaling pathways. Here we aim to bridge oscillations in signal transduction activation to oscillations in genetic output. Specifically, we sought to study how these oscillations can combine in a ligand-specific manner at the level of the promoter to initiate gene transcription. We utilize the late onset gene CD38 as a model gene since it has previously been shown that TNF, but not the related cytokine RANK-L, induces its expression. We find that TNF-induced oscillations in p65 and p50 recruitment to the CD38 promoter correlated with recruitment of MAPK-induced AP-1 recruitment, as analyzed by quantitative ChIP analysis. Through re-ChIP analysis we show that a unique transcriptional complex is seen on the promoter at 3h post-TNF addition, corresponding to the onset of CD38 transcription, which is not seen in the basal state. Moreover, we show that RANK-L was unable to combinatorially recruit AP-1 and NF-kappaB transcription factors to the CD38 promoter, despite inducing the activation of both signaling pathways. These results, in sum with the two accompanying papers, constitute a new paradigm through which cells dynamically orchestrate signaling molecules to coordinate time-resolved gene transcription by the formation of novel time-specific transcriptional complexes.

18332426
Intermittent recombinant TSH injections prevent ovariectomy-induced bone loss.
We recently described the direct effects of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) on bone and suggested that the bone loss in hyperthyroidism, hitherto attributed solely to elevated thyroid hormone levels, could at least in part arise from accompanying decrements in serum TSH. Recent studies on both mice and human subjects provide compelling evidence that thyroid hormones and TSH have the opposite effects on the skeleton. Here, we show that TSH, when injected intermittently into rodents, even at intervals of 2 weeks, displays a powerful antiresorptive action in vivo. By virtue of this action, together with the possible anabolic effects shown earlier, TSH both prevents bone loss and restores the lost bone after ovariectomy. Importantly, the osteoclast inhibitory action of TSH persists ex vivo even after therapy is stopped for 4 weeks. This profound and lasting antiresorptive action of TSH is mimicked in cells that genetically overexpress the constitutively active ligand-independent TSH receptor (TSHR). In contrast, loss of function of a mutant TSHR (Pro --> Leu at 556) in congenital hypothyroid mice activates osteoclast differentiation, confirming once again our premise that TSHRs have a critical role in regulating bone remodeling.

18060857
Functional grouping of osteoclast genes revealed through microarray analysis.
We describe for the first time functional clusters of genes that are modulated during the differentiation of osteoclasts. Pathway analysis was applied to gene array data generated from affymetrix chips hybridized to RNA isolated from RAW264.7 cells exposed to RANK-ligand (RANK-L) for 5 days. This analysis revealed major functional gene clusters that were either up- or down-regulated during osteoclastogenesis. Some of the genes within the clusters have known functions, while others do not. We discuss herein the relevance of these functional gene clusters and their modulation to biological processes underlying the formation, function, and fate of osteoclasts.

17872390
Cellular and molecular consequences of calcineurin A alpha gene deletion.
Here we briefly review our studies that have unraveled an important role for the calcium- and calmodulin-sensitive enzyme calcineurin (CN) in bone remodeling. We find that the genetic deletion of the calcineurin Aalpha isoform results in osteoporosis, which is recapitulated in humans following calcineurin inhibitor therapy widely used after solid organ transplantation. Mechanistically, however, while both calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporine and tacrolimus initially stimulate osteoclastic bone resorption in humans, the predominant feature in the CNAalpha null mouse is a profound reduction in bone formation. We speculate that the so-called "calcineurin inhibitors" may interact with molecules other than calcineurin. The clinical relevance of these observations is explored.

17681281
Regulation of FSH receptor promoter activation in the osteoclast.
We have shown recently that FSH stimulates osteoclast formation and function by a direct action on a G(i)-coupled FSH receptor (FSHR). Here, we report properties of the mouse FSH receptor promoter in the context of its activation in RAW-C3 osteoclast precursor macrophages. Basal promoter activity was low, but was significantly stimulated by receptor activator for NF-kappaB-ligand (RANK-L), a critical osteoclastogenic and pro-resorptive cytokine. In contrast, FSH dampened FSHR promoter activation, while estrogen had no effect. We surmise that the FSHR expression is regulated distinctly in the osteoclast, and differently from other cells, such as the ovarian follicular and Leydig cells.

