21486948
Estrogen receptor mediates a distinct mitochondrial unfolded protein response.
Unfolded protein responses (UPRs) of the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial matrix have been described. Here, we show that the accumulation of proteins in the inter-membrane space (IMS) of mitochondria in the breast cancer cell line MCF-7 activates a distinct UPR. Upon IMS stress, overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and phosphorylation of AKT triggers estrogen receptor (ER) activity, which further upregulates the transcription of the mitochondrial regulator NRF1 and the IMS protease OMI (officially known as HTRA2). Moreover, we demonstrate that the IMS stress-induced UPR culminates in increased proteasome activity. Given our previous report on a proteasome- and OMI-dependent checkpoint that limits the import of IMS proteins, the findings presented in this study suggest that this newly discovered UPR acts as a cytoprotective response to overcome IMS stress.

21410629
Germline CAG repeat length of the androgen receptor and time to progression in patients with prostate cancer treated with androgen deprivation therapy.
Study Type - Prognosis (retrospective cohort) Level of Evidence?2b OBJECTIVES: •?Germline CAG repeat polymorphisms in the androgen receptor (AR-CAG) have been shown to influence the activity of the AR. •?The purpose of the present study was to determine if AR-CAG repeat length correlates with time to progression on androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). PATIENTS AND METHODS: •?Germline AR-CAG repeat lengths were determined in a cohort of 480 patients with recurrent or metastatic prostate cancer treated at a single tertiary care institution and correlated to time to progression (TTP) and overall survival. RESULTS: •?There was no significant correlation between differences in the AR-CAG repeat lengths and TTP or overall survival in patients with prostate cancer receiving ADT. •?AR-CAG repeat lengths did not significantly correlate with age, prostate-specific antigen (PSA), Gleason score or clinical stage at diagnosis. •?In patients with metastatic disease, longer AR-CAG repeat lengths (>23 vs ?23) were associated with a longer TTP on ADT, but this finding was of borderline significance (median TTP 18.3 vs 15.5 months, P= 0.09; adjusted HR = 0.76, 95% confidence interval = 0.54-1.09). CONCLUSION: •?This is the largest published study to date investigating the association of germline AR-CAG repeat lengths and efficacy of ADT in prostate cancer. •?Germline AR-CAG repeat lengths do not predict response to ADT.

21292820
Bortezomib enhances the efficacy of fulvestrant by amplifying the aggregation of the estrogen receptor, which leads to a proapoptotic unfolded protein response.
Fulvestrant is known to promote the degradation of the estrogen receptor (ER) in the nucleus. However, fulvestrant also promotes the aggregation of the newly synthesized ER in the cytoplasm. Accumulation of protein aggregates leads to cell death but this effect is limited as a result of their elimination by the proteasome. We tested whether combining fulvestrant with the proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib, could enhance the accumulation of ER aggregates and cause apoptotic cell death. The rate of aggregation of the ER was monitored in ER(+) breast cancer cells lines, T47D, ZR-75.1, BT474, MDA-MB-361, MCF-7, fulvestrant resistance MCF-7, and tamoxifen-resistant T47D-cyclin D1 cells. Activation of the unfolded protein response, apoptosis, and metabolic rate were also monitored in these cell lines following treatment with fulvestrant, bortezomib, or bortezomib in combination with fulvestrant. We found that bortezomib enhances the fulvestrant-mediated aggregation of the ER in the cytoplasm without blocking the degradation of the ER in the nucleus. Further, these aggregates activate a sustained unfolded protein response leading to apoptotic cell death. Further, we show that the combination induced tumor regression in a breast cancer mouse model of tamoxifen resistance. Adding bortezomib to fulvestrant enhances its efficacy by taking advantage of the unique ability of fulvestrant to promote cytoplasmic aggregates of the ER. As this effect of fulvestrant is independent of the transcriptional activity of the ER, these results suggest that this novel combination may be effective in breast cancers that are ER(+) but estrogen independent. Clin Cancer Res; 17(8); 2292-300. ©2011 AACR.

21255415
Skp2 and Skp2B team up against Rb and p53.
ABSTRACT: The Skp2 locus encodes two proteins, Skp2 and Skp2B. The role of Skp2 in the ubiquitin-dependent degradation of key regulators of the retinoblastoma protein pathway has been well established. More recent work from the McCormick's group suggested that Skp2 has an ubiquitin-independent function in the regulation of the p53 pathway. Adding to this observation, we reported that Skp2B also regulates the activity of p53 by degrading a distinct substrate, prohibitin. Since prohibitin has been implicated in the regulation of the Rb pathway, collectively, these observations suggest that Skp2 and Skp2B team up against p53 and Rb.

20134482
Skp2B attenuates p53 function by inhibiting prohibitin.
The F-box protein Skp2 and its isoform Skp2B are both overexpressed in breast cancers. Skp2 alters the activity of p53 by inhibiting its interaction with p300 and by promoting p300 degradation. Here, we report that Skp2B also attenuates the activity of p53; however, this effect is independent of p300, suggesting that another mechanism might be involved. Prohibitin, a protein reported to activate p53, was isolated in a two-hybrid screen with the carboxy-terminal domain unique to Skp2B. We observed that prohibitin is a new substrate of Skp2B and that the degradation of prohibitin is responsible for the attenuated activity of p53 in cells overexpressing Skp2B. Furthermore, we show that the activity of p53 is reduced in the mammary glands of Skp2B transgenic mice. This study indicates that both Skp2 and Skp2B attenuate p53 activity through different pathways, suggesting that amplification of the Skp2 locus represents a powerful mechanism to attenuate p53 function in cancer.

19019155
Ubiquitin-dependent and -independent mitochondrial protein quality controls: implications in ageing and neurodegenerative diseases.
The ubiquitin-independent protein quality control of matrix proteins of the mitochondrion is well characterized and until recently the mitochondrion was considered a 'ubiquitination-free' organelle. However, a number of studies now indicate multiple roles of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in the regulation and maintenance of mitochondrial integrity. Of particular interest to this review is the finding of a mitochondrial ubiquitin-dependent protein quality control and that this pathway may share similarity to the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway that acts to eliminate misfolded proteins from the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum. The potential cross-talk between the ubiquitin-dependent and -independent protein quality controls and their implications in ageing and neurodegenerative diseases, notably in Parkinson's disease, are discussed.

18362145
Mitochondrial protein quality control by the proteasome involves ubiquitination and the protease Omi.
We report here that blocking the activity of the 26 S proteasome results in drastic changes in the morphology of the mitochondria and accumulation of intermembrane space (IMS) proteins. Using endonuclease G (endoG) as a model IMS protein, we found that accumulation of wild-type but to a greater extent mutant endoG leads to changes in the morphology of the mitochondria similar to those observed following proteasomal inhibition. Further, we show that wild-type but to a greater extent mutant endoG is a substrate for ubiquitination, suggesting the presence of a protein quality control. Conversely, we also report that wild-type but not mutant endoG is a substrate for the mitochondrial protease Omi but only upon inhibition of the proteasome. These findings suggest that although elimination of mutant IMS proteins is strictly dependent on ubiquitination, elimination of excess or spontaneously misfolded wild-type IMS proteins is monitored by ubiquitination and as a second checkpoint by Omi cleavage when the proteasome function is deficient. One implication of our finding is that in the context of attenuated proteasomal function, accumulation of IMS proteins would contribute to the collapse of the mitochondrial network such as that observed in neurodegenerative diseases. Another implication is that such collapse could be accelerated either by mutations in IMS proteins or by mutations in Omi itself.

18245487
Tamoxifen stimulates the growth of cyclin D1-overexpressing breast cancer cells by promoting the activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3.
De novo or acquired resistance to tamoxifen is a major clinical challenge for the management of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancers. Although cyclin D1 overexpression is associated with a better outcome for breast cancer patients, its overexpression is also linked to tamoxifen resistance. We previously reported that the beneficial effect of cyclin D1 correlates with its ability to repress the antiapoptotic transcription factor signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). In contrast, molecular pathways linking overexpression of cyclin D1 to tamoxifen resistance have not been established. In the current study, the effect of tamoxifen on the growth of genetically matched high or low cyclin D1-expressing breast cancer cells was characterized and the interactions between cyclin D1, ER, and STAT3 in response to tamoxifen treatment were determined. We show that repression of STAT3 by cyclin D1 inhibits cell growth on Matrigel and in tumors in vivo; however, treatment with tamoxifen abolishes cyclin D1-mediated repression of STAT3 and growth suppression. We show that tamoxifen induces a redistribution of cyclin D1 from STAT3 to the ER, which results in the activation of both STAT3 and the ER. These results offer a molecular mechanism for the dual effect of cyclin D1 overexpression in breast cancer and support the notion that the level of cyclin D1 expression and activated STAT3 are important markers to predict response to tamoxifen treatment.

17908954
Targeting the cytoplasmic and nuclear functions of signal transducers and activators of transcription 3 for cancer therapy.
Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) are a highly conserved family of transcription factors that are activated by phosphorylation in the cytoplasm, after which they translocate to the nucleus to regulate gene expression. Among the seven STATs, STAT3 is of particular interest due to its constitutive phosphorylation in a large proportion of human cancers and its ability to induce neoplastic transformation. Inhibition of STAT3 can reverse tumor growth in experimental systems while having few effects in normal cells. These findings have implicated STAT3 as a potentially important target for therapeutic intervention. In addition to its well-described role as a transcription factor, STAT3 has been found recently to have important effects in the cytoplasm. Collectively, these functions of STAT3 directly contribute to tumorigenesis, invasion, and metastasis. Given the potential importance of STAT3 as a target for cancer therapy, molecules have been developed that can block STAT3 function at a variety of steps. These drugs show promise as anticancer agents in model systems of a variety of common human cancers. Thus, elucidating the functions of STAT3 and developing agents to inhibit this protein remain important scientific and clinical challenges.

17785450
Skp2B stimulates mammary gland development by inhibiting REA, the repressor of the estrogen receptor.
Skp2B, an F-box protein of unknown function, is frequently overexpressed in breast cancer. In order to determine the function of Skp2B and whether it has a role in breast cancer, we performed a two-hybrid screen and established transgenic mice expressing Skp2B in the mammary glands. We found that Skp2B interacts with the repressor of estrogen receptor activity (REA) and that overexpression of Skp2B leads to a reduction in REA levels. In the mammary glands of MMTV-Skp2B mice, REA levels are also low. Our results show that in virgin transgenic females, Skp2B induces lobuloalveolar development and differentiation of the mammary glands normally observed during pregnancy. As this phenotype is identical to what was observed for REA heterozygote mice, our observations suggest that the Skp2B-REA interaction is physiologically relevant. However, in contrast to REA(+/-) mice, MMTV-Skp2B mice develop mammary tumors, suggesting that Skp2B affects additional proteins. These results indicate that the observed expression of Skp2B in breast cancer does contribute to tumorigenesis at least in part by modulating the activity of the estrogen receptor.

17504161
Targeting the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in cancer therapy.
The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway plays a central role in the degradation of proteins involved in several pathways including the cell cycle, cellular proliferation and apoptosis. Bortezomib is the first proteasome inhibitor to enter clinical use, and received approval by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of patients with multiple myeloma, therefore validating inhibition of the proteasome as an anticancer target. The approval of Bortezomib was based on a large, international, multicenter phase III trial showing its efficacy and safety compared with conventional therapy. Preclinical data also demonstrates the synergistic effect of bortezomib with other chemotherapeutic agents and its ability to overcome drug resistance. Since then several other proteasome inhibitors have been developed. The anti-tumor activities of bortezomib have been attributed to its effect on pro-apoptotic pathways including the inhibition of NF-kappaB and induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress. However, the molecular mechanisms are not fully understood. In this review, we will summarize the molecular mechanism of apoptosis by bortezomib.

