20495382
SMC complexes and topoisomerase II work together so that sister chromatids can work apart.
The pairing of sister chromatids in interphase facilitates error-free homologous recombination (HR). Sister chromatids are held together by cohesin, one of three Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes (SMC) complexes. In mitosis, chromosome condensation is controlled by another SMC complex, condensin, and the type II topoisomerase (Top2). In prophase, cohesin is stripped from chromosome arms, but remains at centromeres until anaphase, whereupon it is removed via proteolytic cleavage. The third SMC complex, Smc5/6, is generally described as a regulator of HR-mediated DNA repair. However, cohesin and condensin are also required for DNA repair, and HR genes are not essential for cell viability, but the SMC complexes are. Smc5/6 null mutants die in mitosis, and in fission yeast, Smc5/6 hypomorphs show lethal mitoses following genotoxic stress, or when combined with a Top2 mutant, top2-191. We found these mitotic defects are due to retention of cohesin on chromosome arms. We also show that Top2 functions in the cohesin cycle, and accumulating data suggests this is not related to its decatenation activity. Thus the SMC complexes and Top2 functionally interact, and any DNA repair function ascribed to Smc5/6 is likely a reflection of a more fundamental role in the regulation of chromosome structure.

20194963
Transformation/transcription domain-associated protein (TRRAP)-mediated regulation of Wee1.
The G2 DNA damage checkpoint inhibits Cdc2 and mitotic entry through the dual regulation of Wee1 and Cdc25 by the Chk1 effector kinase. Upregulation of Chk1 by mutation or overexpression bypasses the requirement for upstream regulators or DNA damage to promote a G2 cell cycle arrest. We screened in fission yeast for mutations that rendered cells resistant to overexpressed chk1(+). We identified a mutation in tra1, which encodes one of two homologs of transformation/transcription domain-associated protein (TRRAP), an ATM/R-related pseudokinase that scaffolds several histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complexes. Inhibition of histone deacetylases reverts the resistance to overexpressed chk1(+), suggesting this phenotype is due to a HAT activity, although expression of checkpoint and cell cycle genes is not greatly affected. Cells with mutant or deleted tra1 activate Chk1 normally and are checkpoint proficient. However, these cells are semi-wee even when overexpressing chk1(+) and accumulate inactive Wee1 protein. The changed division response (Cdr) kinases Cdr1 and Cdr2 are negative regulators of Wee1, and we show that they are required for the Tra1-dependent alterations to Wee1 function. This identifies Tra1 as another component controlling the timing of entry into mitosis via Cdc2 activation.

19574738
The G(2) DNA damage checkpoint: could this ancient regulator be the Achilles heel of cancer?
The maintenance of genomic integrity is important in normal cell growth and organism development, as well as in the prevention of cancer. Cell cycle checkpoints allow the cell time to complete replication and repair DNA damage before it can pass to the next cell cycle stage. These checkpoints ensure faithful segregation of one undamaged copy of the genome to each daughter cell. In humans, a DNA damage-based checkpoint signal in G(1) is propagated through activation of the tumor suppressor p53, which is mutated in many cancers. Chk1, a serine/threonine kinase, controls checkpoint responses in G(2). Chk1 is activated by the concerted action of many upstream proteins and prevents a cell from entering mitosis with damaged or incompletely replicated DNA. This checkpoint is conserved from the fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe through to humans. However, unlike p53, G(2) checkpoint genes are rarely if ever mutated in cancer cells. This suggests that these genes are essential for tumor cell viability and may represent valid anti-cancer drug targets. This review will describe the current understanding of the G(2) checkpoint including how the human biology has been informed by studies in fission yeast. It will also discuss the present status and future of potential cancer therapies aimed at inactivating this signaling pathway in tumor cells.

19528228
Smc5-Smc6-dependent removal of cohesin from mitotic chromosomes.
The function of the essential cohesin-related Smc5-Smc6 complex has remained elusive, though hypomorphic mutants have defects late in recombination, in checkpoint maintenance, and in chromosome segregation. Recombination and checkpoints are not essential for viability, and Smc5-Smc6-null mutants die in lethal mitoses. This suggests that the chromosome segregation defects may be the source of lethality in irradiated Smc5-Smc6 hypomorphs. We show that in smc6 mutants, following DNA damage in interphase, chromosome arm segregation fails due to an aberrant persistence of cohesin, which is normally removed by the Separase-independent pathway. This postanaphase persistence of cohesin is not dependent on DNA damage, since the synthetic lethality of smc6 hypomorphs with a topoisomerase II mutant, defective in mitotic chromosome structure, is also due to the retention of cohesin on undamaged chromosome arms. In both cases, Separase overexpression bypasses the defect and restores cell viability, showing that defective cohesin removal is a major determinant of the mitotic lethality of Smc5-Smc6 mutants.

19400965
Regulation of chk1.
ABSTRACT: Chk1 is a serine/threonine protein kinase that is the effector of the G2 DNA damage checkpoint. Chk1 homologs have a highly conserved N-terminal kinase domain, and a less conserved C-terminal regulatory domain of ~200 residues. In response to a variety of genomic lesions, a number of proteins collaborate to activate Chk1, which in turn ensures that the mitotic cyclin-dependent kinase Cdc2 remains in an inactive state until DNA repair is completed. Chk1 activation requires the phosphorylation of residues in the C-terminal domain, and this is catalyzed by the ATR protein kinase. How phosphorylation of the C-terminal regulatory domain activates the N-terminal kinase domain has not been elucidated, though some studies have suggested that this phosphorylation relieves an inhibitory intramolecular interaction between the N- and C-termini. However, recent studies in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe have revealed that there is more to Chk1 regulation than this auto-inhibition model, and we review these findings and their implication to the biology of this genome integrity determinant.

18716058
Regulation of Chk1 by its C-terminal domain.
Chk1 is a protein kinase that is the effector molecule in the G2 DNA damage checkpoint. Chk1 homologues have an N-terminal kinase domain, and a C-terminal domain of approximately 200 amino acids that contains activating phosphorylation sites for the ATM/R kinases, though the mechanism of activation remains unknown. Structural studies of the human Chk1 kinase domain show an open conformation; the activity of the kinase domain alone is substantially higher in vitro than full-length Chk1, and coimmunoprecipitation studies suggest the C-terminal domain may contain an autoinhibitory activity. However, we show that truncation of the C-terminal domain inactivates Chk1 in vivo. We identify additional mutations within the C-terminal domain that activate ectopically expressed Chk1 without the need for activating phosphorylation. When expressed from the endogenous locus, activated alleles show a temperature-sensitive loss of function, suggesting these mutations confer a semiactive state to the protein. Intragenic suppressors of these activated alleles cluster to regions in the catalytic domain on the face of the protein that interacts with substrate, suggesting these are the regions that interact with the C-terminal domain. Thus, rather than being an autoinhibitory domain, the C-terminus of Chk1 also contains domains critical for adopting an active configuration.

17851138
Turning off the G2 DNA damage checkpoint.
In response to DNA damage, cells activate checkpoints to delay cell cycle progression and allow time for completion of DNA repair before commitment to S-phase or mitosis. During G2, many proteins collaborate to activate Chk1, an effector protein kinase that ensures the mitotic cyclin-dependent kinase remains in an inactive state. This checkpoint is ancient in origin and highly conserved from fission yeast to humans. Work from many groups has led to a detailed description of the spatiotemporal control of signaling events leading to Chk1 activation. However, to survive DNA damage in G2, the checkpoint must be inactivated to allow resumption of cell cycling and entry into mitosis. Though only beginning to be understood, here we review current data regarding checkpoint termination signals acting on Chk1 and its' upstream regulators.

17785450
Skp2B stimulates mammary gland development by inhibiting REA, the repressor of the estrogen receptor.
Skp2B, an F-box protein of unknown function, is frequently overexpressed in breast cancer. In order to determine the function of Skp2B and whether it has a role in breast cancer, we performed a two-hybrid screen and established transgenic mice expressing Skp2B in the mammary glands. We found that Skp2B interacts with the repressor of estrogen receptor activity (REA) and that overexpression of Skp2B leads to a reduction in REA levels. In the mammary glands of MMTV-Skp2B mice, REA levels are also low. Our results show that in virgin transgenic females, Skp2B induces lobuloalveolar development and differentiation of the mammary glands normally observed during pregnancy. As this phenotype is identical to what was observed for REA heterozygote mice, our observations suggest that the Skp2B-REA interaction is physiologically relevant. However, in contrast to REA(+/-) mice, MMTV-Skp2B mice develop mammary tumors, suggesting that Skp2B affects additional proteins. These results indicate that the observed expression of Skp2B in breast cancer does contribute to tumorigenesis at least in part by modulating the activity of the estrogen receptor.

17502373
Fission yeast Rnf4 homologs are required for DNA repair.
We describe two RING finger proteins in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Rfp1 and Rfp2. We show that these proteins function redundantly in DNA repair. Rfp1 was isolated as a Chk1-interacting protein in a two-hybrid screen and has high amino acid sequence similarity to Rfp2. Deletion of either gene does not cause a phenotype, but a double deletion (rfp1Deltarfp2Delta) showed poor viability and defects in cell cycle progression. These cells are also sensitive to DNA-damaging agents, although they maintained normal checkpoint signaling to Chk1. Rfp1 and Rfp2 are most closely related to human Rnf4, and we showed that Rnf4 can substitute functionally for Rfp1 and/or Rfp2. The double mutants also showed significantly increased levels of protein SUMOylation, and we identified an S. pombe Ulp2/Smt4 homolog that, when overexpressed, reduced SUMO levels and suppressed the DNA damage sensitivity of rfp1Delta rfp2Delta cells.

17277362
Brc1-mediated rescue of Smc5/6 deficiency: requirement for multiple nucleases and a novel Rad18 function.
Smc5/6 is a structural maintenance of chromosomes complex, related to the cohesin and condensin complexes. Recent studies implicate Smc5/6 as being essential for homologous recombination. Each gene is essential, but hypomorphic alleles are defective in the repair of a diverse array of lesions. A particular allele of smc6 (smc6-74) is suppressed by overexpression of Brc1, a six-BRCT domain protein that is required for DNA repair during S-phase. This suppression requires the postreplication repair (PRR) protein Rhp18 and the structure-specific endonucleases Slx1/4 and Mus81/Eme1. However, we show here that the contribution of Rhp18 is via a novel pathway that is independent of PCNA ubiquitination and PRR. Moreover, we identify Exo1 as an additional nuclease required for Brc1-mediated suppression of smc6-74, independent of mismatch repair. Further, the Apn2 endonuclease is required for the viability of smc6 mutants without extrinsic DNA damage, although this is not due to a defect in base excision repair. Several nucleotide excision repair genes are similarly shown to ensure viability of smc6 mutants. The requirement for excision factors for the viability of smc6 mutants is consistent with an inability to respond to spontaneous lesions by Smc5/6-dependent recombination.

