21601913
Dietary baked milk accelerates the resolution of cow's milk allergy in children.
BACKGROUND: The majority (approximately 75%) of children with cow's milk allergy tolerate extensively heated (baked) milk products. Long-term effects of inclusion of dietary baked milk have not been reported. OBJECTIVE: We report on the outcomes of children who incorporated baked milk products into their diets. METHODS: Children evaluated for tolerance to baked milk (muffin) underwent sequential food challenges to baked cheese (pizza) followed by unheated milk. Immunologic parameters were measured at challenge visits. The comparison group was matched to active subjects (by using age, sex, and baseline milk-specific IgE levels) to evaluate the natural history of development of tolerance. RESULTS: Over a median of 37 months (range, 8-75 months), 88 children underwent challenges at varying intervals (range, 6-54 months). Among 65 subjects initially tolerant to baked milk, 39 (60%) now tolerate unheated milk, 18 (28%) tolerate baked milk/baked cheese, and 8 (12%) chose to avoid milk strictly. Among the baked milk-reactive subgroup (n = 23), 2 (9%) tolerate unheated milk, and 3 (13%) tolerate baked milk/baked cheese, whereas the majority (78%) avoid milk strictly. Subjects who were initially tolerant to baked milk were 28 times more likely to become unheated milk tolerant compared with baked milk-reactive subjects (P < .001). Subjects who incorporated dietary baked milk were 16 times more likely than the comparison group to become unheated milk tolerant (P < .001). Median casein IgG(4) levels in the baked milk-tolerant group increased significantly (P < .001); median milk IgE values did not change significantly. CONCLUSIONS: Tolerance of baked milk is a marker of transient IgE-mediated cow's milk allergy, whereas reactivity to baked milk portends a more persistent phenotype. The addition of baked milk to the diet of children tolerating such foods appears to accelerate the development of unheated milk tolerance compared with strict avoidance.

21565391
Reply.


21397314
A phase II, randomized, double?blind, parallel?group, placebo?controlled oral food challenge trial of Xolair (omalizumab) in peanut allergy.


21277625
Future therapies for food allergies.
Food allergy is an increasingly prevalent problem in westernized countries, and there is an unmet medical need for an effective form of therapy. A number of therapeutic strategies are under investigation targeting foods that most frequently provoke severe IgE-mediated anaphylactic reactions (peanut, tree nuts, and shellfish) or are most common in children, such as cow's milk and hen's egg. Approaches being pursued are both food allergen specific and nonspecific. Allergen-specific approaches include oral, sublingual, and epicutaneous immunotherapy (desensitization) with native food allergens and mutated recombinant proteins, which have decreased IgE-binding activity, coadministered within heat-killed Escherichia coli to generate maximum immune response. Diets containing extensively heated (baked) milk and egg represent an alternative approach to food oral immunotherapy and are already changing the paradigm of strict dietary avoidance for patients with food allergy. Nonspecific approaches include monoclonal anti-IgE antibodies, which might increase the threshold dose for food allergen in patients with food allergy, and a Chinese herbal formulation, which prevented peanut-induced anaphylaxis in a murine model and is currently being investigated in clinical trials. The variety of strategies for treating food allergy increases the likelihood of success and gives hope that accomplishing an effective therapy for food allergy is within reach.

21093026
Peanut allergy: Clinical and immunologic differences among patients from 3 different geographic regions.
Peanut allergy affects persons from various geographic regions where populations are exposed to different dietary habits and environmental pollens. We sought to describe the clinical and immunologic characteristics of patients with peanut allergy from 3 countries (Spain, the United States, and Sweden) using a molecular component diagnostic approach. Patients with peanut allergy from Madrid (Spain, n = 50), New York (United States, n = 30), Gothenburg, and Stockholm (both Sweden, n = 35) were enrolled. Clinical data were obtained either from a specific questionnaire or gathered from chart reviews. IgE antibodies to peanut extract and the peanut allergens rAra h 1, 2, 3, 8 and 9, as well as to cross-reactive birch (rBet v 1) and grass (rPhl p 1, 5, 7, and 12) pollen allergens, were analyzed. American patients frequently had IgE antibodies to rAra h 1 to 3 (56.7% to 90.0%) and often presented with severe symptoms. Spanish patients recognized these 3 recombinant peanut allergens less frequently (16.0% to 42.0%), were more often sensitized to the lipid transfer protein rAra h 9 (60.0%), and typically had peanut allergy after becoming allergic to other plant-derived foods. Swedish patients detected rAra h 1 to 3 more frequently than Spanish patients (37.1% to 74.3%) and had the highest sensitization rate to the Bet v 1 homologue rAra h 8 (65.7%), as well as to rBet v 1 (82.9%). Spanish and Swedish patients became allergic to peanut at 2 years or later, whereas the American children became allergic around 1 year of age. Peanut allergy has different clinical and immunologic patterns in different areas of the world. Allergen component diagnostics might help us to better understand this complex entity.

21035177
Maternal consumption of peanut during pregnancy is associated with peanut sensitization in atopic infants.
Peanut allergy is typically severe, lifelong, and prevalent. To identify factors associated with peanut sensitization. We evaluated 503 infants 3 to 15 months of age (mean, 9.4 months) with likely milk or egg allergy but no previous diagnosis of peanut allergy. A total of 308 had experienced an immediate allergic reaction to cow's milk and/or egg, and 204 had moderate to severe atopic dermatitis and a positive allergy test to milk and/or egg. A peanut IgE level ?5 kU(A)/L was considered likely indicative of peanut allergy. A total of 140 (27.8%) infants had peanut IgE levels ?5 kU(A)/L. Multivariate analysis including clinical, laboratory, and demographic variables showed frequent peanut consumption during pregnancy (odds ratio, 2.9; 95% CI, 1.7-4.9; P < .001), IgE levels to milk (P = .001) and egg (P < .001), male sex (P = .02), and nonwhite race (P = .02) to be the primary factors associated with peanut IgE ?5 kUA/L. Frequency of peanut consumption during pregnancy and breast-feeding showed a dose-response association with peanut IgE ?5 kU(A)/L, but only consumption during pregnancy was a significant predictor. Among 71 infants never breast-fed, frequent consumption of peanut during pregnancy was strongly associated with peanut IgE ?5 kU(A)/L (odds ratio, 4.99, 95% CI, 1.69-14.74; P < .004). In this cohort of infants with likely milk or egg allergy, maternal ingestion of peanut during pregnancy was strongly associated with a high level of peanut sensitization.

20816193
Identification of IgE sequential epitopes of lentil (Len c 1) by means of peptide microarray immunoassay.
Lentils are often responsible for allergic reactions to legumes in Mediterranean children. Although the primary sequence of the major allergen Len c 1 is known, the location of the IgE-binding epitopes remains undefined. We sought to identify IgE-binding epitopes of Len c 1 and relate epitope binding to clinical characteristics. One hundred thirty-five peptides corresponding to the primary sequence of Len c 1 were probed with sera from 33 patients with lentil allergy and 15 nonatopic control subjects by means of microarray immunoassay. Lentil-specific IgE levels, skin prick test responses, and clinical reactions to lentil were determined. Epitopes were defined as overlapping signal above interslide and intraslide cutoffs and confirmed by using inhibition assays with a peptide from the respective region. Hierarchic clustering of microarray data was used to correlate binding patterns with clinical findings. The patients with lentil allergy specifically recognized IgE-binding epitopes located in the C-terminal region between peptides 107 and 135. Inhibition experiments confirmed the specificity of IgE binding in this region, identifying different epitopes. Linkage of cluster results with clinical data and lentil-specific IgE levels displayed a positive correlation between lentil-specific IgE levels, epitope recognition, and respiratory symptoms. Modeling based on the 3-dimensional structure of a homologous soy vicilin suggests that the Len c 1 epitopes identified are exposed on the surface of the molecule. Several IgE-binding sequential epitopes of Len c 1 have been identified. Epitopes are located in the C-terminal region and are predicted to be exposed on the surface of the protein. Epitope diversity is positively correlated with IgE levels, pointing to a more polyclonal IgE response.

20662744
Perennial allergen-specific immunoglobulin E levels among inner-city elderly asthmatics.
The role of allergen sensitization has been well established among children and young adults with asthma. Some studies have suggested that allergens play a less important role among older patients with asthma. However, whether older asthmatics have a lower prevalence of allergen sensitization than younger adults remains controversial. The aim of this study was to access the prevalence of sensitization to indoor allergens in older compared to younger inner-city adults with persistent asthma. The authors used data collected as part of a cohort study of inner-city adults with persistent asthma. Sensitization to indoor allergens (specifically Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, D. farinae, cat, mouse, Aspergillus fumigates, Alternaria, German and American cockroaches) was evaluated by specific immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies measured from peripheral blood. Univariate and multiple regression analyses were used to compare ratios of sensitization according to age (? 35, 36-59, ? 60 years of age). Of the 245 patients in the study, 19% were over the age of 60 years. Overall 73%, 61%, and 41% of patients ? 35, 36-59, and ? 60 years old, respectively were sensitized to at least one indoor allergen (p = .01). Multivariate analysis showed that patients ? 60 years of age were significantly less likely to be sensitized (odds ratio 0.32, 95% confidence interval 0.11 to 0.89) compared to younger adults after controlling for potential confounders. Allergen sensitization is less common in older patients with persistent asthma. However, sensitization to any indoor allergen is relatively frequent in the elderly. Physicians should consider routinely accessing exposure and sensitization to these allergens as part of the evaluation of older inner-city patients with persistent asthma.

20642207
Safety, tolerability, and immunologic effects of a food allergy herbal formula in food allergic individuals: a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, dose escalation, phase 1 study.
Food allergy is a common and serious health problem. A new herbal product, called food allergy herbal formula 2 (FAHF-2), has been demonstrated to have a high safety profile and potent long-term efficacy in a murine model of peanut-induced anaphylaxis. To evaluate the safety and tolerability of FAHF-2 in patients with food allergy. In this randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, dose escalation, phase 1 trial, patients received 1 of 3 doses of FAHF-2 or placebo: 2.2 g (4 tablets), 3.3 g (6 tablets), or 6.6 g (12 tablets) 3 times a day for 7 days. Four active and 2 placebo patients were treated at each dose level. Vital signs, physical examination results, laboratory data, pulmonary function test results, and electrocardiogram data were monitored. Immunomodulatory studies were also performed. Nineteen food allergic participants were included in the study. Two patients (1 in the FAHF-2 group and 1 in the placebo group) reported mild gastrointestinal symptoms. One patient withdrew from the study because of an allergic reaction that was unlikely related to the study medication. No significant differences were found in vital signs, physical examination results, laboratory data, pulmonary function test results, and electrocardiogram data obtained before and after treatment visits. Significantly decreased interleukin (IL) 5 levels were found in the active treatment group after 7 days. In vitro studies of peripheral blood mononuclear cells cultured with FAHF-2 also demonstrated a significant decrease in IL-5 and an increase in culture supernatant interferon gamma and IL-10 levels. FAHF-2 appeared to be safe and well tolerated in patients with food allergy.

20471069
Greater epitope recognition of shrimp allergens by children than by adults suggests that shrimp sensitization decreases with age.
Shellfish allergy is a long-lasting disorder typically affecting adults. Despite its high prevalence, there is limited information about allergenic shrimp proteins and the epitopes implicated in such allergic reactions. We sought to identify the IgE-binding epitopes of the 4 shrimp allergens and to characterize epitope recognition profiles of children and adults with shrimp allergy. Fifty-three subjects, 34 children and 19 adults, were selected with immediate allergic reactions to shrimp, increased shrimp-specific serum IgE levels, and positive immunoblot binding to shrimp. Study subjects and 7 nonatopic control subjects were tested by means of peptide microarray for IgE binding with synthetic overlapping peptides spanning the sequences of Litopenaeus vannamei shrimp tropomyosin, arginine kinase (AK), myosin light chain (MLC), and sarcoplasmic calcium-binding protein (SCP). The Wilcoxon test was used to determine significant differences in z scores between patients and control subjects. The median shrimp IgE level was 4-fold higher in children than in adults (47 vs 12.5 kU(A)/L). The frequency of allergen recognition was higher in children (tropomyosin, 81% [94% for children and 61% for adults]; MLC, 57% [70% for children and 31% for adults]; AK, 51% [67% for children and 21% for adults]; and SCP, 45% [59% for children and 21% for adults]), whereas control subjects showed negligible binding. Seven IgE-binding regions were identified in tropomyosin by means of peptide microarray, confirming previously identified shrimp epitopes. In addition, 3 new epitopes were identified in tropomyosin (epitopes 1, 3, and 5b-c), 5 epitopes were identified in MLC, 3 epitopes were identified in SCP, and 7 epitopes were identified in AK. Interestingly, frequency of individual epitope recognition, as well as intensity of IgE binding, was significantly greater in children than in adults for all 4 proteins. Children with shrimp allergy have greater shrimp-specific IgE antibody levels and show more intense binding to shrimp peptides and greater epitope diversity than adults.

20462634
US prevalence of self-reported peanut, tree nut, and sesame allergy: 11-year follow-up.
Allergy to peanuts and tree nuts (TNs) is the leading cause of fatal allergic reactions in the United States, and the prevalence appears to be increasing. We sought to determine the US prevalence of self-reported peanut, TN, and sesame allergy in 2008 and compare results with comparable surveys conducted in 1997 and 2002. A nationwide, cross-sectional, random telephone survey for peanut and TN allergy was conducted with a previously used questionnaire, with additional questions about sesame. A total of 5,300 households (13,534 subjects) were surveyed (participation rate, 42% vs 52% in 2002 and 67% in 1997). Peanut allergy, TN allergy, or both was reported by 1.4% of subjects (95% CI, 1.2% to 1.6%) compared with 1.2% in 2002 and 1.4% in 1997. For adults, the prevalence was 1.3% (95% CI, 1.1% to 1.6%), which was not significantly different from prior surveys. However, the prevalence of peanut or TN allergy for children younger than 18 years was 2.1% (95% CI, 1.6% to 2.7%) compared with 1.2% in 2002 (P = .007) and 0.6% in 1997 (P < .001). The prevalence of peanut allergy in children in 2008 was 1.4% (95% CI, 1.0% to 1.9%) compared with 0.8% in 2002 (P = not significant) and 0.4% in 1997 (P < .0001). The prevalence of childhood TN allergy increased significantly across the survey waves (1.1% in 2008, 0.5% in 2002, and 0.2% in 1997). Sesame allergy was reported by 0.1% (95% CI, 0.0% to 0.2%). Although caution is required in comparing surveys, peanut allergy, TN allergy, or both continue to be reported by more than 1% of the US population (eg, >3 million subjects) and appear to be increasingly reported among children over the past decade. Sesame allergy is reported much less commonly.

20451041
Immunologic features of infants with milk or egg allergy enrolled in an observational study (Consortium of Food Allergy Research) of food allergy.
Immune features of infants with food allergy have not been delineated. We sought to explore the basic mechanisms responsible for food allergy and identify biomarkers, such as skin prick test (SPT) responses, food-specific IgE levels, and mononuclear cell responses, in a cohort of infants with likely milk/egg allergy at increased risk of peanut allergy. Infants aged 3 to 15 months were enrolled with a positive SPT response to milk or egg and either a corresponding convincing clinical history of allergy to milk or egg or moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis. Infants with known peanut allergy were excluded. Overall, 512 infants (67% male) were studied, with 308 (60%) having a history of a clinical reaction. Skin test responses, detectable food-specific IgE, or both revealed sensitization as follows: milk, 78%; egg, 89%; and peanut, 69%. SPT responses and food-specific IgE levels were discrepant for peanut (15% for IgE > or = 0.35 kU(A)/L and negative SPT response vs 8% for positive SPT response and IgE <0.35 kU(A)/L, P = .001). Mononuclear cell allergen stimulation screening for CD25, cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CISH), forkhead box protein 3 (FOXP3), GATA3, IL10, IL4, IFNG, and T-box transcription factor (TBET) expression by using casein, egg white, and peanut revealed that only allergen-induced IL4 expression was significantly increased in those with clinical allergy to milk (compared with nonallergic subjects) and in those sensitized to peanut, despite the absence of an increase in GATA3 mRNA expression. Infants with likely milk/egg allergy are at considerably high risk of having increased peanut-specific IgE levels (potential allergy). Peanut-specific serum IgE levels were a more sensitive indicator of sensitization than SPT responses. Allergen-specific IL4 expression might be a marker of allergic risk. Absence of an increase in GATA3 mRNA expression suggests that allergen-specific IL-4 might not be of T-cell origin.

20226304
Correlation of IgE/IgG4 milk epitopes and affinity of milk-specific IgE antibodies with different phenotypes of clinical milk allergy.
Results from large-scale epitope mapping with a peptide microarray have been shown to correlate with clinical features of milk allergy. We sought to assess IgE and IgG4 epitope diversity and IgE affinity in different clinical phenotypes of milk allergy and identify informative epitopes that might be predictive of clinical outcomes of milk allergy. Forty-one subjects were recruited from a larger study on the effects of ingesting heat-denatured milk proteins in subjects with milk allergy. Using food challenges, subjects were characterized as being clinically reactive to all forms of milk (n = 17), being tolerant to heated milk (HM) products (n = 16), or having outgrown their milk allergy (n = 8). Eleven healthy volunteers without milk allergy served as control subjects. A peptide microarray was performed by using the previously published protocol. Subjects with milk allergy had increased epitope diversity compared with those who outgrew their allergy. HM-tolerant subjects had IgE-binding patterns similar to those who had outgrown their allergy, but IgG4-binding patterns that were more similar to those of the allergic group. Binding to higher numbers of IgE peptides was associated with more severe allergic reactions during challenge. There was no association between IgG4 peptides and clinical features of milk allergy. Using a competitive peptide microarray assay, allergic patients demonstrated a combination of high- and low-affinity IgE binding, whereas HM-tolerant subjects and those who had outgrown their milk allergy had primarily low-affinity binding. Greater IgE epitope diversity and higher affinity, as determined by using the peptide microarray, were associated with clinical phenotypes and severity of milk allergy.

20042231
Food allergy.
Adverse immune responses to foods affect approximately 5% of young children and 3% to 4% of adults in westernized countries and appear to have increased in prevalence. Food-induced allergic reactions are responsible for a variety of symptoms and disorders involving the skin and gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts and can be attributed to IgE-mediated and non-IgE-mediated (cellular) mechanisms. Genetic disposition and environmental factors might abrogate oral tolerance, leading to food allergy. Disease outcomes are influenced by the characteristics of the immune response and of the triggering allergen. Diagnosis is complicated by the observation that detection of food-specific IgE (sensitization) does not necessarily indicate clinical allergy. Therefore diagnosis requires a careful medical history, laboratory studies, and, in many cases, an oral food challenge to confirm a diagnosis. Novel diagnostic methods, including ones that focus on immune responses to specific food proteins or epitopes of specific proteins, are under study. Currently, management of food allergies consists of educating the patient to avoid ingesting the responsible allergen and to initiate therapy (eg, with injected epinephrine for anaphylaxis) in case of an unintended ingestion. Improved therapeutic strategies under study include oral and sublingual immunotherapy, Chinese herbal medicine, anti-IgE antibodies, and modified vaccines.

20004784
Epinephrine treatment is infrequent and biphasic reactions are rare in food-induced reactions during oral food challenges in children.
Data about epinephrine use and biphasic reactions in childhood food-induced anaphylaxis during oral food challenges are scarce. To determine the prevalence and risk factors of reactions requiring epinephrine and the rate of biphasic reactions during oral food challenges (OFCs) in children. Reaction details of positive OFCs in children between 1999 and 2007 were collected by using a computerized database. Selection of patients for OFCs was generally predicated on < or =50% likelihood of a positive challenge and a low likelihood of a severe reaction on the basis of the clinical history, specific IgE levels, and skin prick tests. A total of 436 of 1273 OFCs resulted in a reaction (34%). Epinephrine was administered in 50 challenges (11% of positive challenges, 3.9% overall) for egg (n = 15, 16% of positive OFCs to egg), milk (n = 14, 12%), peanut (n = 10, 26%), tree nuts (n = 4, 33%), soy (n = 3, 7%), wheat (n = 3, 9%), and fish (n = 1, 9%). Reactions requiring epinephrine occurred in older children (median, 7.9 vs 5.8 years; P < .001) and were more often caused by peanuts (P = .006) compared with reactions not treated with epinephrine. There was no difference in the sex, prevalence of asthma, history of anaphylaxis, specific IgE level, skin prick tests, or amount of food administered. Two doses of epinephrine were required in 3 of 50 patients (6%) reacting to wheat, cow's milk, and pistachio. There was 1 (2%) biphasic reaction. No reaction resulted in life-threatening respiratory or cardiovascular compromise. Older age and reactions to peanuts were risk factors for anaphylaxis during oral food challenges. Reactions requiring multiple doses of epinephrine and biphasic reactions were infrequent.

19577281
Development of a novel peptide microarray for large-scale epitope mapping of food allergens.
The peptide microarray is a novel assay that facilitates high-throughput screening of peptides with a small quantity of sample. We sought to use overlapping peptides of milk allergenic proteins as a model system to establish a reliable and sensitive peptide microarray-based immunoassay for large-scale epitope mapping of food allergens. A milk peptide microarray was developed by using commercially synthesized peptides (20-mers, 3 offset) covering the primary sequences of alpha(s1)-casein, alpha(s2)-casein, beta-casein, kappa-casein, and beta-lactoglobulin. Conditions for printing and immunolabeling were optimized using a serum pool of 5 patients with milk allergy. Reproducibility of the milk peptide microarray was evaluated using replicate arrays immunolabeled with the serum pool, whereas specificity and sensitivity were assessed by using serial dilution of the serum pool and a peptide inhibition assay. Our results show that epitopes identified by the peptide microarray were mostly consistent with those identified previously by SPOT membrane technology, but with specific binding to a few newly identified epitopes of milk allergens. Data from replicate arrays were reproducible (r > or = 0.92) regardless of printing lots, immunolabeling, and serum pool batches. Using the serially diluted serum pool, we confirmed that IgE antibody binding detected in the array was specific. Peptide inhibition of IgE binding to the same peptide and overlapping peptides further confirmed the specificity of the array. A reliable peptide microarray was established for large-scale IgE epitope mapping of milk allergens, and this robust technology could be applied for epitope mapping of other food allergens.

19568005
The role of immunoglobulin E-binding epitopes in the characterization of food allergy.
Allergen-specific immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies play a central role in food allergic reactions. IgE epitope mapping of food allergens may provide information regarding patient's clinical history and contribute to food allergy diagnosis/prognosis. The goal of this article is to review recent developments in the methods for IgE epitope mapping and the role of IgE-binding epitopes in the characterization of food allergy. Recent studies have suggested a potential role for sequential IgE-binding epitopes as biomarkers for characterizing various phenotypes of food allergy. Studies of allergens in milk, peanut, egg and wheat have shown a correlation between IgE sequential epitope diversity and patients' allergy severity or persistence. Several informative epitopes in milk allergens have been identified as candidate biomarkers to predict the development of tolerance to milk. However, limitations with current methods of IgE-binding epitope identification need to be addressed before they can be applied in the diagnosis/prognosis of food allergy. IgE epitope mapping has the potential to become an additional tool for the diagnosis/prognosis of food allergy and lead to a better understanding of the pathogenesis and tolerance induction of food allergy.

19523674
Sarcoplasmic calcium-binding protein is an EF-hand-type protein identified as a new shrimp allergen.
Shellfish allergy is a long-lasting disorder usually persisting throughout life. Despite its high prevalence, there is limited information about allergenic shrimp proteins. Characterization of shrimp allergens. Fifty-two adults and children with a history of immediate allergic reactions to shrimp and elevated serum IgE to shrimp were selected for this study. Tryptic digests from a 20-kd IgE-binding protein were analyzed by LC-MS/MS, identifying the protein as a sarcoplasmic-calcium-binding protein. cDNA encoding sarcoplasmic calcium-binding protein (SCP) from a shrimp cDNA library (Litopenaeus vannamei) was amplified by PCR, cloned into an expression vector, and sequenced. Recombinant SCP was tested with patients' sera. ELISA inhibition experiments determined the fraction of total shrimp IgE recognizing SCP. A functional assay with a rat basophilic leukemia cell line was used to determine the capacity for mediator release induced by SCP. Immunoblotting demonstrated IgE binding by 31 of 52 (59.6%) of the sera to a 20-kd shrimp protein. The protein was identified as a SCP. Amplified cDNA encoding SCP was isolated and sequenced. Open reading frame translation provided the complete amino acid sequence of shrimp SCP. Recombinant SCP was recognized by serum IgE from 20 of 52 (38.4%) subjects, of whom 17 of 20 (85%) were children. ELISA inhibition of pooled sera IgE reactivity to BS extract using recombinant SCP was significant (as high as 79%). For some subjects, mediator release induced by recombinant SCP was higher than that induced by recombinant tropomyosin. We have identified and cloned a new shrimp allergen, Lit v 4.0101, an SCP, which appears to be of particular importance in the pediatric population.

19348929
Mediator release assay for assessment of biological potency of German cockroach allergen extracts.
Cockroach is an important allergen in inner-city asthma. The diagnosis and treatment of cockroach allergy has been impeded by the lack of standardized cockroach extracts. We investigated the utility of a mediator release assay based on rat basophil leukemia (RBL) cells for comparing the potency of German cockroach extracts. RBL cells (line 2H3) transfected with human FcepsilonRI were passively sensitized with sera from subjects with cockroach allergy and stimulated with serial dilutions of 3 commercial cockroach extracts (1:10 weight/volume). In addition, the in-house prepared extract was tested in separate experiments with pooled sera that produced optimal performance in the RBL assay. N-hexosaminidase release (NHR) was used as a marker of RBL cell degranulation and was examined in relation to the intradermal skin test (ID(50)EAL) and serum cockroach-specific and total IgE levels. The median cockroach-specific IgE concentration in 60 subjects was 0.72 kU(A)/L (interquartile range, 0.35-2.97 kU(A)/L); 19 sera (responders) produced a minimum 10% NHR to more than 1 extract. Responders had higher median cockroach-specific IgE (7.4 vs 1.0 kU(A)/L) and total IgE (429 vs 300 kU/L) levels than nonresponders. Ranking of extract potency was consistent between the mediator release assay and the ID(50)EAL. For the in-house prepared cockroach extract, the dose-response curves were shifted according to the concentration of the extract. NHR was reproducible between different experiments by using pooled sera. The mediator release assay measures biologic potency and correlates with the ID(50)EAL. It should be further evaluated to determine whether it could be used to replace intradermal skin test titration for assessing the potency of cockroach extract.

19348919
Allergen-specific basophil suppression associated with clinical tolerance in patients with milk allergy.
Children with milk allergy who tolerate heat-denatured milk (HM) have less severe reactions and outgrow the condition earlier than those who react to HM, which might be related to differences in IgE-dependent effector cell function. We sought to apply a novel assay to test the hypothesis that HM-tolerant children have suppressed IgE-mediated basophil responses. Allergic, HM-tolerant, outgrown, or control subjects were defined based on oral food challenges. Whole blood cells were stimulated in vitro with a range of milk allergen doses in the presence or absence of autologous serum or with dilutions of autologous serum. Activated basophils were identified by means of flow cytometry as CD63(bright)CD123+CD203c+HLA-DR(-)CD41a(-). HM-tolerant subjects' basophils were significantly less responsive to milk allergen stimulation at all doses than were basophils from HM-reactive (allergic) individuals. In the absence of autologous serum, HM-tolerant subjects' basophils were significantly more reactive at low allergen concentrations. To a lesser extent, autologous serum also inhibited IL-3- and anti-IgE-induced, but not N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine-induced, responses. The allergen-specific responsiveness of HM-tolerant subjects' basophils increased with dilution of autologous serum with normal pooled serum. Children with milk allergy with a favorable prognosis have evidence of extrinsically suppressed allergen-specific effector cell reactivity.

19203662
Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 silences peanut-induced anaphylaxis for a prolonged posttreatment period via IFN-gamma-producing CD8+ T cells.
Food allergy is a serious and sometimes fatal condition for which there is no cure. We previously reported that Food Allergy Herbal Formula (FAHF)-2) protected peanut-allergic mice against anaphylactic reactions as long as 4 weeks posttherapy. This formula is now in clinical trials in the United States. We sought to determine whether FAHF-2-mediated protection could be extended long-term and explored the mechanisms underlying its persistent immunomodulatory effects. Peanut-allergic mice received FAHF-2 daily orally by gavage for 7 weeks, and then received 7 oral peanut challenges at intervals of 4 to 10 weeks over a period of 36 weeks. For mechanistic studies, some mice received CD4(+) or CD8(+) T-cell-depleting antibodies or IFN-gamma-neutralizing antibodies. Anaphylactic symptoms, body temperatures, and plasma histamine levels were recorded after each challenge, and peanut-specific immunoglobulin levels and cytokine profiles of splenocytes, mesenteric lymph node cells, and purified CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells were determined. Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 treatment protected mice from anaphylaxis for more than 36 weeks after discontinuing treatment. Peanut-specific IgE levels were reduced as much as 50%, whereas IgG(2a) levels were increased as much as 60%, and these effects persisted over time. T(H)2 cytokine production by CD4(+) T cells from FAHF-2-treated mice was reduced as much as 75%, whereas CD8(+) T-cell IFN-gamma production was markedly increased by as much as 85% at the final challenge. Neutralization of INF-gamma and depletion of CD8(+) T cells markedly attenuated FAHF-2 efficacy. Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 provides long-term protection from anaphylaxis by inducing a beneficial shift in allergen-specific immune responses mediated largely by elevated CD8(+) T-cell IFN-gamma production.

19141350
The role of lymphocytes in eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders.
Eosinophilic gastrointestinal diseases (EGIDs) encompass a variety of disorders including eosinophilic esophagitis (EE), eosinophilic gastroenteritis (EG), and eosinophilic colitis. Although the pathogenesis of EGIDs is still poorly understood, dietary food antigens have been shown to cause EGIDs through several short-term clinical studies. The relationship of EGIDs with food allergy points to a potential breach of oral tolerance in EGIDs and to a potentially important role played by lymphocytes in responding to the oral food antigens. This article discusses the concept of oral tolerance, the available evidence for the role that lymphocytes play in the induction and pathogenesis of EGIDs, and the evidence for a potential breach in oral tolerance in EGIDs.

18851876
Immunologic changes in children with egg allergy ingesting extensively heated egg.
Prior studies have suggested that heated egg might be tolerated by some children with egg allergy. We sought to confirm tolerance of heated egg in a subset of children with egg allergy, to evaluate clinical and immunologic predictors of heated egg tolerance, to characterize immunologic changes associated with continued ingestion of heated egg, and to determine whether a diet incorporating heated egg is well tolerated. Subjects with documented IgE-mediated egg allergy underwent physician-supervised oral food challenges to extensively heated egg (in the form of a muffin and a waffle), with tolerant subjects also undergoing regular egg challenges (in a form of scrambled egg or French toast). Heated egg-tolerant subjects incorporated heated egg into their diets. Skin prick test wheal diameters and egg white, ovalbumin, and ovomucoid IgE levels, as well as ovalbumin and ovomucoid IgG4 levels, were measured at baseline for all subjects and at 3, 6, and 12 months for those tolerant of heated egg. Sixty-four of 117 subjects tolerated heated egg, 23 tolerated regular egg, and 27 reacted to heated egg. Heated egg-reactive subjects had larger skin test wheals and greater egg white-specific, ovalbumin-specific, and ovomucoid-specific IgE levels compared with heated egg- and egg-tolerant subjects. Continued ingestion of heated egg was associated with decreased skin test wheal diameters and ovalbumin-specific IgE levels and increased ovalbumin-specific and ovomucoid-specific IgG4 levels. The majority of subjects with egg allergy were tolerant of heated egg. Continued ingestion of heated egg was well tolerated and associated with immunologic changes that paralleled the changes observed with the development of clinical tolerance to regular egg.

18848884
Towards a cure for food allergy.
Over the past two decades, food allergies have become both more prevalent and long lasting. This burgeoning problem has not been met with any therapeutic options to date, and patients must attempt to avoid known allergenic foods and treat any allergic reactions with 'as-needed' medications. There are a number of promising emerging therapeutic modalities for food allergy, including allergen-specific and allergen non-specific immunotherapeutic approaches. Although the allergen-specific approaches have some distinct differences, they all attempt to induce tolerance by exposing the patient to an allergen via the mucosal route (oral tolerance induction). Allergen non-specific approaches include biologics to suppress free total IgE levels (e.g. anti-IgE antibody) or to induce more general immune suppression (Chinese herbal medication).

18760458
Myosin light chain is a novel shrimp allergen, Lit v 3.
Shellfish allergy is a prevalent, long-lasting disorder usually persisting throughout life. Few options are available for treatment, and avoidance is the only therapy recommended. We sought to identify relevant crustacean allergens for use as diagnostic and safe immunotherapeutic agents for subjects with shellfish allergy. Thirty-eight patients were selected with immediate allergic reactions to shrimp and increased shrimp-specific serum IgE levels. One-dimensional and 2-dimensional electrophoresis of shrimp extracts were followed by IgE immunoblotting. Protein identification was done with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-mass spectrometry and Edman sequencing. A cDNA library was generated from white pacific shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei) and screened with primers designed on the basis of internal sequences obtained from 2-dimensional tryptic digests. Full-length cDNA clones were isolated from the library and sequenced. Recombinant protein was expressed and tested with sera from patients with shrimp allergy. Immunoblotting demonstrated IgE binding to a 20-kDa shrimp protein by 21 (55%) of 38 sera. Tryptic digestion of the protein followed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-mass spectrometric analysis and Edman sequencing identified it as a myosin light chain (MLC). Screening of the shrimp cDNA library resulted in isolation of a novel protein cDNA. Open reading frame translation provided the amino acid sequence of a new allergenic shrimp protein with high similarity to Bla g 8 (cockroach MLC). Recombinant protein was recognized by 17 patients, confirming the allergenicity of shrimp MLC. We have identified and cloned a new major shrimp allergen, Lit v 3.0101, an MLC protein.

18729729
Food allergy: recent advances in pathophysiology and treatment.
Food allergies, defined as an adverse immune response to food proteins, affect as many as 6% of young children and 3%-4% of adults in westernized countries, and their prevalence appears to be rising. In addition to well-recognized acute allergic reactions and anaphylaxis triggered by IgE antibody-mediated immune responses to food proteins, there is an increasing recognition of cell-mediated disorders such as eosinophilic gastroenteropathies and food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome. We are gaining an increasing understanding of the pathophysiology of food allergic disorders and are beginning to comprehend how these result from a failure to establish or maintain normal oral tolerance. Many food allergens have been characterized at a molecular level, and this knowledge, combined with an increasing appreciation of the nature of humoral and cellular immune responses resulting in allergy or tolerance, is leading to novel therapeutic approaches. Currently, management of food allergies consists of educating the patient to avoid ingesting the responsible allergen and initiating therapy if ingestion occurs. However, numerous strategies for definitive treatment are being studied, including sublingual/oral immunotherapy, injection of anti-IgE antibodies, cytokine/anticytokine therapies, Chinese herbal therapies, and novel immunotherapies utilizing engineered proteins and strategic immunomodulators.

18620743
Tolerance to extensively heated milk in children with cow's milk allergy.
Cow's milk allergy is the most common childhood food allergy. Previously we noted that children who outgrew their milk allergy had milk-specific IgE antibodies primarily directed against conformational epitopes; those with persistent milk allergy also had IgE antibodies directed against specific sequential epitopes. Because high temperature largely destroys conformational epitopes, we hypothesized that some children with milk allergy would tolerate extensively heated (baked) milk products. Children with milk allergy were challenged with heated milk products; heated milk-tolerant subjects were subsequently challenged with unheated milk. Heated milk-tolerant, unheated milk-reactive subjects ingested heated milk products for 3 months and were then re-evaluated. Immune responses were assessed in all subjects; growth and intestinal permeability were followed in heated milk-tolerant subjects. One hundred children (mean age, 7.5 years; range, 2.1-17.3 years) underwent heated milk challenges. Sixty-eight subjects tolerated extensively heated milk only, 23 reacted to heated milk, and 9 tolerated both heated and unheated milk. Heated milk-reactive subjects had significantly larger skin prick test wheals and higher milk-specific and casein-specific IgE levels than other groups. At 3 months, subjects ingesting heated milk products had significantly smaller skin prick test wheals and higher casein-IgG(4) compared with baseline; other immunologic parameters, growth, and intestinal permeability were not significantly different. Heated milk-reactive subjects had more severe symptoms during heated milk challenge than heated milk-tolerant subjects experienced during their unheated milk challenge. The majority (75%) of children with milk allergy tolerate heated milk.

18547626
Use of multiple doses of epinephrine in food-induced anaphylaxis in children.
Food allergy is the most common cause of anaphylaxis outside the hospital setting. We sought to determine the rate, circumstances, and risk factors for repeated doses of epinephrine in the treatment of food-induced anaphylaxis in children. Anonymous questionnaires were distributed to families of children with food allergies during allergy outpatient visits to a food allergy referral center. Demographic information, allergy and reaction history, and details regarding the last 2 anaphylactic reactions requiring epinephrine were collected. A total of 413 questionnaires were analyzed. Seventy-eight children (median, 4.5 years of age; range, 0.5-17.5 years) reported 95 reactions for which epinephrine was administered. Two doses were administered in 12 (13%) and 3 doses in an additional 6 (6%) reactions treated with epinephrine. Peanut, tree nuts, and cow's milk were responsible for >75% of reactions requiring epinephrine. Patients receiving multiple doses of epinephrine more often had asthma (P = .027) than children receiving a single dose. The amount of food ingested or a delay in the initial administration of epinephrine were not risk factors for receiving multiple doses. The second dose of epinephrine was administered by a health care professional in 94% of reactions. In this referral population of children and adolescents with multiple food allergies, 19% of food-induced anaphylactic reactions were treated with more than 1 dose of epinephrine. Prospective studies are necessary to identify risk factors for severe anaphylaxis and to establish rational guidelines for prescribing multiple epinephrine autoinjectors for children with food allergy.

18502490
The use of serum-specific IgE measurements for the diagnosis of peanut, tree nut, and seed allergy.
The gold standard for diagnosing food allergy is the double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenge. Diagnostic food-specific IgE levels might assist in diagnosing food allergies and circumventing the need for food challenges. The purpose of this study was to determine the utility of food-specific IgE measurements for identifying symptomatic peanut, tree nut, and seed allergies and to augment what is known about the relationships among these foods. Patients referred for suspected peanut or tree nut allergies answered a questionnaire about their perceived food allergies. Allergen-specific diagnoses were based on questionnaire, medical history, and, when relevant, skin prick tests and serum specific IgE levels. Sera from the patients were analyzed for specific IgE antibodies to peanuts, tree nuts, and seeds by using ImmunoCAP Specific IgE (Phadia, Inc, Uppsala, Sweden). Three hundred twenty-four patients (61% male; median age, 6.1 years; range, 0.2-40.2 years) were evaluated. The patients were highly atopic (57% with atopic dermatitis and 58% with asthma). The majority of patients with peanut allergy were sensitized to tree nuts (86%), and 34% had documented clinical allergy. The relationship between diagnosis and allergen-specific IgE levels were estimated by using logistic regression. Diagnostic decision points are suggested for peanut and walnut. Probability curves were drawn for peanut, sesame, and several tree nuts. High correlations were found between cashew and pistachio and between pecan and walnut. Quantification of food-specific IgE is a valuable tool that will aid in the diagnosis of symptomatic food allergy and might decrease the need for double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenges.

18389474
Pharmacological and immunological effects of individual herbs in the Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 (FAHF-2) on peanut allergy.
It was previously shown that a Chinese herbal formula, Food Allergy Herbal Formula 2 (FAHF-2) composed of nine herbs, blocked peanut-induced anaphylaxis in a murine model. The current study was designed to investigate the pharmacological actions of individual herbs comprising FAHF-2 on peanut-induced anaphylactic reactions in a murine model of peanut allergy and to determine if all nine herbs are necessary to prevent an anaphylactic reaction, or if a simplified formula containing fewer herbs would be equally effective. Some individual herbs reduced peanut-induced anaphylactic symptoms but no single herb offered full protection from anaphylactic symptoms equivalent to FAHF-2. The herbs had highly variable effects on histamine release, as well as peanut-specific serum IgE and IgG2a levels. The herbs also had variable effects on IL-4, IL-5 and IFN-gamma levels. A simplified formula comprising the most efficacious tested individual herbs showed only partial efficacy and was not able to reproduce comparably the effects of FAHF-2, suggesting that component herbs of FAHF-2 may work synergistically to produce the curative therapeutic effects produced by the whole formula, which appears to be the best option for future clinical trials.

18243289
Correlation of serum allergy (IgE) tests performed by different assay systems.
In vitro testing is commonly used to diagnose and manage allergies. Clinical reactivity has been correlated with food-specific IgE levels by using the ImmunoCAP (Phadia, Uppsala, Sweden). To determine whether IgE levels derived from different assays are equivalent to those measured by ImmunoCAP. Fifty patients from the Mount Sinai Pediatric Allergy practice were prospectively enrolled. For each deidentified sample, specific IgE levels were measured to egg, milk, peanut, cat, birch, and Dermatophagoides farinae at different laboratories, each using a different assay system (Phadia ImmunoCAP, Agilent Turbo-MP, and Siemens Immulite 2000). Results were analyzed to determine whether IgE measurements were equivalent. Food allergen-specific IgE levels were correlated with clinical data and around empirically determined thresholds that predict probability of clinical disease in 50% or 95% of subjects. Variable degrees of agreement existed among the 3 assays. Immulite 2000 overestimated all specific IgE levels compared with ImmunoCAP. Turbo-MP overestimated for egg but underestimated for birch and D farinae. Differences for milk, peanut, and cat were observed, without a trend toward overestimation or underestimation. Furthermore, several values for the food allergens were discrepant around the 50% and 95% positive predictive values for clinical reactivity. Discrepancies in specific IgE values from 3 different assays can potentially lead to altered management and treatment. The predictive values for clinical reactivity associated with food-specific IgE levels determined by ImmunoCAP should not be applied to results from other assays.

18061100
Epidemiology and etiology of eosinophilic esophagitis.
Eosinophilic esophagitis (EE) is an inflammatory disease of the esophagus characterized by eosinophilic infiltration of the esophageal mucosa. Symptoms of EE are variable, and include gastroesophageal reflux symptoms, abdominal pain, growth failure, and dysphagia. Dysphagia is a more common presentation in adults and older children. Serious complications of EE consisting of esophageal food impactions necessitating urgent endoscopic removal of the food and esophageal strictures requiring endoscopic balloon dilatations are also seen. The potential severity of these symptoms points to the importance of proper recognition and management of the disease, especially given that EE has become more prevalent over the past decade. In this article, available evidence on the epidemiology and etiology of EE is discussed.

17916645
CD4 T cells activated in the mesenteric lymph node mediate gastrointestinal food allergy in mice.
A localized Th2 milieu has been observed in the intestine of subjects with food allergic disorders; however, the role of T cells in the pathophysiology of these disorders remains poorly understood. Our aim was to examine sites of T cell activation in response to food challenge, identify potential factors responsible for T cell recruitment to the gut, and determine the role of T cells in disease. BALB/c mice were systemically sensitized to ovalbumin (OVA) and repeatedly fed with OVA to induce allergic diarrhea. Local cytokine and chemokine expressions were assessed by quantitative PCR, and cytokine secretion levels in the mesenteric lymph node (MLN) were determined by ELISA. Homing molecule expression was determined by flow cytometry, and the role of CD4(+) T cells in promoting disease was tested by adoptive transfer. Mice developed diarrhea associated with changes in epithelial ion transport, mast cell infiltration, intestinal IgE secretion, and local upregulation of Th2 cytokines and the Th2 chemokines CCL1, CCL17, and CCL22 in the small intestine. T cell activation occurred in the MLN before symptom onset, and a single feed of OVA induced T cell proliferation, alpha(4)beta(7) upregulation, and CD62L downregulation. Cells from the MLN, including purified CD4(+) T cells, were able to transfer allergic diarrhea to naive mice. A gut-homing phenotype induced in the MLN and selective upregulation of Th2 chemoattractants are likely important factors in the gastrointestinal recruitment of pathological Th2-skewed CD4(+) T cells in food allergy.

17873744
Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis in children with eosinophilic esophagitis.
Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis has been reported in adults with eosinophilic esophagitis (EE). Our goal was to determine the prevalence of esophageal fibrosis in children with EE, to determine whether it is specific for EE, and to correlate it with clinical and pathological features. Twenty-one children with EE, 7 with eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 6 with gastroesophageal reflux disease, and 17 control children were studied. Distal esophageal biopsy specimens containing lamina propria were evaluated for extent of subepithelial collagen deposition by use of trichrome staining. Fibrosis was defined as abnormally increased collagen deposition, determined after the establishment of normal patterns on sections of esophagus from pediatric autopsies. Maximum numbers of intraepithelial and lamina propria eosinophils per high-power field by hematoxylin and eosin staining and mast cells per high-power field by immunohistochemical staining for tryptase were determined. Eosinophil and mast cell degranulation in epithelium and lamina propria was determined by use of immunohistochemical staining for major basic protein and tryptase, respectively. The patients' records were reviewed. Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis was present in 12 (57%) patients with EE, 1 with eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 0 with gastroesophageal reflux disease, and 1 control patient. Forty-two percent of those with fibrosis had dysphagia, 80% of whom had food impactions; these symptoms were present only in patients with fibrosis. Within the EE group, fibrosis was not associated with duration of symptoms or with increasing numbers of infiltrating eosinophils/mast cells, but it was associated with eosinophil degranulation. Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis is prevalent in EE and is specific for the disease in children. It is associated with dysphagia, and it may explain and predict future esophageal dysmotility. Fibrosis is related to the extent of esophageal eosinophil activation, as evidenced by eosinophil degranulation.

17689596
Peanut allergy: emerging concepts and approaches for an apparent epidemic.
Peanut allergy is typically lifelong, often severe, and potentially fatal. Because reactions can occur from small amounts, the allergy presents patients with significant obstacles to avoid allergic reactions. In North America and the United Kingdom, prevalence rates among schoolchildren are now in excess of 1%, framing an increasing public health concern and raising research questions about environmental, immunologic, and genetic factors that may influence outcomes of peanut allergy. This review focuses on recent observations that continue to question the influences of maternal and infant diet on outcomes of peanut allergy, and explore how peanut may be uniquely suited to induce an allergic response. We highlight studies that affect current diagnosis, management, and the nature of advice that can be provided to patients, including the utility of diagnostic tests, doses that elicit reactions, characteristics of reactions from exposure, issues of cross-reactivity, concerns about peanut contamination of manufactured goods, and the natural course of the allergy. Clinical, molecular, and immunologic advances are reviewed, highlighting research discoveries that influence strategies for improved diagnosis, prevention, and treatment. Among the therapeutic strategies reviewed are sublingual and oral immunotherapy, anti-IgE, Chinese herbal medicine, and vaccine strategies.

17613633
Food allergy as a risk factor for asthma morbidity in adults.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the relationship between food allergy and asthma morbidity in adults. We interviewed a cohort of persistent asthmatics from an inner-city clinic. Allergies to food were assessed by patient report of convincing symptoms of acute allergic reactions. Outcome variables included health resource utilization and medication use. The prevalence of allergy to fish, peanut, tree-nut, shellfish, and seed allergies were 3%, 3%, 3%, 13%, and 1%. Patients with allergies to > 1 food had increased asthma hospitalizations, ED visits, and use of oral steroids (p < 0.05 for all comparisons). Specifically, allergy to fish was associated with a greater risk of health resource utilization and increased frequency of oral steroid use (p < or = 0.03 for all comparisons). Self-reported allergy to foods was associated with worse outcomes, suggesting that food allergy may be a risk factor for increased asthma morbidity in adults.

17156490
Standardization and performance evaluation of mononuclear cell cytokine secretion assays in a multicenter study.
Cryopreservation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells has been used to preserve and standardize immunologic measurements for multicenter studies, however, effects of cryopreservation on cytokine responses are incompletely understood. In designing immunologic studies for a new multicenter birth cohort study of childhood asthma, we performed a series of experiments to determine the effects of two different methods of cryopreservation on the cytokine responses of cord and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Paired samples of PBMC were processed freshly, or after cryopreservation in a Nalgene container (NC) or a controlled-rate freezer (CRF). Although there were some differences between the methods, cryopreservation inhibited PHA-induced IL-10 secretion and Der f 1-induced IL-2 secretion, and augmented PHA-induced IL-2 secretion and spontaneous secretion of TNF-alpha. In separate experiments, NC cryopreservation inhibited secretion of several cytokines (IL-13, IL-10, IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha) by PHA-stimulated cord blood mononuclear cells. With the exception of PHA-induced IL-13, results from fresh and cryopreserved cord blood samples were not significantly correlated. Finally, in reproducibility studies involving processing of identical cell samples in up to 4 separate laboratories, variances in cytokine responses of fresh cells stimulated at separate sites did not exceed those in cryopreserved cells stimulated at a central site. Collectively, these studies indicate that cryopreservation can affect mononuclear cell cytokine response profiles, and that IL-10 secretion and antigen-induced responses may be especially vulnerable. These studies also demonstrate that mononuclear cell responses can be standardized for performance in a small number of laboratories for multicenter studies, and underscore the importance of measuring reproducibility and of testing whether cryopreservation techniques alter specific immunologic outcomes.

19522997
Identification of two pistachio allergens, Pis v 1 and Pis v 2, belonging to the 2S albumin and 11S globulin family.
IgE-mediated allergic reactions to pistachio appear to be occurring more frequently; however, little is known about its allergenic proteins. We attempted to identify pistachio allergens and to clone the encoding genes. Pistachio proteins were extracted and separated by SDS-PAGE. Immunolabelling was performed with sera from 28 pistachio-allergic individuals. Proteins of interest were further analysed by Edman sequencing and mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (MS/MS). In parallel, a cDNA library was generated from immature pistachios and screened with primers designed on the basis of internal sequences and peptide spectra. Full-length cDNA clones were isolated from the library and sequenced. Recombinant proteins were expressed and tested with sera from pistachio-allergic patients. Nineteen out of 28 patients (68%) showed IgE binding to a 7 kDa protein fraction, while 14 (50%) showed specific IgE to a 32 kDa protein fraction. Analysis by Edman sequencing and MS/MS revealed that these proteins were homologue to the cashew nut allergens Ana o 3 and Ana o 2, respectively. Screening of the pistachio cDNA library resulted in isolation of novel protein cDNAs. Open-reading frame translation provided the complete amino acid sequences of two new allergenic pistachio proteins. Recombinant proteins were recognized by six out of six selected patients. Therefore, these new allergens were named Pis v 1 and Pis v 2 by the Allergen Nomenclature Subcommittee. Novel allergens in pistachio, Pis v 1 and Pis v 2, which belong to 2S albumin and 11S globulin family, respectively, were isolated and the genes encoding these allergens were identified.

18186809
Identification of amino acids critical for IgE-binding to sequential epitopes of bovine kappa-casein and the similarity of these epitopes to the corresponding human kappa-casein sequence.
The delineation of allergenic (i.e. IgE-binding) epitopes in cow's milk proteins and the amino acids (AAs) critical for IgE-binding is necessary to understand better the structural properties of an allergen and to develop more efficacious immunotherapeutic reagents. Furthermore, this information may enable us to understand better cross-sensitivity between different allergens. Eleven peptides, 10-14 AAs in length, representing the IgE-binding epitopes of kappa-casein were synthesized on a derivatized cellulose membrane with single AA substitutions at each position. Membranes were incubated with pooled sera from 15 milk-allergic patients and individual sera from 10 of the patients included in the pool. For 10/11 allergenic peptides, one to five different single AA substitutions resulted in elimination of IgE-binding of pooled patient sera. Overall at least one mutated peptide could be found for these 10 IgE-binding sites that resulted in a reduction of IgE-binding in at least 80% of the patients who recognized the native protein. Furthermore, the IgE-binding region at AA104-112 on bovine kappa-casein showed a high degree of similarity with the human kappa-casein, respectively, including the AAs critical for IgE-binding. This finding suggests that critical AAs should be assessed with both pooled and individual patient sera to account for the B-cell epitope heterogeneity between patients, with cow's milk allergy. In addition, we identified two potentially cross-reactive peptides between bovine and human caseins of unknown clinical relevance.

17573723
Specificity of IgE antibodies to sequential epitopes of hen's egg ovomucoid as a marker for persistence of egg allergy.
Approximately two-thirds of egg-allergic infants become tolerant within the first 5 years of life. We sought (1) to compare the recognition of sequential (linear) and conformational binding sites of ovomucoid, ovalbumin and ovotransferrin, by IgE antibodies of children with persistent and transient egg allergy, (2) to identify immunodominant IgE-and IgG-binding epitopes of ovomucoid, and (3) to compare epitope-specificity of IgE antibodies between patients with differing natural histories of egg allergy. Using immunodot-blots or ImmunoCAPs, IgE-antibodies against conformational (native) and sequential (reduced and alkylated) egg proteins were determined at the time of clinical reactivity in patients who retained their allergy and in those who developed clinical tolerance. IgE- and IgG-binding epitopes were mapped for ovomucoid using overlapping decapeptides on SPOTs membranes. Recognition of the major IgE-binding epitopes were compared between patients with differing natural histories of egg allergy. The patients with long-lasting egg allergy had a higher concentrations of IgE antibodies against sequential and native ovomucoid and ovalbumin than the children who subsequently gained tolerance (P < 0.01). Four major IgE-binding epitopes were identified in ovomucoid at amino acid 1-10, 9-20, 47-56, and 113-124. IgE antibodies of all seven patients with persistent egg allergy recognized these epitopes whereas none of the 11 children who outgrew their egg allergy did so. Patients with persistent egg allergy develop IgE antibodies against more sequential and conformational epitopes of ovomucoid and ovalbumin. The presence of serum IgE antibodies to specific sequential epitopes of ovomucoid may be used as a screening instrument for persistent egg allergy.

17517098
Induction of tolerance after establishment of peanut allergy by the food allergy herbal formula-2 is associated with up-regulation of interferon-gamma.
Peanut (PN)-anaphylaxis is potentially life threatening. We previously reported that a Chinese herbal medicine preparation, food allergy herbal formula-2 (FAHF-2), prevented peanut allergy (PNA) in mice when administered during sensitization. To investigate whether FAHF-2 also can prevent anaphylactic reactions when administered to mice with established PNA and, if so, whether protection would persist after cessation of therapy. C3H/HeJ mice sensitized and boosted over 8 weeks with a standard protocol known to establish PN hypersensitivity received seven weeks of FAHF-2 treatment or water as a sham treatment. Mice were subsequently challenged with PN at week 14 (1-day post-therapy) and week 18 (4-week post-therapy) to evaluate the efficacy and persistence of FAHF-2 treatment by assessing anaphylactic scores, core body temperatures and plasma histamine levels. Serum PN-specific antibody levels and cytokine profiles from splenocytes and mesenteric lymph node (MLN) cells were also determined. All sham-treated mice challenged at weeks 14 and 18 showed anaphylactic symptoms. In contrast, FAHF-2-treated mice showed no sign of anaphylactic reactions. PN-specific IgE levels in FAHF-2-treated mice also were reduced whereas IgG2a levels were increased. Furthermore, MLN cells from FAHF-2-treated mice produced markedly less IL-4 and IL-5, but more IFN-gamma, and contained increased numbers of IFN-gamma-producing CD8+ cells as compared with sham-treated mice. FAHF-2 treatment established PN tolerance in this model, which persisted for at least 4-week post-treatment. This result was associated with modulation of intestinal T helper type 1 cell (Th1) and Th2 cytokine production, and with increased numbers of mesenteric IFN-gamma-producing CD8+ cells.

17517096
Mutational analysis of immunoglobulin E-binding epitopes of beta-casein and beta-lactoglobulin showed a heterogeneous pattern of critical amino acids between individual patients and pooled sera.
For immunotherapeutic approaches, 'critical' amino acids (AAs) within allergenic epitopes are replaced with alternate AAs to eliminate IgE antibody binding. To determine the critical AAs for IgE binding in beta-casein and beta-lactoglobulin (BLG). Peptides of 10-14 AAs in length were synthesized on a derivatized cellulose membrane with single AA substitutions (alanine or glycine) at each position. Membranes were incubated with a pool of sera from 15 cow's milk-allergic patients and individual sera from six of the 15 patients. In cases where no decrease in binding occurred with a single AA substitution, peptides with two AA substitutions were generated and labelled. Using pooled patient sera, single AA substitutions led to complete elimination of binding to six of 11 peptides for beta-casein and to all six peptides for BLG. Substituting two AAs led to an elimination of binding to four of the remaining five beta-casein epitopes. However, in three of the 11 modified beta-casein peptides and five of the six BLG peptides, no decrease in IgE binding occurred in at least one individual patient. For these patients, critical AAs other than those defined by the patient serum pool were identified, indicating a heterogeneous pattern of IgE recognition. These results indicate that AAs critical for IgE binding are more heterogeneous than initially defined by pooled milk-allergic patient sera. For future immunotherapeutic interventions with mutated peptides, critical AAs should also be identified with individual patient sera to account for heterogeneity of IgE binding between patients.

