21131838
Loss of p16INK4A expression in low-grade ovarian serous carcinomas.
According to a tumor progression model, low-grade ovarian serous carcinomas may evolve from serous borderline tumors or micropapillary tumors. We sought to investigate the role of and associations between BRAF mutational status, extracellular signal regulated kinase activation, and p16(INK4A) expression in various types of ovarian serous tumors. We analyzed 29 typical ovarian serous borderline tumors, 8 micropapillary tumors, 4 low-grade invasive ovarian serous carcinomas, and 24 high-grade invasive ovarian serous carcinomas for the BRAF mutational status at codon 600; in addition, expression levels of the downstream signaling protein extracellular signal regulated kinase and the p16(INK4A) tumor suppressor protein were assessed by immunohistochemistry. There was a decline in p16(INK4A) expression from serous borderline tumors to micropapillary tumors with almost complete loss in low-grade invasive carcinomas. High-grade carcinomas had a variable p16(INK4A) expression pattern. We found a T1799A BRAF mutation in 12 typical serous borderline tumors (41%) and 1 micropapillary tumor (12.5%). No mutations were found in the low-grade and high-grade invasive carcinomas (0%). Among the typical borderline tumors, cases with BRAF mutations tended to have stronger p16(INK4A) expression compared with cases with wild-type BRAF. No other correlations were identified between the BRAF mutational status and expression levels of the analyzed proteins. Loss of p16(INK4A) expression may be a pathogenetic factor in the progression from serous borderline tumors to low-grade invasive carcinomas. The divergent molecular profiles support the theory that high-grade carcinomas are unrelated to serous borderline tumors or low-grade carcinomas.

19576622
Rapamycin by itself and additively in combination with carboplatin inhibits the growth of ovarian cancer cells.
The current standard treatment for ovarian carcinoma, consisting of surgery followed by chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel, is fraught with a high rate of recurrences. We hypothesized that targeted inhibition of specific signaling pathways in combination with conventional drugs may increase chemotherapeutic efficacy. We analyzed the expression and activation profiles of various signaling pathways in nine established ovarian cancer cell lines (CAOV-3, ES2, PA-1, SKOV-3, NIHOVCAR3, OV90, TOV112D, A1847, A2780) and 24 freshly procured human ovarian tumors. The PI3 kinase pathway component Akt was frequently overexpressed and/or activated in tumor cells. The effect of several PI3K pathway inhibitors (rapamycin, LY294002, SH-6) and rapamycin in combination with carboplatin on various tumor cell growth characteristics was tested in cell lines and fresh tumor-derived transient monolayer and organ cultures. Rapamycin by itself and additively with carboplatin inhibited the growth and invasion, and increased the sensitivity to anoikis of most of the ovarian cancer cell lines and fresh tumors. The additive inhibitory effect may be due to enhanced apoptosis as demonstrated by Poly-ADP-Ribose Polymerase (PARP) cleavage and Annexin V staining in cells treated with both rapamycin and carboplatin. Rapamycin in combination with standard chemotherapeutic agents may improve the efficiency of ovarian cancer treatment.

