19083924
Plenary address.


17986725
Consensus update on the appropriate usage of cardiac computed tomographic angiography.


19083896
Crystal ball: the way ahead in 2008.


17697838
Prevalence and correlates of septal delayed contrast enhancement in patients with pulmonary hypertension.
Using cardiac magnetic resonance, the presence of myocardial delayed contrast enhancement (DCE) has been described in the ventricular septum at the level of the right ventricular insertion points in patients with pulmonary hypertension (PH). The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence, extent, and correlates of this finding. Septal DCE was evaluated in 55 patients with known or suspected PH of various causes. The extent of DCE was estimated visually with an insertion enhancement score (range 0 to 4) and quantified as DCE mass. The results were correlated with cine magnetic resonance and right-sided cardiac catheterization. Predictors of DCE were investigated using multivariate analysis. PH at rest was present in 42 patients (group 1) and absent in 13 (group 2). DCE was noted in 41 patients (97%) in group 1 and 3 (23%) in group 2 (p <0.0001). The extent of DCE was higher in group 1 than group 2 (median insertion enhancement score 3 vs 0, median DCE mass 8.7 vs 0 g, respectively; p <0.0001 for both). The extent of DCE showed moderate to good univariate correlations (r = 0.5 to 0.73) with pulmonary pressures and with right ventricular volumes, mass, and ejection fractions. In multivariate analysis, systolic pulmonary pressure was the only predictor of DCE. In conclusion, the presence of septal DCE at the right ventricular insertion points is common in PH of different causes, and the level of systolic pulmonary pressure elevation appears to be the main determinant of this finding.

17392248
Pulmonary hypertension: accuracy of detection with left ventricular septal-to-free wall curvature ratio measured at cardiac MR.
To retrospectively evaluate the accuracy and reproducibility of the cardiac magnetic resonance (MR) imaging-derived left ventricular septal-to-free wall curvature ratio for prediction of the right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) in patients clinically known to have or suspected of having pulmonary hypertension (PH), with same-day right-side heart catheterization (RHC) as the reference standard. Institutional review board approval was received for this HIPAA-compliant study. Sixty-one patients clinically known or suspected of having PH underwent cardiac MR and RHC on the same day. Interventricular septal curvature (C(IVS)) and left ventricular free wall curvature (C(FW)) measured at end systole were used to derive the curvature ratio (C(IVS)/C(FW)). Effective distending transmural pressure (dP(FW)) and transseptal pressure gradient (dP(IVS)) were assumed to be equivalent, respectively, to the systolic blood pressure (SBP) and the difference between SBP and RVSP. Curvature ratio and SBP were used to noninvasively estimate RVSP. Linear regression analysis was performed to assess the difference between curvature ratio and rate of pressure rise (dP) ratio (dP(IVS)/dP(FW)). The accuracy of the dichotomized curvature ratio in PH detection was analyzed by using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. PH, defined as RVSP higher than 40 mm Hg, was confirmed with RHC in 46 patients. A direct linear correlation between dP ratio and curvature ratio was observed (r = 0.85, P < .001). Bland-Altman analysis revealed moderate agreement between cardiac MR- and RHC-derived RVSPs (mean difference, -1.1 mm Hg +/- 15.9 [standard deviation]). ROC analysis of the accuracy of the curvature ratio for detection of increased RVSP revealed 87% sensitivity and 100% specificity (area under ROC curve, 0.95; P < .001). Intraobserver (r = 0.97) and interobserver (r = 0.95) curvature ratio measurements were closely correlated. In patients clinically known to have or suspected of having PH, cardiac MR-derived curvature ratio, as compared with RHC measurement, was an accurate and reproducible index for estimation of RVSP.

17329691
Pulmonary arterial hypertension: noninvasive detection with phase-contrast MR imaging.
To retrospectively identify pulmonary arterial (PA) flow parameters measured with phase-contrast magnetic resonance (MR) imaging that allow noninvasive diagnosis of chronic PA hypertension (PAH). The study was HIPAA compliant and was approved by the institutional review board; a waiver of informed consent was obtained. Fifty-nine patients (49 female patients; mean age, 46 years; range, 16-85 years) known to have or suspected of having PAH underwent breath-hold phase-contrast MR imaging and right-sided heart catheterization (RHC). The presence of PAH (mean pulmonary artery pressure [mPAP], >25 mm Hg) was confirmed in 42 patients. Parameters, including PA areas, PA strain, average velocity, peak velocity, acceleration time, and ejection time, were measured in each patient by investigators blinded to RHC results. These measurements were correlated with mPAP, systolic pulmonary artery pressure (sPAP), and pulmonary vascular resistance index (PVRI). The diagnostic ability of phase-contrast MR imaging to depict PAH was quantified. Statistical tests included Spearman rho coefficients, receiver operating characteristic curve analysis, and Bland-Altman plots. Results showed average velocity to have the best correlation with mPAP, sPAP, and PVRI (r = -0.73, -0.76, and -0.86, respectively; P < .001). Average velocity (cutoff value = 11.7 cm/sec) revealed PAH with a sensitivity of 92.9% (39 of 42) and a specificity of 82.4% (14 of 17). Sensitivity and specificity for the minimum PA area (cutoff value = 6.6 cm(2)) were 92.9% (39 of 42) and 88.2% (15 of 17), respectively. The average blood velocity throughout the cardiac cycle is strongly correlated with pulmonary pressures and resistance.

