21056895
Histologic characteristics of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia associated with different pancreatic lesions.
Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) has been found in association with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, intraductal papillary-mucinous neoplasm (IPMN), mucinous cystic neoplasm, and other pancreatic lesions, but the characteristics of PanINs associated with these lesions are not well characterized. In this study, 185 partial or total pancreatectomy specimens were collected, and 173 had complete slides for reviewed, which included 74 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas, 28 IPMNs, 7 mucinous cystic neoplasms, 44 other nonductal tumors, and 20 nontumorous lesions. Differences in grade, extent, and duct involvement among PanINs associated with different lesions were analyzed. Patients with PanINs were older than those without, regardless of associated tumor or lesions. No sex predilection was noted. PanINs were found in 89%, 96%, 86%, 64%, and 55% pancreata with ductal adenocarcinomas, IPMNs, mucinous cystic neoplasm, other nonductal tumors, and nontumorous lesions, respectively. PanIN 1 and 2 were commonly associated with all types of lesions, but high-grade PanIN 3 was more frequently associated with ductal adenocarcinomas. Ductal involvement of PanINs was more extensive in association with ductal adenocarcinomas than in any other types of pancreatic tumors or lesions. PanINs associated with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas affected both the main and branched ducts, whereas PanINs associated with other types of pancreatic tumors or lesions were mainly present in the branch ducts. No statistical differences were observed in distribution, extent, and grade of PanINs among IPMNs, mucinous cystic neoplasms, other nonductal tumors, and nontumorous lesions. Our study demonstrated a high concurrence between PanINs and other precancerous lesions and histologic features of PanINs associated with different pancreatic diseases.

20976843
Hepatic lipogranulomas in patients with chronic liver disease: association with hepatitis C and fatty liver disease.
To study the significance and clinical implication of hepatic lipogranuloma in chronic liver diseases, including fatty liver disease and hepatitis C. A total of 376 sequential, archival liver biopsy specimens were reviewed. Lipogranuloma, steatosis and steato-fibrosis were evaluated with combined hematoxylin and eosin and Masson's trichrome staining. Fifty-eight (15.4%) patients had lipogranuloma, including 46 patients with hepatitis C, 14 patients with fatty liver disease, and 5 patients with other diseases. Hepatic lipogranuloma was more frequently seen in patients with hepatitis C (21%) and fatty liver disease (18%), and its incidence was significantly higher than that in control group (P < 0.0002 and P < 0.007, respectively). In addition, 39 out of the 58 patients with lipogranuloma were associated with steatosis and/or steato-fibrosis. Of the 18 lipogranuloma patients with clinical information available for review, 15 (83%) had risk factors associated with fatty liver disease, such as alcohol use, obesity, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes mellitus. Although the incidence of these risk factors was greater in patients with lipogranuloma than in control group (60%), it did not reach statistical significance. Hepatic lipogranuloma is not limited to mineral oil use and commonly associated with hepatic steatosis, hepatitis C and fatty liver disease. With additional histological features of steato-fibrosis, lipogranuloma can also be used as a marker of prior hepatic steatosis.

20960381
Primary hepatic signet ring cell neuroendocrine tumor: a case report with literature review.
Primary hepatic signet ring cell neuroendocrine tumor is extremely rare and is characterized by distinct intracytoplasmic hyaline vacuoles that are mucin negative and cytokeratin positive. The unique histological features may cause difficulty in diagnosis and delay patient care. Here the authors report a 49-year-old man with an incidental finding of a 2.7 cm liver mass in the absence of chronic liver disease. The resected tumor was grossly unencapsulated but well demarcated with friable tissue texture. Microscopically, the entire tumor consisted of sheets of monotonous cells separated by delicate microvasculature. The tumor cells had granular chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, and eosinophilic cytoplasm. Many of the tumor cells had eccentric, pale intracytoplasmic vacuoles resembling signet ring cells in adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical studies showed that the tumor cells were positive for neuroendocrine markers and that the intracytoplasmic vacuoles were negative for mucin but strongly positive for cytokeratins. Careful systemic search including OctreoScan scintigraphy (Mallinckrodt Medical, Inc., St. Louis, MO) and capsule endoscopy failed to reveal any other tumors. A diagnosis of primary hepatic signet ring cell neuroendocrine tumor was established. Ten months after surgery, the patient is well without any other detectable tumor on radiology. Serological neuroendocrine markers are also within normal limits.

19582809
Metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma presenting as a pancreatic mass by computed tomography scan and mimicking a primary neuroendocrine tumor: a potential pitfall in aspiration cytology.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly malignant neoplasm, often presenting at late stage and portending a poor prognosis for the patient. The peripancreatic fat is a rare site of extrahepatic metastasis, and metastatic HCC can mimic primary pancreatic neoplasms, even in this location. It is crucial to be aware of this pitfall in the evaluation of aspiration cytology of pancreatic neoplasms and to develop a strategy to reach the correct diagnosis. We present an endoscopic ultrasound fine-needle aspiration diagnosis of metastatic HCC presenting as a pancreatic mass radiologically that had neuroendocrine features on various cytological and histological preparations. The metastatic lesions were located surgically in the peripancreatic adipose tissue with involvement of one peripancreatic lymph node. This case illustrates the utility of FNA for diagnosing uncommon presentations of HCC and the importance of clinical history, cell block, and an immunocytochemical panel in determining the origin of the tumor.

