21568349
Mutations in a Helix-1 Motif of the ATP Synthase c-Subunit of Bacillus pseudofirmus OF4 Cause Functional Deficits and Changes in the c-Ring Stability and Mobility on Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis.
The ATP synthase of the alkaliphile Bacillus pseudofirmus OF4 has a tridecameric c-subunit rotor ring. Each c-subunit has an AxAxAxA motif near the center of the inner helix, where neutralophilic bacteria generally have a GxGxGxG motif. Here, we studied the impact of four single and six multiple Ala-to-Gly chromosomal mutations in the A16xAxAxA22 motif on the capacity for nonfermentative growth and, for most of the mutants, on ATP synthesis by ADP- and P(i)-loaded membrane vesicles at pH 7.5 and 10.5. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) analyses of the holo-ATP synthases were used to probe stability of the mutant c-rotors and mobility properties of the c-rotors as well as the monomeric c-subunits that are released from them by trichloroacetic acid treatment. Mutants containing an Ala16-to-Gly mutation exhibited the most severe functional defects. Via SDS-PAGE, most of the mutant c-monomers exhibited increased mobility relative to the wild-type (WT) c-subunit, but among the intact c-rings, only Ala16-to-Gly mutants exhibited significantly increased mobility relative to that of the WT c-ring. The hypothesis that these c-rings have a decreased c-subunit stoichiometry is still untested, but the functional impact of an Ala16-to-Gly mutation clearly depended upon additional Ala-to-Gly mutation(s) and their positions. The A16/20G double mutant exhibited a larger functional deficit than both the A16G and A16/18G mutants. Most of the mutant c-rings showed in vitro instability relative to that of the WT c-ring. However, the functional deficits of mutants did not correlate well with the extent of c-ring stability loss, so this property is unlikely to be a major factor in vivo.

20716528
The ATP synthase a-subunit of extreme alkaliphiles is a distinct variant: mutations in the critical alkaliphile-specific residue Lys-180 and other residues that support alkaliphile oxidative phosphorylation.
A lysine residue in the putative proton uptake pathway of the ATP synthase a-subunit is found only in alkaliphilic Bacillus species and is proposed to play roles in proton capture, retention and passage to the synthase rotor. Here, Lys-180 was replaced with alanine (Ala), glycine (Gly), cysteine (Cys), arginine (Arg), or histidine (His) in the chromosome of alkaliphilic Bacillus pseudofirmus OF4. All mutants exhibited octylglucoside-stimulated ATPase activity and ?-subunit levels at least as high as wild-type. Purified mutant F(1)F(0)-ATP synthases all contained substantial a-subunit levels. The mutants exhibited diverse patterns of native (no octylglucoside) ATPase activity and a range of defects in malate growth and in vitro ATP synthesis at pH 10.5. ATP synthesis by the Ala, Gly, and His mutants was also impaired at pH 7.5 in the presence of a protonophoric uncoupler. Thus Lys-180 plays a role when the protonmotive force is reduced at near neutral, not just at high pH. The Arg mutant exhibited no ATP synthesis activity in the alkaliphile setting although activity was reported for a K180R mutant of a thermoalkaliphile synthase (McMillan, D. G., Keis, S., Dimroth, P., and Cook, G. M. (2007) J. Biol. Chem. 282, 17395-17404). The hypothesis that a-subunits from extreme alkaliphiles and the thermoalkaliphile represent distinct variants was supported by demonstration of the importance of additional alkaliphile-specific a-subunit residues, not found in the thermoalkaliphile, for malate growth of B. pseudofirmus OF4. Finally, a mutant B. pseudofirmus OF4 synthase with switched positions of Lys-180 (helix 4) and Gly-212 (helix 5) retained significant coupled synthase activity accompanied by proton leakiness.

20193659
F1F0-ATP synthases of alkaliphilic bacteria: lessons from their adaptations.
This review focuses on the ATP synthases of alkaliphilic bacteria and, in particular, those that successfully overcome the bioenergetic challenges of achieving robust H+-coupled ATP synthesis at external pH values>10. At such pH values the protonmotive force, which is posited to provide the energetic driving force for ATP synthesis, is too low to account for the ATP synthesis observed. The protonmotive force is lowered at a very high pH by the need to maintain a cytoplasmic pH well below the pH outside, which results in an energetically adverse pH gradient. Several anticipated solutions to this bioenergetic conundrum have been ruled out. Although the transmembrane sodium motive force is high under alkaline conditions, respiratory alkaliphilic bacteria do not use Na+- instead of H+-coupled ATP synthases. Nor do they offset the adverse pH gradient with a compensatory increase in the transmembrane electrical potential component of the protonmotive force. Moreover, studies of ATP synthase rotors indicate that alkaliphiles cannot fully resolve the energetic problem by using an ATP synthase with a large number of c-subunits in the synthase rotor ring. Increased attention now focuses on delocalized gradients near the membrane surface and H+ transfers to ATP synthases via membrane-associated microcircuits between the H+ pumping complexes and synthases. Microcircuits likely depend upon proximity of pumps and synthases, specific membrane properties and specific adaptations of the participating enzyme complexes. ATP synthesis in alkaliphiles depends upon alkaliphile-specific adaptations of the ATP synthase and there is also evidence for alkaliphile-specific adaptations of respiratory chain components.

19176524
Characterization of the Functionally Critical AXAXAXA and PXXEXXP Motifs of the ATP Synthase c-Subunit from an Alkaliphilic Bacillus.
The membrane-embedded rotor in the F(0) sector of proton-translocating ATP synthases is formed from hairpin-like c-subunits that are protonated and deprotonated during energization of ATP synthesis. This study focuses on two c-subunit motifs that are unique to synthases of extremely alkaliphilic Bacillus species. One motif is the AXAXAXA sequence found in the N-terminal helix-1 instead of the GXGXGXG of non-alkaliphiles. Quadruple A-->G chromosomal mutants of alkaliphilic Bacillus pseudofirmus OF4 retain 50% of the wild-type hydrolytic activity (ATPase) but <18% of the ATP synthase capacity at high pH. Consistent with a structural impact of the four alanine replacements, the mutant ATPase activity showed enhanced inhibition by dicyclohexylcarbodiimide, which blocks the helix-2 carboxylate. Single, double, or triple A-->G mutants exhibited more modest defects, as monitored by malate growth. The key carboxylate is in the second motif, which is P(51)XXE(54)XXP in extreme alkaliphiles instead of the (A/G)XX(E/D)XXP found elsewhere. Mutation of Pro(51) to alanine had been shown to severely reduce malate growth and ATP synthesis at high pH. Here, two Pro(51) to glycine mutants of different severities retained ATP synthase capacity but exhibited growth deficits and proton leakiness. A Glu(54) to Asp(54) change increased proton leakiness and reduced malate growth 79-90%. The Pro(51) and the Glu(54) mutants were both more dicyclohexylcarbodiimide-sensitive than wild type. The results highlight the requirement for c-subunit adaptations to achieve alkaliphile ATP synthesis with minimal cytoplasmic proton loss and suggest partial suppression of some mutations by changes outside the atp operon.

18359284
Purification of two putative type II NADH dehydrogenases with different substrate specificities from alkaliphilic Bacillus pseudofirmus OF4.
A putative Type II NADH dehydrogenase from Halobacillus dabanensis was recently reported to have Na+/H+ antiport activity (and called Nap), raising the possibility of direct coupling of respiration to antiport-dependent pH homeostasis. This study characterized a homologous type II NADH dehydrogenase of genetically tractable alkaliphilic Bacillus pseudofirmus OF4, in which evidence supports antiport-based pH homeostasis that is mediated entirely by secondary antiport. Two candidate type II NADH dehydrogenase genes with canonical GXGXXG motifs were identified in a draft genome sequence of B. pseudofirmus OF4. The gene product designated NDH-2A exhibited homology to enzymes from Bacillus subtilis and Escherichia coli whereas NDH-2B exhibited homology to the H. dabanensis Nap protein and its alkaliphilic Bacillus halodurans C-125 homologue. The ndh-2A, but not the ndh-2B, gene complemented the growth defect of an NADH dehydrogenase-deficient E. coli mutant. Neither gene conferred Na+-resistance on an antiporter-deficient E. coli strain, nor did they confer Na+/H+ antiport activity in vesicle assays. The purified hexa-histidine-tagged gene products were approximately 50 kDa, contained noncovalently bound FAD and oxidized NADH. They were predominantly cytoplasmic in E. coli, consonant with the absence of antiport activity. The catalytic properties of NDH-2A were more consistent with a major respiratory role than those of NDH-2B.

17600061
Three putative cation/proton antiporters from the soda lake alkaliphile Alkalimonas amylolytica N10 complement an alkali-sensitive Escherichia coli mutant.
Attempts to identify members of the antiporter complement of the alkali- and saline-adapted soda lake alkaliphile Alkalimonas amylolytica N10 have used screens of DNA libraries in antiporter-deficient Escherichia coli KNabc. Earlier screens used Na(+) or Li(+) for selection but only identified one NhaD-type antiporter whose properties were inconsistent with a robust role in pH homeostasis. Here, new screens using elevated pH for selection identified three other putative antiporter genes that conferred resistance to pH >or=8.5 as well as Na(+) resistance. The three predicted gene products were in the calcium/cation antiporter (CaCA), cation/proton antiporter-2 (CPA2) and cation/proton antiporter-1 (CPA1) families of membrane transporters, and were designated Aa-CaxA, Aa-KefB and Aa-NhaP respectively, reflecting homology within those families. Aa-CaxA conferred the poorest Na(+) resistance and also conferred modest Ca(2+) resistance. Aa-KefB and Aa-NhaP inhibited growth of a K(+) uptake-deficient E. coli mutant (TK2420), suggesting that they catalysed K(+) efflux. For Aa-NhaP, the reversibility of the growth inhibition by high K(+) concentrations depended upon an organic nitrogen source, e.g. glutamine, rather than ammonium. This suggests that as well as K(+) efflux is catalysed by Aa-NhaP. Vesicles of E. coli KNabc expressing Aa-NhaP, which conferred the strongest alkali resistance, exhibited K(+)/H(+) antiport activity in a pH range from 7.5 to 9.5, and with an apparent K(m) for K(+) of 0.5 mM at pH 8.0. The properties of this antiporter are consistent with the possibility that this soda lake alkaliphile uses K(+)( )/H(+) antiport as part of its alkaline pH homeostasis mechanism and part of its capacity to reduce potentially toxic accumulation of cytoplasmic K(+) or respectively, under conditions of high osmolarity or active amino acid catabolism.

