21315952
Catastrophic cutaneous carcinomatosis in the non-organ transplant patient.
The increased frequency of nonmelanoma skin cancers (NMSCs) in organ transplant recipients has been termed "catastrophic cutaneous carcinomatosis" (CCC). We have treated a cohort of immunocompetent patients with an increased number of NMSCs that meets the definition of CCC whom we have termed "catastrophic cutaneous carcinomatosis-immunocompetent" (CCC-IC). We sought to further understand the epidemiologic characteristics of this subset of immunocompetent patients with a high burden of NMSCs. Our pathology database was searched over a 4-year experience of a Mohs surgeon to identify patients with greater than 10 basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) and/or squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) in a 12-month period who had no underlying systemic cause of immunosuppression or genetic predisposition to form NMSCs. Information regarding the 13 patients who met inclusion criteria was collected by questionnaire and analyzed. There was no statistically significant difference in the constitutional variables of this patient population. Patients with CCC-IC had a SCC:BCC ratio of 2.5:1, similar to what is seen in organ transplant recipients where the SCC:BCC ratio is 2:1 with SCC predominance. There was a statistically significant increase in the number of SCCs in patients with CCC-IC (8.77/patient) as compared with control patients (2.27/patient). Most strikingly, a 13.8-fold higher incidence of malignant melanoma in the CCC-IC group was found as compared with the general population. Limitations to this study include a small sample size and recall bias. Our data suggest that patients with CCC-IC have skin cancer profiles of SCC and BCC similar to organ transplant recipients and have a markedly higher incidence of malignant melanoma than the general population. These patients require strict monitoring and combination therapeutic approaches toward management of cutaneous carcinomas.

20618368
Use of high-frequency, high-resolution ultrasound before Mohs surgery.
Although ultrasound imaging is employed ubiquitously today, its use to examine and assess the skin is a relatively new technology. We explored the clinical application and use of high-frequency, high-resolution ultrasound in Mohs micrographic surgery. To evaluate the ability of ultrasound to accurately determine lesion length and width of tumor borders in order to reduce the number of surgical stages. This was an institutional review board-approved single-center study of 26 Mohs surgery patients. Ultrasound images were taken to record lesion dimensions, and then the investigator documented clinical estimation of the first stage. Extirpation of the tumor and histological analysis were performed thereafter. The results of 20 patients were included in the analysis. A paired-samples t-test revealed no significant difference between clinical and ultrasound widths (t=-1.324, p=.20). Similarly, there was no significant difference between the lengths found from clinical assessment and ultrasound (t=-1.093, p=.29). For different tumor types, there was no significant difference between clinical and ultrasound widths or lengths for basal cell carcinoma (t=-1.307, p=.23; t=-1.389, p=.20) or squamous cell cancer (t=-0.342, p=.73; t=0.427, p=.68). CONCLUSION There is a diagnostic role for high-resolution ultrasound in Mohs surgery regarding the delineation of surgical margins, but its limitations preclude its practical adoption at this time.

19708876
Six-month safety results of calcium hydroxylapatite for treatment of nasolabial folds in Fitzpatrick skin types IV to VI.
Recently, the cosmetic market has seen an increase in the options for treatment for people with dark skin. This study evaluates the use of calcium hydroxylapatite (CaHA), a dermal filler indicated for the correction of moderate to severe facial wrinkles and folds, including the nasolabial folds (NLFs) in individuals with dark skin. This open-label, nonrandomized, prospective, five-center trial enrolled 100 patients aged 18 and older with Fitzpatrick skin types IV to VI. CaHA was injected subdermally with a 25- to 27-gauge needle. Participants received a range of 0.6 to 2.8 mL of CaHA and returned at 3 and 6 months to be assessed for keloid formation, hypertrophic scarring, and hyper- or hypopigmentation. If necessary, each subject was offered a touch-up at the conclusion of the 6-month visit. No reports of keloid formation, hypertrophic scarring, hypo- or hyperpigmentation, or other clinically significant adverse events were recorded. People with dark skin injected subdermally with CaHA do not show signs of keloid formation, hypertrophic scarring, or hyper- or hypopigmentation. Because of this safety feature, as well as other characteristics of the product already shown in clinical literature, CaHA is an attractive dermal filler in this population.

19708875
A five-patient satisfaction pilot study of calcium hydroxylapatite injection for treatment of aging hands.
The process of skin aging is not limited to the face but involves every part of the body, including the hands. A common manifestation of aging of the hands is the loss of volume, which occurs as the skin loses its subcutaneous fat. Injectable dermal fillers have surfaced as a popular method to address such deficiencies. To report the use of calcium hydroxylapatite (CaHA) to address lost volume. Five female subjects with soft tissue deficiency of the dorsa of the hands were enrolled at Mount Sinai Medical Center. A solution of CaHA with 2% lidocaine in amounts of 0.3 to 1.0 mL was injected interdigitally at each of three to five insertion sites; the sites were massaged and molded up to three times to ensure an optimal cosmetic end point. Subjects were seen for a follow-up visit after 1, 4, 16, and 24 weeks. With a single injection, all subjects reached their correction goals without requiring any touch-ups. At the 24-week visit, the subjects retained the filling effect, with no adverse events and high patient satisfaction. CaHA, a new, easily injectable, safe dermal filler, has emerged as an excellent option for soft tissue augmentation in aging hands.

19389095
Bloodless nasal alar surgery: another innovative use of the chalazion clamp.


18569267
Treatment of disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis (DSAP) with the Q-switched ruby laser.
Disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis (DSAP) is one clinical subtype of porokeratosis, a cutaneous disorder of keratinization. A variety of approaches may be used to treat DSAP. The ruby laser appears to be a promising option for DSAP treatment. Traditionally, the ruby laser is used to treat hair removal and lesions involving hyperpigmentation. Its use may be further applied to treat the hyperpigmented lesions of DSAP. Objective: This study examines the efficacy of the ruby laser in treating a case of DSAP. A 48-year-old female, with a history of pseudoxanthoma elasticum and DSAP, received three Q-switched ruby laser treatments (694 nm) to over 50 sites on the lower and upper extremities. Clinical outcome and patient satisfaction was followed-up. Minimal to moderate erythema and appropriate whitening was noted after each treatment. The patient tolerated treatments well and hyperpigmentation and erythema of the majority of the lesions decreased. The patient was very pleased with the results and reports satisfactory cosmetic outcome 3 months later. The results obtained from the current case suggests that the ruby laser is moderately successful in treating DSAP and may still provide a good alternative to other available treatments. Further studies are needed to investigate the potential of combined ruby laser treatment for DSAP and to determine the appropriate laser pulse duration and fluence for effective treatment.

18569262
The five D's of botulinum toxin: doses, dilution, diffusion, duration and dogma.
The purpose of this review is to update cosmetic dermatologists and surgeons on the latest information about botulinum toxin injections for the treatment of the face and neck and to provide a practical guide to effective and safe technique. We review indications, recommended doses and dilutions, storage recommendations and injection techniques.

17903151
Perioperative management of anticoagulant therapy during cutaneous surgery: 2005 survey of Mohs surgeons.
The perioperative management of anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy is a controversial topic in the field of dermatologic surgery. Dermasurgeons must weigh the risk of bleeding against the risk of thrombotic complications when deciding how to manage perioperative anticoagulation. Our aim is to present a summary of current practice in anticoagulation management perioperatively during cutaneous surgery. We compare our results to those found in a similar survey in 2002. A questionnaire surveying current practice in perioperative management of anticoagulant therapy was mailed to 720 dermasurgeons. Thirty-eight percent of dermasurgeons responded to the questionnaire. Of the responding physicians, 87% discontinue prophylactic aspirin therapy, 37% discontinue medically necessary aspirin, 44% discontinue warfarin, 77% discontinue nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and 77% discontinue vitamin E therapy perioperatively at least some of the time. Although clopidogrel was not surveyed, 78 physicians included comments about the management of this agent. Dermasurgeons were more likely to continue medically necessary aspirin and warfarin in 2005 compared to 2002, with the most dramatic shift evident in the management of warfarin. They were more likely to discontinue prophylactic aspirin, NSAIDs, and vitamin E. Surgeons were concerned about bleeding with the antiplatelet agent clopidogrel. More evidence-based medicine is necessary to set guidelines for the management of anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy perioperatively.

17716243
Paradoxical effects of hair removal systems: a review.
Although a variety of lasers have proven to be clinically effective for long-term hair removal, the use of these lasers has also been associated with undesirable side effects, such as hyper- and hypopigmentation, crusting, erythema, and edema. One notable side effect that seems to be underreported in the literature is the growth of fine dark hair in untreated areas close to the treated ones. This contradictory hypertrichosis is known as the paradoxical effect. In this paper, we review the published reports of the paradoxical effect and offer some possible explanations for this effect. The paradoxical effect has been documented most commonly after the use of induced pulse light and alexandrite lasers. One possible explanation is the activation of dormant hair follicles by suboptimal fluences. Another mechanism may be the synchronization of hair growth cycles by direct light stimulation.

