21092890
Cardiac gene therapy.
Heart failure is a chronic progressive disorder in which frequent and recurrent hospitalizations are associated with high mortality and morbidity. The incidence and the prevalence of this disease will increase with the increase in the number of the aging population of the United States. Understanding the molecular pathology and pathophysiology of this disease will uncover novel targets and therapies that can restore the function or attenuate the damage of malfunctioning cardiomyocytes by gene therapy that becomes an interesting and a promising field for the treatment of heart failure as well as other diseases in the future. Of equal importance are developing vectors and delivery methods that can efficiently transduce most of the cardiomyocytes that can offer a long-term expression and that can escape the host immune response. Recombinant adeno-associated virus vectors have the potential to become a promising novel therapeutic vehicles for molecular medicine in the future.

20494091
Preemptive axillo-axillary placement of percutaneous transseptal ventricular assist device to facilitate high-risk reoperative cardiac surgery.
We describe preemptive placement of a TandemHeart percutaneous left ventricular assist device (CardiacAssist Inc, Pittsburgh, PA) through the axillary artery and vein for temporary postoperative support in a patient with severe left ventricular dysfunction undergoing high-risk cardiac reoperation. We believe this approach is preferable to high-dose catecholamines because of preserved early tissue perfusion without excessive vasoconstriction. Axillo-axillary placement is advantageous because patients can sit up and partially mobilize, and there is no need to reopen the chest for explantation.

20472633
Transcatheter repair of perivalvular regurgitation.
Hemodynamically significant perivalvular regurgitation affects about 1.5% of all prosthetic valve implants. Reoperation carries increased risk--especially in the setting of concomitant comorbidities of left ventricular dysfunction, prior coronary artery bypass grafts, renal dysfunction, and advanced age. Transcatheter closure of the perivalvular regurgitant channel using a variety of occluders has been available for several years; however, recent improvements in technology and technique have made this therapy more effective and available to a wider group of patients. This article describes the recent advances and the state of the art of this therapy.

18834825
Noncompaction cardiomyopathy: case report and echocardiographic findings.


