20823154
Angiopoietin-4 promotes glioblastoma progression by enhancing tumor cell viability and angiogenesis.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly invasive and vascularized aggressive brain tumor. Less than 10% of GBM patients survive >5 years after diagnosis. Angiogenesis plays an important role in GBM growth, and antiangiogenesis-based therapies have shown clinical efficacy for GBM patients. Unfortunately, therapeutic resistance often develops in these patients, suggesting that GBM cells are capable of switching their dependency on one proangiogenic signaling pathway to an alternative one. Therefore, it is important to identify novel angiogenic factors that play essential roles in tumor angiogenesis and GBM progression. Angiopoietins (Ang-1, Ang-2, and Ang-4) are the ligands of the Tie-2 receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK). The roles of Ang-1 and Ang-2 in tumor angiogenesis have been established. However, little is known about how Ang-4 affects tumor angiogenesis and GBM progression and the mechanism underlying its effects. In our current study, we establish that Ang-4 is upregulated in human GBM tissues and cells. We show that, like endothelial cells, human GBM cells express Tie-2 RTK. We first establish that Ang-4 promotes in vivo growth of human GBM cells by promoting tumor angiogenesis and directly activating extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (Erk1/2) in GBM cells. Our results establish the novel effects of Ang-4 on tumor angiogenesis and GBM progression and suggest that this pro-GBM effect of Ang-4 is mediated by promoting tumor angiogenesis and activating Erk1/2 kinase in GBM cells. Together, our results suggest that the Ang-4-Tie-2 functional axis is an attractive therapeutic target for GBM.

20491622
Merlin, a "magic" linker between extracellular cues and intracellular signaling pathways that regulate cell motility, proliferation, and survival.
Genetic alterations of neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) gene lead to the development of schwannomas, meningiomas, and ependymomas. Mutations of NF2 gene were also found in thyroid cancer, mesothelioma, and melanoma, suggesting that it functions as a tumor suppressor in a wide spectrum of cells. The product of NF2 gene is merlin (moesin-ezrin-radixin-like protein), a member of the Band 4.1 superfamily proteins. Merlin shares significant sequence homology with the ERM (Ezrin-Radixin-Moesin) family proteins and serves as a linker between transmembrane proteins and the actin-cytoskeleton. Merlin is a multifunctional protein and involved in integrating and regulating the extracellular cues and intracellular signaling pathways that control cell fate, shape, proliferation, survival, and motility. Recent studies showed that merlin regulates the cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesions and functions of the cell surface adhesion/extracellular matrix receptors including CD44 and that merlin and CD44 antagonize each other's function and work upstream of the mammalian Hippo signaling pathway. Furthermore, merlin plays important roles in stabilizing the contact inhibition of proliferation and in regulating activities of several receptor tyrosine kinases. Accumulating data also suggested an emerging role of merlin as a negative regulator of growth and progression of several non-NF2 associated cancer types. Together, these recent advances have improved our basic understanding about merlin function, its regulation, and the major signaling pathways regulated by merlin and provided the foundation for future translation of these findings into the clinic for patients bearing the cancers in which merlin function and/or its downstream signaling pathways are impaired or altered.

20197461
CD44 attenuates activation of the hippo signaling pathway and is a prime therapeutic target for glioblastoma.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive brain tumor that, by virtue of its resistance to chemotherapy and radiotherapy, is currently incurable. Identification of molecules whose targeting may eliminate GBM cells and/or sensitize glioblastoma cells to cytotoxic drugs is therefore urgently needed. CD44 is a major cell surface hyaluronan receptor and cancer stem cell marker that has been implicated in the progression of a variety of cancer types. However, the major downstream signaling pathways that mediate its protumor effects and the role of CD44 in the progression and chemoresponse of GBM have not been established. Here we show that CD44 is upregulated in GBM and that its depletion blocks GBM growth and sensitizes GBM cells to cytotoxic drugs in vivo. Consistent with this observation, CD44 antagonists potently inhibit glioma growth in preclinical mouse models. We provide the first evidence that CD44 functions upstream of the mammalian Hippo signaling pathway and that CD44 promotes tumor cell resistance to reactive oxygen species-induced and cytotoxic agent-induced stress by attenuating activation of the Hippo signaling pathway. Together, our results identify CD44 as a prime therapeutic target for GBM, establish potent antiglioma efficacy of CD44 antagonists, uncover a novel CD44 signaling pathway, and provide a first mechanistic explanation as to how upregulation of CD44 may constitute a key event in leading to cancer cell resistance to stresses of different origins. Finally, our results provide a rational explanation for the observation that functional inhibition of CD44 augments the efficacy of chemotherapy and radiation therapy.

18632626
Merlin is a potent inhibitor of glioma growth.
Neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) is an inherited cancer syndrome in which affected individuals develop nervous system tumors, including schwannomas, meningiomas, and ependymomas. The NF2 protein merlin (or schwannomin) is a member of the Band 4.1 superfamily of proteins, which serve as linkers between transmembrane proteins and the actin cytoskeleton. In addition to mutational inactivation of the NF2 gene in NF2-associated tumors, mutations and loss of merlin expression have also been reported in other types of cancers. In the present study, we show that merlin expression is dramatically reduced in human malignant gliomas and that reexpression of functional merlin dramatically inhibits both subcutaneous and intracranial growth of human glioma cells in mice. We further show that merlin reexpression inhibits glioma cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in vivo. Using microarray analysis, we identify altered expression of specific molecules that play key roles in cell proliferation, survival, and motility. These merlin-induced changes of gene expression were confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR, Western blotting, and functional assays. These results indicate that reexpression of merlin correlates with activation of mammalian sterile 20-like 1/2-large tumor suppressor 2 signaling pathway and inhibition of canonical and noncanonical Wnt signals. Collectively, our results show that merlin is a potent inhibitor of high-grade human glioma.

17667983
Advanced glycation endproducts induce podocyte apoptosis by activation of the FOXO4 transcription factor.
Advanced glycation endproducts (AGEs) and a receptor for AGEs (RAGE) have been linked in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy. RAGE is usually localized to podocytes and is increased in diabetes. RAGE activation increases reactive oxygen species production, which mediates hyperglycemia-induced podocyte apoptosis in early diabetic nephropathy. Here, we examined the interaction of AGE and RAGE on podocyte apoptosis. When we exposed murine cultured podocytes to bovine serum albumin (BSA) that was modified by AGEs or to carboxymethyl-lysine BSA, more apoptosis was found when compared with unmodified BSA. Similarly, more podocytes underwent detachment and apoptosis when cultured on AGE-modified collagen IV than on native collagen IV. AGEs isolated from sera of patients with chronic kidney disease also caused apoptosis of podocytes. Apoptosis was diminished by small interference RNA (siRNA) for RAGE in podocytes exposed to AGE-BSA, but not to AGE-modified collagen IV. Both AGE- and carboxymethyl-lysine modified-BSA activated p38MAP kinase and inhibition of this kinase reduced the apoptotic effect of AGE-BSA. Exposure to AGE-BSA was associated with Akt dephosphorylation and FOXO4 transcriptional activation leading to an increase in the expression of an effector protein of apoptosis, Bim. siRNA for FOXO4 abolished AGE-BSA-induced apoptosis of podocytes. Our study suggests that an AGE-RAGE interaction contributes to podocyte apoptosis by activation of the FOXO4 transcription factor.

