21093760
High-definition and filter-aided colonoscopy.
New high-resolution colonoscopes and filter technologies are allowing us to visualize more lesions and better characterize lesions within the gastrointestinal tract. In light of recent findings that flat and serrated lesions are more likely to contain invasive cancer and that even small lesions (5-10 mm) may contain advanced histology, detecting these lesions earlier with improved optical technologies may help decrease the rate of interval cancers after colonoscopy. With the limited accuracy of white-light colonoscopy (59%-84%) in distinguishing non-neoplastic lesions from neoplastic lesions, these new technologies can help us improve our abilities to risk stratify patients and determine more precise surveillance intervals.

20978843
Computer-assisted brush-biopsy analysis for the detection of dysplasia in a high-risk Barrett's esophagus surveillance population.
Barrett's epithelial dysplasia, the direct precursor to esophageal adenocarcinoma, is often unapparent and frequently missed during surveillance of Barrett's esophagus with four-quadrant forceps biopsy protocol. To determine whether the detection of dysplasia is improved by adding computer-assisted brush biopsy (EndoCDx©) to four-quadrant biopsy protocol. Patients with a history of Barrett's esophagus with dysplasia scheduled for endoscopic surveillance were recruited from four academic medical centers. Patients underwent brush biopsy followed by four-quadrant biopsy every 1-2 cm. The results from brush and forceps biopsy were reviewed independently by pathologists blinded to the other's results. Among 151 patients enrolled (124 men, 27 women; mean age: 65), 117 (77.5%) had forceps and brush-biopsy specimens adequate for interpretation. The mean number of forceps biopsies was 11.9 (median 10, range 2-40) and brush biopsies was 2.0 (median 2, range 1-4). The overall yield of forceps alone was 25.2% (n = 38). Brush biopsy added an additional 16 positive cases increasing the yield of dysplasia detection by 42% (95% CI: 20.7-72.7). The number needed to test (NNT) to detect one additional case of dysplasia was 9.4 (95% CI: 6.4-17.7). There were no significant differences in results among different centers, between standard versus jumbo forceps, or between forceps biopsies taken every 1 cm versus every 2 cm. These data suggest that computer-assisted brush biopsy is a useful adjunct to standard endoscopic surveillance regimens for the identification of dysplasia in Barrett's esophagus.

19586085
GERD and Barrett's esophagus: diagnostic and management strategies in the geriatric population.
Chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a risk factor for the development of Barrett's esophagus, the predominant precursor to esophageal adenocarcinoma. It is important for the primary care physician to identify those at greatest risk of developing Barrett's esophagus for referral for appropriate endoscopic screening. Many older patients display atypical symptoms or may be asymptomatic. The primary care physician must maintain a high index of suspicion and refer anyone who may potentially be at risk of Barrett's esophagus to a gastroenterologist. Once a diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus is made, appropriate endoscopic surveillance is indicated. For patients who have progressed to dysplasia, endoscopic therapy has become the preferred treatment modality because of its comparable efficacy to surgical resection with lower morbidity and mortality.

19161814
Exploring the association between elevated body mass index and Barrett's esophagus: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to study the association between elevated body mass index (BMI) and Barrett's esophagus (BE). Cross-sectional, case-control and cohort studies published through February 2008 that met strict inclusion and exclusion criteria were included. Summary estimates were calculated for the association between BE and being either overweight (BMI > or = 25 kg/m(2)) or obese (BMI > or = 30 kg/m(2)), or both. Based on 11 studies included in this analysis, there was a statistically significant relationship between increasing BMI and BE. Further studies are needed to evaluate if the presence of reflux attenuates the strength of this relationship, and if a particular pattern of obesity is more strongly associated with BE.

