20858855
Sequential treatment of CD34+ cells from patients with primary myelofibrosis with chromatin-modifying agents eliminate JAK2V617F-positive NOD/SCID marrow repopulating cells.
Because primary myelofibrosis (PMF) originates at the level of the pluripotent hematopoietic stem cell (HSC), we examined the effects of various therapeutic agents on the in vitro and in vivo behavior of PMF CD34(+) cells. Treatment of PMF CD34(+) cells with chromatin-modifying agents (CMAs) but not hydroxyurea, Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) inhibitors, or low doses of interferon-? led to the generation of greater numbers of CD34(+) chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor (CXCR)4(+) cells, which were capable of migrating in response to chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand (CXCL)12 and resulted in a reduction in the proportion of hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) that were JAK2V617F(+). Furthermore, sequential treatment of PMF CD34(+) cells but not normal CD34(+) cells with decitabine (5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine [5azaD]), followed by suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA; 5azaD/SAHA), or trichostatin A (5azaD/TSA) resulted in a higher degree of apoptosis. Two to 6 months after the transplantation of CMAs treated JAK2V617F(+) PMF CD34(+) cells into nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient (SCID)/IL-2R?(null) mice, the percentage of JAK2V617F/JAK2(total) in human CD45(+) marrow cells was dramatically reduced. These findings suggest that both PMF HPCs, short-term and long-term SCID repopulating cells (SRCs), are JAK2V617F(+) and that JAK2V617F(+) HPCs and SRCs can be eliminated by sequential treatment with CMAs. Sequential treatment with CMAs, therefore, represents a possible effective means of treating PMF at the level of the malignant SRC.

20625010
Treatment with the Bcl-xL inhibitor ABT-737 in combination with interferon ? specifically targets JAK2V617F-positive polycythemia vera hematopoietic progenitor cells.
Polycythemia vera (PV) treatment with interferon ? (IFN?) is frequently limited by dose-related toxicity. PV CD34(+) cells are characterized by overexpression of Bcl-xL, which can be antagonized by ABT-737 leading to apoptosis. We explored the effects of ABT-737 and IFN? on PV hematopoiesis. Both IFN? and ABT-737 alone or in combination had a modest effect on normal hematopoiesis but each individually were able to markedly induce PV CD34(+) cell apoptosis and suppress hematopoietic colony formation. The inhibitory activities of these agents in combination were greater against PV hematopoiesis than either agent alone. The exposure of PV CD34(+) cells to low doses of IFN? and ABT-737 in combination resulted in the reduction of the proportion of JAK2V617F(+) colonies similar to that observed with higher doses of IFN?. These data provide the rationale for combination therapy with low doses of IFN? and a BH3 mimetic for patients with PV.

20303384
Interferon-alpha targets JAK2V617F-positive hematopoietic progenitor cells and acts through the p38 MAPK pathway.
Interferon-alpha (IFNalpha) therapy leads to hematological remissions and a reduction of the JAK2V617F allele burden in patients with polycythemia vera (PV). In this study, the cellular target by which IFNalpha affects hematopoiesis in PV patients was evaluated. CD34(+) cells were isolated from normal bone marrow and the peripheral blood of patients with PV and were treated in vitro with each of the three commercially available forms of IFNalpha: IFNalpha 2b, pegylated IFNalpha 2a (Peg-IFNalpha 2a), and pegylated IFNalpha 2b (Peg-IFNalpha 2b). Each form of IFNalpha was equally potent in suppressing hematopoietic colony formation by normal CD34(+) cells, but Peg-IFNalpha 2a and IFNalpha 2b were more effective than Peg-IFNalpha 2b in inhibiting burst-forming unit erythroid-derived colony formation by PV CD34(+) cells. In addition, exposure of PV CD34(+) cells to equal doses of Peg-IFNalpha 2a and IFNalpha 2b resulted in a 38% to 40% reduction in the proportion of JAK2V617F-positive hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPC), while equivalent doses of Peg-IFNalpha 2b did not reduce the number of malignant HPC. Further studies explored the mechanism by which IFNalpha induced PV HPC growth inhibition. Treatment of Peg-IFNalpha 2a increased the rate of apoptosis of PV CD34(+) cells and the phosphorylation/activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in PV CD34(+) cells, while the p38-specific inhibitor SB203580 reversed the growth inhibition and apoptosis induced by Peg-IFNalpha 2a. These data suggest that low doses of IFNalpha selectively and directly suppress PV JAK2V617F HPC and that these agents act through the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

19762257
Human CD34+ cells are capable of generating normal and JAK2V617F positive endothelial like cells in vivo.
Endothelial like cells (ELCs) are thought to originate from either a hierarchy of endothelial progenitor cells (EPC), monocytes or monocyte derived multipotent progenitor cells (MOMCs). In this report, the ability of CD34(+) cells to generate ELC in vivo was examined using an immunodeficient mouse transplant assay system. The Philadelphia chromosome negative (Ph(-)) myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are associated with the acquired mutation, JAK2V617F. In order to further examine the ability of cord blood and JAK2V617F positive MPN CD34(+) cells to generate ELC, CD34(+) cells were transplanted into NOD/SCID mice. Cells within the livers and lungs of recipient mice had phenotypic and molecular properties of human ELC as examined using RT-PCR, flow cytometric analysis and fluorescence microscopy. These cells possessed either human wild type JAK2 or JAK2V617F indicating that they were derived from the transplanted human cells and that a fraction of such cells were involved by the malignant process. Furthermore, human CD144(+) cells isolated from the livers of recipient mice formed clusters in vitro composed of ELC, which contained either wild type JAK2 or JAK2V617F suggesting that these cells are derived from either MOMC or EPC that have an extensive proliferative capacity as well as some degree of self renewal capacity. These studies indicate that adult CD34(+) cells can be affected by JAK2V617F and that they can generate ELC which might play a role in the development of thrombosis in patients with MPN.

19752087
Correction of the abnormal trafficking of primary myelofibrosis CD34+ cells by treatment with chromatin-modifying agents.
The abnormal trafficking of CD34+ cells is a unique characteristic of primary myelofibrosis (PMF). We have further studied the behavior of PMF CD34+ cells by examining their homing to the marrow and the spleens of nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient (NOD/SCID) mice. Following the infusion of PMF and normal granulocyte colony-stimulating factor-mobilized peripheral blood (mPB) CD34+ cells into NOD/SCID mice, reduced numbers of PMF CD34+ cells and granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming unit (CFU-GM) compared with mPB were detected in the marrow of these mice, whereas similar numbers of PMF and mPB CD34+ cells and CFU-GM homed to their spleens. The abnormal homing of PMF CD34+ cells was associated with reduced expression of CXCR4, but was not related to the presence of JAK2V617F. The sequential treatment of PMF CD34+ cells with the chromatin-modifying agents 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5azaD) and trichostatin A (TSA), but not treatment with small molecule inhibitors of JAK2, resulted in the generation of increased numbers of CD34+CXCR4+ cells, which was accompanied by enhanced homing of PMF CD34+ cells to the marrow but not the spleens of NOD/SCID mice. Following 5azaD/TSA treatment, JAK2V617F-negative PMF hematopoietic progenitor cells preferentially homed to the marrow but not the spleens of recipient mice. Our data suggest that PMF CD34+ cells are characterized by a reduced ability to home to the marrow but not the spleens of NOD/SCID mice and that this homing defect can be corrected by sequential treatment with chromatin-modifying agents.

18715806
Circulating angiogenic monocyte progenitor cells are reduced in JAK2V617F high allele burden myeloproliferative disorders.
The clinical course of patients with Philadelphia chromosome negative myeloproliferative disorder is frequently complicated by thrombotic events. Post-natal vasculogenesis has been proposed to play a critical role in angiogenesis by acting through a hierarchy of endothelial progenitor cells. Some endothelial progenitor cells have been shown to share a number of features associated with monocytes while other more primitive progenitor cells produce endothelial cells in vitro exclusively. The cells which share features of monocytes and endothelial cells have been termed angiogenic monocytes. Reduced levels of angiogenic monocyte progenitor cells have been reported to be predictive of atherosclerotic disease progression. Angiogenic monocyte progenitor cells were assayed in vitro from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells of myeloproliferative disorder patients. Angiogenic monocyte colonies were plucked and analyzed for endothelial cells and hematopoietic cell markers, JAK2V617F and their ability to incorporate into vascular endothelium following their transplantation into non-obese diabetic, severe combine immunodeficient mice. Myeloproliferative disorder angiogenic monocyte colonies that were detected were uniformly JAK2V617F positive and produced cells that expressed phenotypic markers characteristic of both monocytes and endothelial cells. Reduced numbers of angiogenic monocyte colonies were present in the blood of myeloproliferative disorder patients with a high JAK2V617F burden (>50%), (p<0.01). Transplanted angiogenic monocytes were able to contribute to the vascular endothelium of non-obese diabetic, severe combine immunodeficient mice. These studies suggest that reduced numbers of circulating angiogenic monocyte progenitors contribute to the propensity to develop thrombotic complications in myeloproliferative disorder patients.

