21084793
Hypogonadism, erectile dysfunction, and type 2 diabetes mellitus: what the clinician needs to know.
Testosterone levels and erectile function are known to decline as men age, leading to hypogonadism and erectile dysfunction (ED). Men with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) have a particularly high prevalence of hypogonadism and ED. This population also has an increased risk for cardiovascular diseases, as well as exposure to other metabolic and cardiovascular risk factors, such as obesity. Several professional societies have recommended screening men with T2DM for testosterone deficiency. Hypogonadism is generally suspected when morning levels for total testosterone are < 300 ng/dL and clinical signs and symptoms typically associated with androgen deficiency are present. While hypogonadism and ED have emerged as predictors of cardiovascular disease and may respond to the lifestyle changes commonly recommended for patients with diabetes and the metabolic syndrome, the literature on whether treatment with testosterone supplementation affects outcomes beyond well-being and sexual function is still emerging. Primary care providers should be aware of this dysmetabolic cluster affecting their male patients and its importance, and, given the common occurrence of hypogonadism, ED, and T2DM, diagnosis of 1 of these conditions should elicit inquiry into the other 2 conditions.

19318216
Diabetes, obesity, and erectile dysfunction.
Diabetes mellitus (DM) and obesity affect large parts of the population in the United States and around the world. These disorders are among the most common risk factors for erectile dysfunction (ED), because of their effects on the vasculature and the hormonal milieu. This article reviews the current literature on the connection between DM, obesity, and ED. Using the search terms erectile dysfunction, endothelial dysfunction, hypogonadism, diabetes, and obesity, a systematic review of the available literature in the PubMed database was conducted. Relevant English-language publications (to August 2008) were identified. ED is highly prevalent in men with both DM and obesity, and may act as a harbinger for cardiovascular disease (CVD) in this high-risk population. In addition to male hypogonadism and macrovascular disease, endothelial dysfunction is central to the connection between the metabolic syndrome and ED. Conversely, improved glycemic control and weight loss have been found to improve erectile function. ED is very prevalent in men with DM and obesity. It is increasingly being recognized as an early clinical indicator and motivator for patients with CVD. The role of pharmacologic ED treatments in improving endothelial function is currently being investigated.

18729177
Type 1 diabetes mellitus: new knowledge of etiology, new approaches to management.


17543734
Dietary supplements and nutraceuticals in the management of andrologic disorders.
Dietary supplements and nutraceuticals are commonly used by men with erectile dysfunction, decreased libido, BPH, and concerns about developing prostate cancer. Many preparations do not contain the advertised dosages of the active ingredient or are contaminated. Dietary supplements and nutraceuticals, particularly those addressing erectile dysfunction and libido, need to undergo rigorous testing before they can be wholeheartedly recommended.

18463666
Assessment of endothelial function in the patient with erectile dysfunction: an opportunity for the urologist.
Although there is now ample evidence that men with manifest coronary, cerebral and peripheral vascular disease and their risk factors are at highest risk for suffering from erectile dysfunction, recent findings demonstrate a strong connection between erectile dysfunction and endothelial dysfunction. This review explores how urologists and other providers may utilize the link between these conditions in clinical practice, compares methods of assessing endothelial dysfunction and finally speculates on how this additional information might impact treatment plans.

