21375368
Differential gene expression in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Abstract Our objective was to analyze gene expression pattern in muscles from patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) compared to controls. Biopsied skeletal muscles from three ALS, three MMN and three control subjects had total RNA extracted and subjected to genome-wide gene expression analysis using Affymetrix GeneChip Exon 1.0 ST array. The most significant expression pattern differences were confirmed with RT-PCR in four additional ALS patients. Results showed that over 3000 genes were identified across the groups using q < 10%. Among 50 genes that were overexpressed only in the ALS group were: leucine-rich repeat kinase-2, follistatin, collagen type XIX alpha-1, ceramide kinase-like, sestrin-3 and CXorf64. No genes were significantly overexpressed in MMN alone. Underexpressed genes only in ALS included actinin ?3, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase-2 and homeobox C10; whereas only in MMN: hemoglobin A1 and CXorf64. Ankyrin repeat domain-1 was overexpressed in both groups. Underexpressed genes in both groups included myosin light chain kinase-2, enolase-3 and 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase-1. Validation analysis using RT-PCR confirmed the data for leucine-rich repeat kinase-2, follistatin, collagen type XIX alpha-1, ceramide kinase-like, sestrin-3 and CXorf64. In conclusion, there is differential tissue-specific gene expression in patients with ALS relative to MMN and controls. Further studies are necessary to evaluate the identified genes in larger patient groups and different tissues.

21305570
Do A-waves help predict intravenous immunoglobulin response in multifocal motor neuropathy without block?
Are there electrophysiological findings that predict response to intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) in patients with lower motor neuron (LMN) syndromes without multifocal conduction block (MCB)? We enrolled 9 patients with LMN syndromes without MCB to receive 18 weeks of IVIg therapy. Response was measured at weeks 2 and 18 using the Appel Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (AALS) score (includes grip and pincer strength measures), ALS Functional Rating Scale (ALSFRS), and electrophysiological measures, including motor unit estimates (MUNEs). No change occurred in AALS or ALSFRS scores posttreatment. Grip/pincer strength increased in 7 patients (P = 0.028) after initial treatment (responders); 2 showed no improvement (non-responders). No electrophysiological measure changed after treatment in either group but MUNEs trended higher (P = 0.055). "Abnormal A-waves" (complex, repetitive biphasic, or present in multiple nerves) occurred in pretreatment studies more often in responders (P = 0.028). "Abnormal A-waves" may signal IVIg-responsive LMN syndromes even if conduction block is absent.

18288708
ALSFRS and appel ALS scores: discordance with disease progression.
Progression of disease and effectiveness of therapy in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are determined by both questionnaire- and examination-based measures. To determine whether both types of measurement tools are equally predictive at all stages of disease, we compared questionnaire-based ALS Functional Rating Scale (ALSFRS) scores to the examination-based Appel ALS (AALS) scores at different stages of disease. Same-day scores were obtained during 174 visits in 62 patients with definite or probable ALS. Using normalized scores, correlation between the scales and predictability were best in mildly affected patients. Predictions of ALSFRS based on AALS scores were less than half as precise in the later stages of disease. Both scales showed significant change with disease progression, but ALSFRS consistently underestimated disease severity defined by AALS (P < 0.001). Questionnaire-based measurements should be compared against objective scales at all stages of disease severity before they are accepted as primary endpoint measures.

