21615648
Recurrent intrahepatic pigmented stones after liver transplantation in a patient with hemoglobin SC disease: Case report and review of the literature.
Tomaino J, Keegan T, Kerkar N, Facciuto M, Miloh T, Taouli B, Hurlet A, Weintraub J, Sejpal D, Arnon R. Recurrent intrahepatic pigmented stones after liver transplantation in a patient with hemoglobin SC disease: Case report and review of the literature. Pediatr Transplantation 2011. © 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Abstract:? Patients with hemoglobinopathies may have hepatic involvement, which if severe, can lead to chronic liver disease and a need for liver transplant. Here, we present a case of a 16-yr-old female adolescent who presented to our center with hemoglobin SC disease, obstructive jaundice because of pigmented intrahepatic biliary stones, and progressive liver disease. She underwent a successful liver transplant but a few years later, she developed recurrent cholangitis and graft dysfunction because of recurrent intrahepatic biliary stones. Recurrent formation of intrahepatic stones after liver transplant is a rare and severe complication in patients with hemoglobinopathies. We recommend hypertransfusion therapy and surveillance imaging studies after liver transplant for early detection and prevention of this complication.

21572265
Hepatocellular Carcinoma Arising in a Pigmented Telangiectatic Adenoma With Nuclear ?-catenin and Glutamine Synthetase Positivity: Case Report and Review of the Literature.
Telangiectatic hepatocellular adenoma is a rare, recently recognized subtype of hepatocellular adenoma that is often underrecognized by pathologists. We report a case of hepatocellular carcinoma arising within a pigmented telangiectatic hepatocellular adenoma in a noncirrhotic man with diffuse glutamine synthetase and nuclear ?-catenin positivity. This case highlights malignant transformation of telangiectatic adenomas, and describes a previously unreported association between pigment deposition and telangiectatic adenoma. Radiology, gross pathology, and histopathology are shown. Review of the literature with attention to ?-catenin and glutamine synthetase staining, malignant transformation, patient characteristics, the presence of Dubin-Johnson-like pigment, and genetic characteristics of telangiectatic adenomas are discussed.

