21613252
The multifunctional role of EKLF/KLF1 during erythropoiesis.
The cellular events that lead to terminal erythroid differentiation rely on the controlled interplay of extra- and intra-cellular regulatory factors. Their downstream effects are highly coordinated and result in the structural/morphologic and metabolic changes that uniquely characterize a maturing red blood cell. EKLF (Erythroid Krüppel-like factor; KLF1) is one of a very small number of intrinsic transcription factors that play a major role in regulating these events. This review covers three major aspects of erythropoiesis in which EKLF plays crucial functions. First, at the MEP (megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor) stage, where EKLF is involved in erythroid lineage commitment; second, during the global expansion of erythroid gene expression in primitive and definitive lineages, where it plays a direct role in globin switching; and third, during the terminal maturation of red cells where it helps control exit from the cell cycle. We finish by describing recent studies of mammalian EKLF/KLF1 mutations that lead to altered red cell phenotypes and disease.

20837550
Design of embedded chimeric peptide nucleic acids that efficiently enter and accurately reactivate gene expression in vivo.
Pharmacological treatments designed to reactivate fetal ?-globin can lead to an effective and successful clinical outcome in patients with hemoglobinopathies. However, new approaches remain highly desired because such treatments are not equally effective for all patients, and toxicity issues remain. We have taken a systematic approach to develop an embedded chimeric peptide nucleic acid (PNA) that effectively enters the cell and the nucleus, binds to its target site at the human fetal ?-globin promoter, and reactivates this transcript in adult transgenic mouse bone marrow and human primary peripheral blood cells. In vitro and in vivo DNA-binding assays in conjunction with live-cell imaging have been used to establish and optimize chimeric PNA design parameters that lead to successful gene activation. Our final molecule contains a specific ?-promoter-binding PNA sequence embedded within two amino acid motifs: one leads to efficient cell/nuclear entry, and the other generates transcriptional reactivation of the target. These embedded PNAs overcome previous limitations and are generally applicable to the design of in vivo transcriptional activation reagents that can be directed to any promoter region of interest and are of direct relevance to clinical applications that would benefit from such a need.

20696915
Severe anemia in the Nan mutant mouse caused by sequence-selective disruption of erythroid Kruppel-like factor.
Studies of mouse models of anemia have long provided fundamental insights into red blood cell formation and function. Here we show that the semidominant mouse mutation Nan ("neonatal anemia") carries a single amino acid change (E339D) within the second zinc finger of the erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF), a critical erythroid regulatory transcription factor. The mutation alters the DNA-binding specificity of EKLF so that it no longer binds promoters of a subset of its DNA targets. Remarkably, even when mutant Nan and wild-type EKLF alleles are expressed at equivalent levels, the mutant form selectively interferes with expression of EKLF target genes whose promoter elements it no longer binds. This interference yields a distorted genetic output and selective protein deficiencies that differ from those seen in EKLF-heterozygous and EKLF-null red blood cells and presents a unique and unexpected mechanism of inherited disease.

20368355
EKLF directly activates the p21WAF1/CIP1 gene by proximal promoter and novel intronic regulatory regions during erythroid differentiation.
The switch from proliferation to differentiation during the terminal stages of erythropoiesis is a tightly controlled process that relies in part on transcription factor-mediated activation of cell cycle components. EKLF is a key transcription factor that is necessary for the initial establishment of the red cell phenotype. Here, we find that EKLF also plays a role during the subsequent differentiation process, as it induces p21(WAF1/CIP1) expression independent of p53 to regulate the changes in the cell cycle underlying erythroid maturation. EKLF activates p21 not only by directly binding to an EKLF site within a previously characterized GC-rich region in the p21 proximal promoter but also by occupancy at a novel, phylogenetically conserved region that contains consensus CACCC core motifs located downstream from the p21 TATA box. Our findings demonstrate that EKLF, likely in coordination with other transcription factors, directly contributes to the complex set of events that occur at the final erythroid cell divisions and accentuates terminal differentiation directly by activation of CDK inhibitors such as p21.

19251649
Distinct modes of gene regulation by a cell-specific transcriptional activator.
The architectural layout of a eukaryotic RNA polymerase II core promoter plays a role in general transcriptional activation. However, its role in tissue-specific expression is not known. For example, differing modes of its recognition by general transcription machinery can provide an additional layer of control within which a single tissue-restricted transcription factor may operate. Erythroid Kruppel-like factor (EKLF) is a hematopoietic-specific transcription factor that is critical for the activation of subset of erythroid genes. We find that EKLF interacts with TATA binding protein-associated factor 9 (TAF9), which leads to important consequences for expression of adult beta-globin. First, TAF9 functionally supports EKLF activity by enhancing its ability to activate the beta-globin gene. Second, TAF9 interacts with a conserved beta-globin downstream promoter element, and ablation of this interaction by beta-thalassemia-causing mutations decreases its promoter activity and disables superactivation. Third, depletion of EKLF prevents recruitment of TAF9 to the beta-globin promoter, whereas depletion of TAF9 drastically impairs beta-promoter activity. However, a TAF9-independent mode of EKLF transcriptional activation is exhibited by the alpha-hemoglobin-stabilizing protein (AHSP) gene, which does not contain a discernable downstream promoter element. In this case, TAF9 does not enhance EKLF activity and depletion of TAF9 has no effect on AHSP promoter activation. These studies demonstrate that EKLF directs different modes of tissue-specific transcriptional activation depending on the architecture of its target core promoter.

18725573
Blood group antigens reveal their maker.


18710946
Acetylation of EKLF is essential for epigenetic modification and transcriptional activation of the beta-globin locus.
Posttranslational modifications of transcription factors provide alternate protein interaction platforms that lead to varied downstream effects. We have investigated how the acetylation of EKLF plays a role in its ability to alter the beta-like globin locus chromatin structure and activate transcription of the adult beta-globin gene. By establishing an EKLF-null erythroid line whose closed beta-locus chromatin structure and silent beta-globin gene status can be rescued by retroviral infection of EKLF, we demonstrate the importance of EKLF acetylation at lysine 288 in the recruitment of CBP to the locus, modification of histone H3, occupancy by EKLF, opening of the chromatin structure, and transcription of adult beta-globin. We also find that EKLF helps to coordinate this process by the specific association of its zinc finger domain with the histone H3 amino terminus. Although EKLF interacts equally well with H3.1 and H3.3, we find that only H3.3 is enriched at the adult beta-globin promoter. These data emphasize the critical nature of lysine acetylation in transcription factor activity and enable us to propose a model of how modified EKLF integrates coactivators, chromatin remodelers, and nucleosomal components to alter epigenetic chromatin structure and stimulate transcription.

18448565
Activation of Eklf expression during hematopoiesis by Gata2 and Smad5 prior to erythroid commitment.
The hierarchical progression of stem and progenitor cells to their more-committed progeny is mediated through cell-to-cell signaling pathways and intracellular transcription factor activity. However, the mechanisms that govern the genetic networks underlying lineage fate decisions and differentiation programs remain poorly understood. Here we show how integration of Bmp4 signaling and Gata factor activity controls the progression of hematopoiesis, as exemplified by the regulation of Eklf during establishment of the erythroid lineage. Utilizing transgenic reporter assays in differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells as well as in the murine fetal liver, we demonstrate that Eklf expression is initiated prior to erythroid commitment during hematopoiesis. Applying phylogenetic footprinting and in vivo binding studies in combination with newly developed loss-of-function technology in embryoid bodies, we find that Gata2 and Smad5 cooperate to induce Eklf in a progenitor population, followed by a switch to Gata1-controlled regulation of Eklf transcription upon erythroid commitment. This stage- and lineage-dependent control of Eklf expression defines a novel role for Eklf as a regulator of lineage fate decisions during hematopoiesis.

18329016
Non-random subcellular distribution of variant EKLF in erythroid cells.
EKLF protein plays a prominent role during erythroid development as a nuclear transcription factor. Not surprisingly, exogenous EKLF quickly localizes to the nucleus. However, using two different assays we have unexpectedly found that a substantial proportion of endogenous EKLF resides in the cytoplasm at steady state in all erythroid cells examined. While EKLF localization does not appear to change during either erythroid development or terminal differentiation, we find that the protein displays subtle yet distinct biochemical and functional differences depending on which subcellular compartment it is isolated from, with PEST sequences possibly playing a role in these differences. Localization is unaffected by inhibition of CRM1 activity and the two populations are not differentiated by stability. Heterokaryon assays demonstrate that EKLF is able to shuttle out of the nucleus although its nuclear re-entry is rapid. These studies suggest there is an unexplored role for EKLF in the cytoplasm that is separate from its well-characterized nuclear function.

17938210
Sumoylation of EKLF promotes transcriptional repression and is involved in inhibition of megakaryopoiesis.
Erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF [KLF1]) is a transcriptional regulator that plays a critical role within a specific subset of hematopoietic cells, particularly in the erythroid lineage and its immediate precursor, the megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor (MEP). We find that EKLF is posttranslationally modified by sumoylation at a single site near its amino terminus and that PIAS1 plays a critical role in this process. Mutation of this site has little effect on EKLF's ability to function as a transcriptional activator; however, it has a dramatic effect on its repressive abilities. The mechanism of repression likely involves a novel small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO)-dependent EKLF interaction with the Mi-2beta component of the NuRD repression complex. Mutated EKLF is attenuated in its ability to repress megakaryocyte differentiation, implicating EKLF sumoylation status in differentiative decisions emanating from the MEP. These studies demonstrate a novel mechanism by which transcription factor sumoylation can alter protein-protein interactions and bipotential lineage decisions.

17715392
Novel role for EKLF in megakaryocyte lineage commitment.
Megakaryocytes and erythroid cells are thought to derive from a common progenitor during hematopoietic differentiation. Although a number of transcriptional regulators are important for this process, they do not explain the bipotential result. We now show by gain- and loss-of-function studies that erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF), a transcription factor whose role in erythroid gene regulation is well established, plays an unexpected directive role in the megakaryocyte lineage. EKLF inhibits the formation of megakaryocytes while at the same time stimulating erythroid differentiation. Quantitative examination of expression during hematopoiesis shows that, unlike genes whose presence is required for establishment of both lineages, EKLF is uniquely down-regulated in megakaryocytes after formation of the megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor. Expression profiling and molecular analyses support these observations and suggest that megakaryocytic inhibition is achieved, at least in part, by EKLF repression of Fli-1 message levels.

17198872
Altered regulation of beta-like globin genes by a redesigned erythroid transcription factor.
Targeted regulation of beta-like globin genes was studied using designer zinc finger transcription factors containing the DNA binding domain of the red cell specific transcription factor erythroid Kruppel-like factor (EKLF) fused to repression domains. Globin gene expression was analyzed after introduction of the modified transcription factors into cell lines, embryonic stem cells and transgenic mice. As would be predicted, when introduced transiently into cells these transcription factors were effective in repressing the adult beta-globin promoter CACCC element, which is the natural target for EKLF. In murine erythroleukemia cells repression of the adult beta-globin gene was accompanied by a reactivation of the endogenous embryonic betaH1-globin gene. Studies in differentiated embryonic stem cells and transgenic mice confirmed the reactivation of embryonic gene expression during development. Our studies support a competition model for beta-globin gene expression and underscore the importance of EKLF in the embryonic/fetal-to-adult globin switch. They also demonstrate the feasibility of designer zinc finger transcription factors in the study of transcriptional control mechanisms at the beta-globin locus and as potential gene therapy agents for sickle cell disease and related hemoglobinopathies.

