21477851
Wdr5 Mediates Self-Renewal and Reprogramming via the Embryonic Stem Cell Core Transcriptional Network.
The embryonic stem (ES) cell transcriptional and chromatin-modifying networks are critical for self-renewal maintenance. However, it remains unclear whether these networks functionally interact and, if so, what factors mediate such interactions. Here, we show that WD repeat domain 5 (Wdr5), a core member of the mammalian Trithorax (trxG) complex, positively correlates with the undifferentiated state and is a regulator of ES cell self-renewal. We demonstrate that Wdr5, an "effector" of H3K4 methylation, interacts with the pluripotency transcription factor Oct4. Genome-wide protein localization and transcriptome analyses demonstrate overlapping gene regulatory functions between Oct4 and Wdr5. The Oct4-Sox2-Nanog circuitry and trxG cooperate in activating transcription of key self-renewal regulators, and furthermore, Wdr5 expression is required for the efficient formation of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. We propose an integrated model of transcriptional and epigenetic control, mediated by select trxG members, for the maintenance of ES cell self-renewal and somatic cell reprogramming.

20686956
Efficient gene knockdowns in mouse embryonic stem cells using microRNA-based shRNAs.
RNA interference (RNAi) is a powerful gene-knockdown technology that has been applied for functional genetic loss-of-function studies in many model eukaryotic systems, including embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Application of RNAi in ESCs allows for dissection of mechanisms by which ESCs self-renew and maintain pluripotency, and also specifying particular cell types needed for cell-replacement therapies. Potent RNAi response can be induced by expression of an microRNA-embedded short-hairpin RNA (shRNA(mir)) cassette that is integrated in the genome by virus infection or site-specific recombination at a defined locus. In this chapter, I will provide detailed protocols to perform shRNA(mir)-mediated RNAi studies in mouse ESCs using retrovirus infection and loxP site-directed recombination for efficient constitutive and inducible gene knockdown, respectively.

