21240257
Benign mucocele-like lesions of the breast: revisited.
Mucocele-like lesions of the breast are ruptured ducts that discharge their contents into the stroma. They constitute a spectrum from benign to atypical to malignant. The current management of these lesions diagnosed on core biopsy is excision. The goal of our study was to evaluate the necessity of this practice for benign mucocele-like lesions. Retrospective review of the pathology database from 1 January 2000 to 1 June 2008 identified 61 cases, with follow-up information available in 50 cases. Clinical, radiological, and pathological information was correlated. Core biopsies were reviewed to confirm the diagnosis and verify previous biopsy site. In all, 45 patients underwent surgery, whereas 5 patients were followed for >1 year and remained stable. Patient's ages ranged from 44 to 76 years. Most benign mucoceles were diagnosed stereotactically while targeting calcifications (93.3%); rarely, the lesion was a sonographically detected mass. Most excisions had no residual mucocele (37/45=82%). In seven cases (15.6%), atypical duct hyperplasia was present, three with residual mucocele. In one case, the residual mucocele showed a continuum from florid to atypical duct hyperplasia at the core biopsy site. The other six cases showed atypical duct hyperplasia adjacent to but not directly at the core biopsy site. The sizes of the benign mucoceles ranged from incipient to 0.6?cm, all containing calcifications except one, which was incidental. Radiological-pathological correlation was concordant in all cases except one with suspicious calcification, which was ductal carcinoma in situ on excision. In this series, the largest of its kind, the upstage rate of benign mucoceles diagnosed on core biopsy was 17.8%. With the exception of the ductal carcinoma in situ case, no radiological or morphological features were predictive of atypia. Thus, because of associated atypical duct hyperplasia, sampling reasons, and intralesional heterogeneity, we continue to recommend excision of benign mucocele-like lesions diagnosed on core biopsy.

19961252
Adequate histologic sampling of breast magnetic resonance imaging-guided core needle biopsy.
-The increasing use of contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the breast as a valuable adjunct to mammography and ultrasound in the detection of breast lesions, in association with needle core biopsy taken from the suspicious areas, has major workload implications for histopathology laboratories wherever breast MRI is practiced. -To establish the number of histologic levels necessary for the evaluation of breast MRI-guided needle core biopsy specimens taken from suspicious areas on breast MRI examination. -Retrospective histologic review of a series of breast MRI-guided core needle biopsies, initially examined routinely at 4 levels, in the Pathology Department at Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, New York. -Accurate diagnostic classification was possible after examination of the first level in 95.4% of cases. For a small group of patients (4.4%), 4 levels were considered to provide additional useful information, although this information did not alter the diagnosis. In only a single case (0.2%) was it likely that routine examination of 4 levels could have led to an incidental finding of a very small intraductal papilloma (0.15 cm) present only at the second histologic level. However, this incidental finding would have not changed the patient outcome. -Needle core biopsies for MRI-detected abnormalities should be routinely examined at only 1 level. Further levels may be needed in occasional cases to identify more conclusively an associated pathologic abnormality and may be of particular value when assessing atypical intraductal proliferative epithelial lesions.

19402174
Excision is indicated for intraductal papilloma of the breast diagnosed on core needle biopsy.
Although it has been accepted that intraductal papillomas with atypia or malignancy diagnosed on core needle biopsy require surgical excision, the management of pure intraductal papillomas has been controversial. Because some series reported a small but definite incidence of atypia or malignancy, whereas others claimed that radiologic follow-up was adequate, this study evaluated results of excision of all pure intraductal papillomas diagnosed on core needle biopsy at this institution. By using computerized pathology files from January of 2000 to December of 2004, 200 cases of intraductal papillomas on core needle biopsy were identified. Information regarding excision was available in 104 cases. All specimens were reviewed to confirm both the diagnoses as well as the presence of biopsy site changes in excision specimens, and the findings were correlated with radiologic data. The age of the patients ranged from 25 to 82 years (mean, 55.5). The diagnoses on excision were as follows: intraductal papillomas = 71 cases (68.3%), no residual intraductal papillomas = 16 (15.3%), atypical duct hyperplasia = 8 (7.7%), ductal carcinoma in situ = 6 (5.8%), and invasive carcinoma = 3 (2.9%). In cases with atypia or malignancy, these findings were adjacent to but not in the biopsy site. In cases with atypical duct hyperplasia or ductal carcinoma in situ, a spectrum of histologic changes ranging from florid to atypical duct hyperplasia (14 cases), to ductal carcinoma in situ (6 cases) were present, all involving intraductal papillomas. The upstage rate of pure intraductal papillomas on core needle biopsy to atypia or malignancy on excision was 16.4%. Because of sampling error and the close proximity of atypia or malignancy to the intraductal papillomas (suggesting precancerous potential), excision was recommended of these lesions diagnosed on core needle biopsy. Close radiologic-pathologic correlation was important in the evaluation of these lesions.

19061295
Intraductal carcinoma arising in intraductal papilloma in an axillary lymph node: review of the literature and proposed theories of evolution.
We report a case of an axillary lymph node containing benign glandular lesions, intraductal papilloma with florid and atypical duct hyperplasia, and ductal carcinoma in situ. We propose 2 theories for the development of the intraductal papilloma: from adjacent benign glandular inclusions, or from displaced epithelial cells from a previous intraductal papilloma in the ipsilateral breast. This case identifies yet another etiology for false-positive sentinel lymph nodes morphologically and by immunohistochemistry.

18948766
Occult axillary node metastases in breast cancer are prognostically significant: results in 368 node negative patients with 20-year follow-up.


18533395
Ultrasound detection of nonpalpable mammographically occult malignancy.
To evaluate the prevalence of occult malignancy with screening breast ultrasound. All ultrasound-guided core needle breast biopsies performed between January 1, 1999, and June 30, 2001, were retrospectively reviewed. Lesions were identified during screening breast ultrasound in high-risk women with no mammographic or palpable abnormality in either breast, a unilateral mammographic or palpable abnormality in the contralateral breast, or a unilateral mammographic or palpable abnormality in a different quadrant of the same breast. All ultrasound-detected lesions were histologically verified. Six hundred and fifty-two women with a mean age of 49 years underwent 698 biopsies during the study period. Three hundred and forty-nine of these lesions were detected at screening breast ultrasound. Out of 349, 11 (3.2%) had a mammographically and clinically occult malignancy. Nine cancers were found in women with no mammographic or palpable abnormality. Two cancers were found in the same breast as the mammographic or palpable abnormality. None were found in the breast contralateral to a palpable or mammographic abnormality. Screening breast ultrasound of high-risk women has a similar detection rate for occult carcinoma as screening mammography, but has a low positive predictive value in cases where biopsy is performed.

18348299
Lobular neoplasia on core needle biopsy does not require excision.
Lobular neoplasia (LN), encompassing atypical lobular hyperplasia (ALH) and lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS), is often an incidental finding on core needle biopsies (CNBs) performed in instances of radiologic densities and/or calcifications. Because LN is generally considered a risk factor for breast carcinoma, the utility of subsequent excision is controversial. The authors' database yielded 98 cases of LCIS and/or ALH. Cases containing LN accompanied by a second lesion mandating excision (eg, radial scar, atypical ductal hyperplasia [ADH]) and those failing to meet strict diagnostic criteria for LN (eg, atypical cells, mitoses, single-cell necrosis) were excluded. Radiographic calcifications were correlated with their histologic counterparts in terms of size, number, and pattern. Ninety-one biopsies were performed for calcifications and 7 were performed for mass lesions. The ages of the patients ranged from 35 to 82 years. Fifty-three patients were followed radiologically without excision, 42 of whom had available clinicoradiologic information. The 45 patients who underwent excision were without disease at follow-up periods ranging from 1 to 8 years. Of these 45 patients, 42 (93%) had biopsy results demonstrating only LN. The remaining 3 patients had biopsies with the following findings: ADH in 1 biopsy, residual LCIS and a separate minute focus of infiltrating lobular carcinoma (clearly an incidental finding) in the second biopsy, and ductal carcinoma in situ admixed with LCIS in the third biopsy (a retrospective examination performed by 2 blinded breast pathologists revealed foci of atypical cells and mitoses). Excision of LN is unnecessary provided that: 1) careful radiographic-pathologic correlation is performed; and 2) strict histologic criteria are adhered to when making the diagnosis. Close radiologic and clinical follow-up is adequate.

17696841
Incidental metastatic microcarcinoma of the thyroid identified after total parathyroidectomy.
Papillary microcarcinoma of the thyroid comprises 10-20% of all thyroid malignancies. Most microcarcinomas are slow growing and have a favorable prognosis. Lymph node metastasis caused by thyroid microcarcinoma is uncommon, and distant metastasis to lung or bone is even rarer. Thyroid microcarcinoma with metastasis to a thymic lymph node was not previously reported. We describe a case of incidental 1 mm micropapillary thyroid cancer identified within a thymic lymph node following total parathyroidectomy for secondary hyperparathyroidism.

