21533091
Reversal of diabetic nephropathy by a ketogenic diet.
Intensive insulin therapy and protein restriction delay the development of nephropathy in a variety of conditions, but few interventions are known to reverse nephropathy. Having recently observed that the ketone 3-beta-hydroxybutyric acid (3-OHB) reduces molecular responses to glucose, we hypothesized that a ketogenic diet, which produces prolonged elevation of 3-OHB, may reverse pathological processes caused by diabetes. To address this hypothesis, we assessed if prolonged maintenance on a ketogenic diet would reverse nephropathy produced by diabetes. In mouse models for both Type 1 (Akita) and Type 2 (db/db) diabetes, diabetic nephropathy (as indicated by albuminuria) was allowed to develop, then half the mice were switched to a ketogenic diet. After 8 weeks on the diet, mice were sacrificed to assess gene expression and histology. Diabetic nephropathy, as indicated by albumin/creatinine ratios as well as expression of stress-induced genes, was completely reversed by 2 months maintenance on a ketogenic diet. However, histological evidence of nephropathy was only partly reversed. These studies demonstrate that diabetic nephropathy can be reversed by a relatively simple dietary intervention. Whether reduced glucose metabolism mediates the protective effects of the ketogenic diet remains to be determined.

21150875
Increased susceptibility to acute kidney injury due to endoplasmic reticulum stress in mice lacking tumor necrosis factor-? and its receptor 1.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is actively involved in acute organ injury. Since tumor necrosis factor ? (TNF?) plays a role in acute kidney injury, and induces ER stress and cell death in vitro, we examined the contribution of TNF? to acute kidney ER stress induced by tunicamycin. Contrary to expectation, tunicamycin caused much more severe kidney injury in TNF?-/- than in wild-type mice. The major site of kidney injury in TNF?-/- mice was proximal tubules, which showed extensive cell vacuolation, lipid accumulation, and apoptosis. Reconstitution of TNF?-/- mice with TNF? 24?h before tunicamycin injection reversed the susceptibility. When TNF?-receptor-deficient mice were treated with tunicamycin, severe renal injury developed in TNFR1-/- but not TNFR2-/- mice, suggesting this aspect of TNF? action was through TNF receptor-1 (TNFR1). In response to tunicamycin-induced acute ER stress, kidneys from neither TNF?-/- nor TNFR1-/- mice showed a significant increase in phosphorylated eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2? (eIF2?), a key step in ER stress regulation. Moreover, proximal tubular cells from TNFR1-/- mice did not show increased eIF2? phosphorylation in response to tunicamycin and were susceptible to ER stress-induced cell death. Finally, treatment of proximal tubule cells isolated from TNFR1-/- mice with an inhibitor of eIF2? phosphatase increased the levels of phosphorylated eIF2? and substantially reduced tunicamycin-induced cell death. Thus, disruption of TNFR1 signaling leads to dysregulation of eIF2? and increased susceptibility to acute ER stress injury in the kidney.

21074754
Potentiation of Th17 cytokines in aging process contributes to the development of colitis.
Th17 cells, which produce IL-17 and IL-22, promote autoimmunity in mice and have been implicated in the pathogenesis of autoimmune/inflammatory diseases in humans. However, the Th17 immune response in the aging process is still not clear. In the present study, we found that the induction of IL-17-producing CD4(+) T cells was significantly increased in aged individuals compared with young healthy ones. The mRNA expression of IL-17, IL-17F, IL-22, and RORC2 was also significantly increased in aged people. Similar to humans, Th17 cells as well as mRNAs encoding IL-17, IL-22 and ROR?t were dramatically elevated in naïve T cells from aged mouse compared to young ones. In addition, CD44 positive IL-17-producing CD4(+) T cells were significantly higher in aged mice, suggesting that memory T cells are an important source of IL-17 production. Furthermore, the percentage of IL-17-producing CD4(+) T cells generated in co-culture with dendritic cells from either aged or young mice did not show significant differences, suggesting that dendritic cells do not play a primary role in the elevation of Th17 cytokines in aged mouse cells. Importantly, transfer of CD4(+)CD45Rb(hi) cells from aged mice induced more severe colitis in RAG(-/-) mice compared to cells from young mice, Taken together, these results suggest that Th17 immune responses are elevated in aging humans and mice and may contribute to the increased development of inflammatory disorders in the elderly.

20363923
Induction of diabetes in aged C57B6 mice results in severe nephropathy: an association with oxidative stress, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and inflammation.
Kidney aging is a slowly progressive process that is postulated to be accelerated by intervening diseases, such as diabetes, due in part to the addition of excessive stress and inflammation from the intervening disease to the underlying aging process. This hypothesis was tested by inducing diabetes with streptozotocin in 18-month-old, aging mice. After 4 months of diabetes, these mice developed severe albuminuria, elevated creatinine levels, and renal lesions including extensive apoptotic cell death, glomerulosclerosis, afferent and efferent hyalinosis, and tubulointerstitial inflammation and fibrosis. These symptoms were associated with elevated oxidative stress. The presence of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in 22-month-old diabetic kidneys resulted in up-regulation of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), which may play a role in increasing kidney lesions because CHOP-deficient proximal tubular cells were resistant to ER stress-induced cell death, and CHOP-deficient mice were protected from diabetic nephropathy. Moreover, CHOP-deficient mice did not develop albuminuria as they aged. Inflammation, another key component of progressive diabetic nephropathy, was prominent in 22-month-old diabetic kidneys. The expression of tumor-necrosis factor-alpha in 22-month-old diabetic kidneys may play a role in inflammation, ER stress, and apoptosis. Thus, diabetes may accelerate the underlying kidney aging process present in old mice.

20006791
Identifying advanced glycation end products as a major source of oxidants in aging: implications for the management and/or prevention of reduced renal function in elderly persons.
Aging is characterized by increasing inflammation and oxidant stress (OS). Reduced renal function was present in more than 20% of normal-aged individuals sampled in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) cross-sectional study of the US population. Longitudinal studies in the United States and Italy showed that renal function does not decline in some individuals, suggesting that a search for causes of the loss of renal function in some persons might be indicated and interventions to reduce this outcome should be sought. Because advanced glycation end products (AGEs) induce both inflammation and OS, accumulate with age, and primarily are excreted by the kidney, one outcome of reduced renal function in aging could be decreased AGE disposal. The build-up of AGEs with reduced renal function could contribute to inflammation, increased oxidant stress, and accumulation of AGEs in aging. In fact, results from a longitudinal study of normal aging adults in Italy showed that the most significant correlation with mortality was the level of renal function. A clear link between inflammation, OS, AGEs, and chronic disease was shown in studies of mice that showed that reduction of AGE levels by drugs or decreased intake of AGEs reduces chronic kidney disease (CKD) and cardiovascular disease of aging. The data support a role for AGEs in the development of renal lesions in aging mice and reveal that AGEs in the diet are very important contributors to renal and cardiovascular lesions. AGEs signal through two receptors, one of which is anti-inflammatory (AGER1) and the other is proinflammatory (RAGE). Overexpression of AGER1 protects against OS and acute vascular injury. The reduction of AGEs in the diet is as efficient in preventing aging-related cardiovascular and renal lesions in mice as that seen with calorie restriction. Studies in normal adults of all ages and those with CKD suggest that the findings in mice may be directly applicable to both aging and CKD. Namely, the dietary content of AGEs determines the serum levels of AGEs and inflammatory mediators and urine AGE levels in both normal subjects and CKD patients. Importantly, reduction of AGEs controls these changes in both normal subjects and CKD patients, and the phenotypic changes in AGER1 are reduced in CKD patients by decreasing the amount of AGEs consumed with the diet. These data suggest that the changes in renal function in normal aging may be subject to control and this subject deserves renewed attention.

19946325
Role of oxidants/inflammation in declining renal function in chronic kidney disease and normal aging.
Oxidant stress (OS) and inflammation increase in normal aging and in chronic kidney disease (CKD), as observed in human and animal studies. In cross-sectional studies of the US population, these changes are associated with a decrease in renal function, which is exhibited by a significant proportion of the population. However, since many normal adults have intact renal function, and longitudinal studies show that some persons maintain normal renal function with age, the link between OS, inflammation, and renal decline is not clear. In aging mice, greater oxidant intake is associated with increased age-related CKD and mortality, which suggests that interventions that reduce OS and inflammation may be beneficial for older individuals. Both OS and inflammation can be readily lowered in normal subjects and patients with CKD stage 3-4 by a simple dietary modification that lowers intake and results in reduced serum and tissue levels of advanced glycation end products. Diabetic patients, including those with microalbuminuria, have a decreased ability to metabolize and excrete oxidants prior to observable changes in serum creatinine. Thus, OS and inflammation may occur in the diabetic kidney at an early time. We review the evidence that oxidants in the diet directly lead to increased serum levels of OS and inflammatory mediators in normal aging and in CKD. We also discuss a simple dietary intervention that helps reduce OS and inflammation, an important and achievable therapeutic goal for patients with CKD and aging individuals with reduced renal function.

19779136
Advanced glycation end product receptor-1 transgenic mice are resistant to inflammation, oxidative stress, and post-injury intimal hyperplasia.
The high levels of oxidative stress (OS) and inflammation associated with cardiovascular disease are linked to pro-oxidants such as advanced glycation end products (AGEs). AGEs interact with multiple receptors, including receptor 1 (AGER1), which promotes AGE removal and blocks OS and inflammation, and RAGE, which enhances inflammation. In this study, we evaluated metabolic and vascular changes in AGER1 transgenic mice (AGER1-tg) subjected to an atherogenic diet and arterial wire-injury. Both baseline and postatherogenic diet serum and tissue AGEs as well as plasma 8-isoprostane levels were lower in AGER1-tg mice than in wild-type mice. The levels of injected (125)I-AGE in tissues were decreased as well in AGER1-tg mice. After ingesting a high-fat diet, AGER1-tg mice had a normal glucose tolerance and only 7% were hyperglycemic, whereas 53% of wild-type mice had stable hyperglycemia. After wire-injury, intimal lesions in AGER1-tg mice were small, whereas wild-type mice had diffuse intimal hyperplasia, a high intima/media ratio, and inflammatory cell infiltrates. In addition, AGER1 staining, prominent in AGER1-tg mice, was attenuated in 30 to 40% of wild-type cells, although all cells were strongly positive for AGEs. Thus, AGER1 overexpression in mice reduces basal levels of AGEs and OS, enhances resistance to diet-induced hyperglycemia and OS, and protects against injury-induced arterial intimal hyperplasia and inflammation, providing protection against OS and inflammation induced by AGEs and high-fat diets in vivo.

19776174
Oxidative stress-induced JNK activation contributes to proinflammatory phenotype of aging diabetic mesangial cells.
Chronic inflammation and increased oxidative stress (OS) play an important role in diabetic nephropathy progression. Herein, we show that mesangial cells from streptozotocin-induced aging diabetic mice, a model of progressive diabetic nephropathy, exhibited increased OS and a proinflammatory phenotype characterized by elevated chemokines and ICAM-1 expression. This phenotypic change was consistent with the extensive inflammatory lesions present in aging diabetic kidneys and was not found in mesangial cells from old and young controls or young diabetic mice. Activation of the c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway was a likely contributor to the proinflammatory phenotype of aging diabetic mesangial cells since 1) phosphorylated JNK levels and JNK kinase activity were increased in these cells, 2) suppression of JNK significantly decreased monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) production in these cells, and 3) activation of JNK in normal mesangial cells induced inflammation. Elevated OS in aging diabetic mesangial cells may be a cause of JNK activation and inflammation, because antioxidant treatment decreased JNK phosphorylation and MCP-1 production. Additionally, decreased expression of mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 5 (MKP5) may also contribute to increased JNK and inflammation in aging diabetic mesangial cells since overexpression of MKP5 in these cells normalized phosphorylated JNK levels and reversed the proinflammatory phenotype. Moreover, knocking down of MKP5 expression in old control mesangial cells resulted in JNK activation and MCP-1 production, a phenotype seen in aging diabetic mesangial cells. Interestingly, MKP5 phosphatase activity was diminished by free radicals in vitro. Thus, OS may induce inflammation in mesangial cells by activating JNK through either a direct activation of JNK or indirectly by suppression of MKP5 activity. Proinflammatory phenotype of mesangial cells may contribute to chronic inflammatory lesions and disease progression of aging diabetic mice.

19246537
Advanced glycation end products inhibit glucose-stimulated insulin secretion through nitric oxide-dependent inhibition of cytochrome c oxidase and adenosine triphosphate synthesis.
Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are implicated in diabetic complications. However, their role in beta-cell dysfunction is less clear. In this study we examined the effects of AGEs on islet function in mice and in isolated islets. AGE-BSA or BSA was administered ip to normal mice twice a day for 2 wk. We showed that AGE-BSA-treated mice exhibited significantly higher glucose levels and lower insulin levels in response to glucose challenge than did BSA-treated mice, although there were no significant differences in insulin sensitivity and islet morphology between two groups. Glucose-stimulated insulin secretion by islets of the AGE-BSA-treated mice or AGE-BSA-treated normal islets was significantly lower than that by islets isolated from the BSA-treated mice or BSA-treated normal islets. Furthermore, AGE treatment of islet beta-cells inhibited ATP production, and glimepiride, a sulfonylurea derivative, restored glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Further investigation indicated that AGEs inhibited cytochrome c oxidase activity by inducing the expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). Blocking the formation of nitric oxide with an iNOS selective inhibitor aminoguanidine reversed the inhibitory effects of AGEs on ATP production and insulin secretion. We conclude that AGEs inhibit cytochrome c oxidase and ATP production, leading to the impairment of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion through iNOS-dependent nitric oxide production.

18756295
PPAR-gamma and aging: one link through klotho?
PPAR-gamma, a transcription factor involved in adipogenesis, glucose homeostasis, bone turnover, and inflammation, has now been shown to increase klotho expression. Klotho is predominantly expressed by the kidney and functions at the tubule and in the circulation as an anti-aging factor and a hormone participating in mineral metabolism. The finding that klotho is upregulated by PPAR-gamma may prompt further exploration of the role and mechanism of action of PPAR-gamma in aging and bone diseases.

18004308
Thiazolidinediones: a novel class of drugs for the prevention of diabetic nephropathy?
Diabetic nephropathy is the leading cause of end-stage renal disease. Novel preventive measures for diabetic renal complications are urgently needed. Miyazaki et al. report that rosiglitazone, a thiazolidinedione insulin sensitizer and a potent peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma agonist, not only effectively improves glycemic control but also halts progression of albuminuria in type 2 diabetic patients with early-stage diabetic nephropathy. These findings could offer a new prevention of diabetic nephropathy in insulin-resistant diabetic patients.

