21437608
Repeatability of cardiac-MRI-measured right ventricular size and function in congenital heart disease.
BACKGROUND: The measurement error for right ventricular (RV) size and function assessed by cardiac MRI (CMRI) in congenital heart disease has not been fully characterized. As CMRI parameters are being increasingly utilized to make clinical decisions, defining error in the clinical setting is critical. OBJECTIVE: This investigation examines the repeatability of CMRI for RV size and function. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty consecutive people with congenital heart disease involving the RV were retrospectively identified. Contouring of RV volumes was performed by two expert CMRI clinicians. The coefficient of variability and repeatability coefficients were calculated. Repeatability coefficients were multiplied by the mean value for each group studied to define a threshold beyond which measurement error was unlikely to be responsible. RESULTS: The variability for indexed RV end-diastolic volume = 3.2% and 3.3% for intra- and interobserver comparisons, respectively. The repeatability coefficients were 13.2% and 14.9% for intra- and interobserver comparisons, which yielded threshold values of 15.1 ml/m^2 and 20.2 ml/m^2, respectively. For RV ejection fraction (EF), the repeatability coefficients for intra- and interobserver comparisons were 5.0% and 6.0%, which resulted in threshold values of 2.6 EF% and 3.0 EF%. CONCLUSION: The threshold values generated can be used during serial assessment of RV size and function.

17610970
Echocardiographic diagnosis of clinically silent congenital coronary artery anomalies.
The incidence of congenital coronary anomalies is mainly derived from autopsy series and pre-participation exams in athletes. Limited data exist regarding the spectrum of coronary anomalies that can be detected in asymptomatic patients. We sought to describe echocardiographically detected congenital coronary artery anomalies in asymptomatic children after implementing a screening protocol mandating identification of coronary artery origin and proximal course in all initial studies. Our database was searched from 1/1/1993 to 3/31/2006 and all echocardiograms coded for coronary anomalies were identified. Clinically "silent" congenital coronary anomalies were culled from that group. Of the 168 "silent" coronary anomalies detected, 111 were anomalies of aortic origin, including 59 patients with "high coronary takeoff" and 30 patients with "wrong sinus" origin of either the left or right coronary artery. Small coronary fistulas were seen in 57. Associated congenital heart defects were found in 53% of individuals with coronary anomalies. This study comprises the largest group of echocardiographically detected, "silent" but potentially clinically significant, congenital coronary anomalies in children. Prospective echocardiographic diagnosis of "high coronary takeoff", a risk factor for injury during cardio-pulmonary bypass, and asymptomatic intraseptal coronary stenosis are described for the first time.

