20368476
Heart rate and blood pressure changes during autonomic nervous system challenge in panic disorder patients.
To test the hypothesis that panic disorder (PD) patients have a heightened or deregulated autonomic nervous system at rest and during autonomic challenge compared with healthy controls (HC); and to test a second hypothesis that severity of illness differentiates patients'; sympathovagal balance both at rest and during orthostatic challenge. Spectral analysis of heart rate (HR) and blood pressure was performed on 30 PD and 10 HC participants during an orthostatic challenge (head-up tilt). PD patients presented higher HR (p < .001), lower heart rate variability (HRV) (p < .015), higher mean diastolic blood pressure (p < .006), higher low-frequency component of HR (p < .001), and a higher ratio of low-frequency to high-frequency component of HR (LF/HF) (p < .022) than HC at baseline. During tilt, PD patients responded with higher HR (p < .039), lower HRV (p < .043), increased mean diastolic blood pressure (p < .028), and a mild increase in LF/HF, whereas controls responded with a five-fold increase in LF/HF (p < .022). Patients with higher illness severity ratings (Clinical Global Impression Scale) showed higher HR (p < .002), lower HRV (p < .026), and a lower total power of systolic blood pressure (p < .02) compared with less ill patients. These findings demonstrate a consistently higher or deregulated autonomic arousal in PD patients at rest and during orthostatic challenge compared with HC. These data also reveal a possible association between the level of anxiety illness severity and sympathovagal balance, which may imply greater cardiac risk.

18839407
Effect of medication and psychotherapy on heart rate variability in panic disorder.
Panic disorder (PD) patients have been shown to have reduced heart rate variability (HRV). Low HRV has been associated with elevated risk for cardiovascular disease. Our aim was to investigate the effects of treatment on heart rate (HR) in patients with PD through a hyperventilation challenge. We studied 54 participants, 43 with Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) PD and 11 controls. Subjects lay supine with their heads in a plastic canopy chamber, resting for 15 min and then breathing at a rate of 30 breaths per minute for 10 min. HRV was sampled for spectral analysis. Clinical and behavioral measures of anxiety were assessed. Treatment was chosen by patients: either 12 weeks of CBT alone or CBT with sertraline. All patients showed significant decrease on clinical measures from baseline and 31 were treatment responders, 8 dropped out of the study before completion of the 12-week treatment phase and 4 were deemed nonresponders after 12 weeks of treatment. Although both treatments led to significant clinical improvement, only CBT alone demonstrated a significant reduction in HR and increase in HRV. Our study replicated the finding that increased HR and decreased HRV occur in PD patients. Given the evidence of cardiac risk related to HRV, CBT appears to have additional benefits beyond symptom reduction. The mechanisms of this difference between CBT and sertraline are unclear and require further study.

18278989
Predictors and time course of response among panic disorder patients treated with cognitive-behavioral therapy.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is well documented as an efficacious treatment for panic disorder. We provided open CBT treatment to patients who subsequently participated in a maintenance treatment study. This article reports on predictors and trajectory of response in 381 participants who completed treatment at 4 sites. Participants who met criteria for panic disorder with or without agoraphobia (N = 381) completed assessment and entered treatment. Of these, 256 completed 11 sessions of CBT delivered by trained and supervised research therapists. Raters trained to reliability obtained demographic data and administered structured diagnostic interviews and the Hamilton Rating Scales for Depression and Anxiety and the Panic Disorder Severity Scale (PDSS) measures at baseline and posttreatment. We obtained self-report (SR) measures of anxiety sensitivity and adult separation anxiety at baseline and posttreatment and PDSS-SR ratings weekly. The study was conducted between November 1999 and July 2002. Treatment response rate was 65.6% for completers and 44.1% for the intent-to-treat sample. Greater severity of panic disorder and lower levels of adult separation anxiety predicted response. Beginning at week 4, responders showed greater mean decreases in PDSS scores than non-responders and maintained the advantage throughout the treatment. By week 6, 76% of responders, compared to 36% of nonresponders, recorded PDSS scores at least 40% below baseline on 2 consecutive weeks (odds ratio = 5.42, 95% CI = 3.10 to 9.48). These results suggest that CBT is just as effective for more severe panic disorder patients as it is for those with less severe panic disorder, regardless of other comorbid disorders, including agoraphobia. However, patients experiencing adult separation anxiety disorder are less likely to respond. Our results further inform clinicians that many people who will respond to 11 weeks of treatment will have done so by the middle of the treatment.

17560768
The effect of doxapram on brain imaging in patients with panic disorder.
Administration of doxapram hydrochloride, a respiratory stimulant, is experienced by panic disorder patients to be similar to panic attacks but has reduced emotional effect in normal volunteers, thus providing a laboratory model of panic for functional imaging. Six panic patients and seven normal control subjects underwent positron emission tomography with (18)F-deoxyglucose imaging after a single-blinded administration of either doxapram or a placebo saline solution. Saline and doxapram were administered on separate days in counterbalanced order. Patients showed a greater heart rate increase on doxapram relative to saline than controls, indicating differential response. On the saline placebo day, patients had greater prefrontal relative activity than controls. In response to doxapram, patients tended to decrease prefrontal activity more than controls, and increased cingulate gyrus and amygdala activity more than controls. This suggests that panic disorder patients activate frontal inhibitory centers less than controls, a tendency that may lower the threshold for panic.

