21598272
New academic partnerships in global health: innovations at mount sinai school of medicine.
Global health has become an increasingly important focus of education, research, and clinical service in North American universities and academic health centers. Today there are at least 49 academically based global health programs in the United States and Canada, as compared with only one in 1999. A new academic society, the Consortium of Universities for Global Health, was established in 2008 and has grown significantly. This sharp expansion reflects convergence of 3 factors: (1) rapidly growing student and faculty interest in global health; (2) growing realization-powerfully catalyzed by the acquired immune deficiency syndrome epidemic, the emergence of other new infections, climate change, and globalization-that health problems are interconnected, cross national borders, and are global in nature; and (3) rapid expansion in resources for global health. This article examines the evolution of the concept of global health and describes the driving forces that have accelerated interest in the field. It traces the development of global health programs in academic health centers in the United States. It presents a blueprint for a new school-wide global health program at Mount Sinai School of Medicine. The mission of that program, Mount Sinai Global Health, is to enhance global health as an academic field of study within the Mount Sinai community and to improve the health of people around the world. Mount Sinai Global Health is uniting and building synergies among strong, existing global health programs within Mount Sinai; it is training the next generation of physicians and health scientists to be leaders in global health; it is making novel discoveries that translate into blueprints for improving health worldwide; and it builds on Mount Sinai's long and proud tradition of providing medical and surgical care in places where need is great and resources few. Mt Sinai J Med 78:471-483, 2011. © 2011 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

20063071
The role of housing type and housing quality in urban children with asthma.
The goal of this study was to assess the relationship between type and quality of housing and childhood asthma in an urban community with a wide gradient of racial/ethnic, socioeconomic, and housing characteristics. A parent-report questionnaire was distributed in 26 randomly selected New York City public elementary schools. Type of housing was categorized using the participants' addresses and the Building Information System, a publicly-accessible database from the New York City Department of Buildings. Type of housing was associated with childhood asthma with the highest prevalence of asthma found in public housing (21.8%). Residents of all types of private housing had lower odds of asthma than children living in public housing. After adjusting for individual- and community-level demographic and economic factors, the relationship between housing type and childhood asthma persisted, with residents of private family homes having the lowest odds of current asthma when compared to residents of public housing (odds ratio: 0.51; 95% confidence interval, 0.22, 1.21). Factors associated with housing quality explain some of the clustering of asthma in public housing. For example, the majority (68.7%) of public housing residents reported the presence of cockroaches, compared to 21% of residents of private houses. Reported cockroaches, rats, and water leaks were also independently associated with current asthma. These findings suggest differential exposure and asthma risk by urban housing type. Interventions aimed at reducing these disparities should consider multiple aspects of the home environment, especially those that are not directly controlled by residents.

19648704
Primary household language and asthma care among Latino children.
To determine if language barriers affect the level of asthma management and quality of health care in Latino children, a cross-sectional, parent-report survey was conducted in 26 randomly selected public elementary schools in New York City. The overall response rate was 76.9%, yielding a sample of 1,847 Latino children. The prevalence of asthma among Latinos from Spanish-speaking households was 20.8%, compared with 25.8% among Latino children from English-speaking households. Although asthmatics from Spanish-speaking families were less likely to have symptoms than children from English-speaking families, they were twice as likely to be hospitalized for asthma (9.4% vs. 4.4%, p<.02). Asthmatics from Spanish-speaking households were more likely to have public health insurance and to use a community/hospital clinic for care. Spanish-speaking parents were less likely to report having access to care on weekends or to have communicated with their child's physician about recommended components of an asthma management plan.

19014766
Disparities in allergy testing and health outcomes among urban children with asthma.
Previous research has found that treating allergies and reducing exposure to allergens can reduce asthma morbidity. We sought to examine whether urban asthmatic children were receiving care for allergies as part of a comprehensive asthma management plan. A cross-sectional study, consisting of a parent-reported questionnaire, was conducted in 26 randomly selected New York City public elementary schools during the 2002-2003 school year. In a sample of 5,250 children aged 5 to 12 years, 13.0% were found to have current asthma. The prevalence of allergy diagnosis was 21.0%. Less than half (47.3%) of the subjects with current asthma reported a physician's diagnosis of allergies. The frequency of a reported allergy diagnosis varied with race/ethnicity, ranging from 14.4% in Mexican American children to 67.9% in white children. Only 54.9% of asthmatic children with an allergy diagnosis reported allergy testing. Children from lower-/middle-income households and children with public forms of health insurance were the least likely to report testing (adjusted odds ratios, 0.18 and 0.46). Higher frequencies of reported allergy testing were associated with education on allergen avoidance, use of allergy medications, lower exposure to household allergens, and lower prevalence of wheezing. Many children do not receive comprehensive asthma treatment that includes management of allergies and education on avoidance of household allergens. Lower reported allergy testing might indicate lower access to medical care among middle-income families who are ineligible for public programs but who do not have the income to access higher-quality care. Interventions aimed at improving medical care and adherence to treatment guidelines are necessary to decrease asthma morbidity.

18651932
Improving sampling and response rates in children's health research through participatory methods.
Children's health is an important indicator of community health because children are especially vulnerable to disease. The school setting is ideal for assessing these vulnerabilities and prevalence of disease, yet the methods that produce high participation among students and their families are not usually described or evaluated. This is important because high participation rates increase reliability of data and interpretation of results. In order to determine which methods produce the highest response rates in a parent-report school-based survey, a child-focused protocol, consisting of a brief classroom presentation and incentives for participation, was compared to a parent/teacher outreach method and a teacher-only outreach protocol. Methods were implemented in schools matched on student demographics and neighborhood socioeconomic level. The child-focused method was found to yield the highest response rate; thus, it was deployed in 26 schools to determine its effectiveness in schools of varying socioeconomic levels. Response rates were highest using the child-focused protocol when compared to those resulting from the parent/teacher outreach or the teacher-only protocols (80.5% vs 74.7%, 83.4% vs 45.8%, respectively). After full deployment, the response rate of the child-focused protocol was 76.9% (70.8-82.8%), with 46.9% of classrooms achieving a response rate of 80% or greater. The sample obtained was highly representative in racial/ethnic distribution, as evidenced by its strong correlation with the individual school enrollment, the 5- to 12-year-old population of surrounding ZIP codes, and the New York City public school population. Participatory research methods that engage schoolchildren and school staff directly in the research process yield the highest response rates for school-based studies and provide educational benefits for the school community.

