21416131
Ischemic bowel due to embolization from an isolated mobile thrombus of the ascending aorta: a case report and review of the literature.
Aortic thrombi are commonly present in atherosclerotic and aneurysmatic aortas. Thrombus formation in an aorta with or focal atherosclerosis in a patient without risk factors is rare. A 63-year-old woman with dementia and hypothyroidism presented with hypotension and respiratory distress. Work-up revealed leukocytosis, sinus tachycardia, and proximal small bowel obstruction. At emergent laparotomy, a superior mesenteric artery thomboembolus was identified with necrosis of surrounding bowel. The patient expired on hospital day five. Autopsy revealed a 1.4 cm thrombus overlying an isolated atherosclerotic plaque in the ascending aorta and infarctions of the spleen, liver, and right kidney as well as occlusive thromboembolism of the superior mesenteric artery. This case report illustrates lethal complications from an unsuspected aortic thrombus. Work-up for patients presenting with signs of peripheral embolization, or in this case, necrotic bowel, should include the aorta as a source of embolic thrombi.

20566928
Fatal influenza A(H1N1) respiratory tract infection in a patient having psoriasis treated with infliximab.
The use of biologic agents represents a remarkable advance for patients with psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis who have experienced an incomplete response to other therapeutic modalities. Decreased mortality and improved quality of life have been reported in patients undergoing treatment with these agents. Increased risk of bacterial, viral, granulomatous, and opportunistic infections also has been associated with the use of these medications. Enhanced patient education, watchful monitoring to promote early detection of infections, discontinuation of the medication when clinical symptoms are identified, and immediate availability of supportive care are advised to balance the benefit of treatment with biologic agents against the potential risk of infection. Herein, we discuss the risk of infection and the monitoring and vaccination guidelines in patients having psoriasis treated with biologic agents. A woman with obesity and psoriasis that had previously been successfully treated with efalizumab (Raptiva) for 3 years was started on a regimen of infliximab (Remicade) to treat a flare. She died 1 week after her first infusion of infliximab and was found to have had influenza A(H1N1). We report the first case to date of a patient with psoriasis who died of influenza A(H1N1) respiratory tract infection while undergoing treatment with infliximab. Further observations are needed to make a causal association.

19841356
Ischemic colitis after endovascular aortoiliac aneurysm repair: a 10-year retrospective study.
To examine the incidence, cause, and outcomes of ischemic colitis after endovascular stent graft repair of aortoiliac aneurysms (EVAR). Medical record review. University teaching hospital. Eight hundred nine patients treated during 10 years were included in the study. Preoperative data regarding the size of the aneurysm, hypogastric coil embolization, and inferior mesenteric artery patency were evaluated by means of computed tomographic scans and aortograms. Ischemic colitis was diagnosed by lower endoscopy or pathology reports. Ischemic colitis after EVAR. Eleven patients (1.4%) developed ischemic colitis. Seven patients' episode occurred less than 30 days from repair (early), whereas 4 occurred 30 days or more from repair (late). Ten of 11 patients had preoperative inferior mesenteric artery occlusion. Microembolization was seen histologically in 2 patients in the early group, both of whom died. A significant increase in ischemic colitis was seen in patients undergoing preoperative unilateral hypogastric coil embolization (P = .02). Three of the patients with late ischemic colitis had comorbidities other than the EVAR to explain the ischemia. The incidence of ischemic colitis is decreased in patients undergoing EVAR vs open repair. The cause of the ischemia is multifactorial and seems to differ between patients in the early and late groups. Microembolization tends to produce severe ischemic colitis and is usually fatal. There should be a low threshold for performing endoscopy in any patient thought to have ischemic colitis after EVAR.

