20418391
Initiation of decay of Bacillus subtilis rpsO mRNA by endoribonuclease RNase Y.
rpsO mRNA, a small monocistronic mRNA that encodes ribosomal protein S15, was used to study aspects of mRNA decay initiation in Bacillus subtilis. Decay of rpsO mRNA in a panel of 3'-to-5' exoribonuclease mutants was analyzed using a 5'-proximal oligonucleotide probe and a series of oligonucleotide probes that were complementary to overlapping sequences starting at the 3' end. The results provided strong evidence that endonuclease cleavage in the body of the message, rather than degradation from the native 3' end, is the rate-determining step for mRNA decay. Subsequent to endonuclease cleavage, the upstream products were degraded by polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase), and the downstream products were degraded by the 5' exonuclease activity of RNase J1. The rpsO mRNA half-life was unchanged in a strain that had decreased RNase J1 activity and no RNase J2 activity, but it was 2.3-fold higher in a strain with decreased activity of RNase Y, a recently discovered RNase of B. subtilis encoded by the ymdA gene. Accumulation of full-length rpsO mRNA and its decay intermediates was analyzed using a construct in which the rpsO transcription unit was under control of a bacitracin-inducible promoter. The results were consistent with RNase Y-mediated initiation of decay. This is the first report of a specific mRNA whose stability is determined by RNase Y.

19850915
Bacillus subtilis RNase J1 endonuclease and 5' exonuclease activities in the turnover of DeltaermC mRNA.
RNase J1, a ribonuclease with 5' exonuclease and endonuclease activities, is an important factor in Bacillus subtilis mRNA decay. A model for RNase J1 endonuclease activity in mRNA turnover has RNase J1 binding to the 5' end and tracking to a target site downstream, where it makes a decay-initiating cleavage. The upstream fragment from this cleavage is degraded by 3' exonucleases; the downstream fragment is degraded by RNase J1 5' exonuclease activity. Previously, DeltaermC mRNA was used to show 5'-end dependence of mRNA turnover. Here we used DeltaermC mRNA to probe RNase J1-dependent degradation, and the results were consistent with aspects of the model. DeltaermC mRNA showed increased stability in a mutant strain that contained a reduced level of RNase J1. In agreement with the tracking concept, insertion of a strong stem-loop structure at +65 resulted in increased stability. Weakening this stem-loop structure resulted in reversion to wild-type stability. RNA fragments containing the 3' end were detected in a strain with reduced RNase J1 expression, but were undetectable in the wild type. The 5' ends of these fragments mapped to the upstream side of predicted stem-loop structures, consistent with an impediment to RNase J1 5' exonuclease processivity. A DeltaermC mRNA deletion analysis suggested that decay-initiating endonuclease cleavage could occur at several sites near the 3' end. However, even in the absence of these sites, stability was further increased in a strain with reduced RNase J1, suggesting alternate pathways for decay that could include exonucleolytic decay from the 5' end.

19633085
Processing and stability of inducibly expressed rpsO mRNA derivatives in Bacillus subtilis.
The Bacillus subtilis rpsO gene specifies a small (388-nucleotide), monocistronic mRNA that encodes ribosomal protein S15. We showed earlier that rpsO mRNA decay intermediates accumulated to a high level in a strain lacking polynucleotide phosphorylase. Here, we used inducibly expressed derivatives of rpsO, encoding smaller RNAs that had the complex 5' region deleted, to study aspects of mRNA processing in B. subtilis. An IPTG (isopropyl-beta-d-thiogalactopyranoside)-inducible rpsO transcript that contained lac sequences at the 5' end, called lac-rpsO RNA, was shown to undergo processing to result in an RNA that was 24 nucleotides shorter than full length. Such processing was dependent on the presence of an accessible 5' terminus; a lac-rpsO RNA that contained a strong stem-loop at the 5' end was not processed and was extremely stable. Interestingly, this stability depended also on ribosome binding to a nearby Shine-Dalgarno sequence but was independent of downstream translation. Either RNase J1 or RNase J2 was capable of processing lac-rpsO RNA, demonstrating for the first time a particular in vivo processing event that could be catalyzed by both enzymes. Decay intermediates were detected in the pnpA strain only for a lac-rpsO RNA that was untranslated. Analysis of processing of an untranslated lac-rpsO RNA in the pnpA strain shortly after induction of transcription suggested that endonuclease cleavage at 3'-proximal sites was an early step in turnover of mRNA.

19161848
Analysis of mRNA decay in Bacillus subtilis.
Studies of mRNA turnover in B. subtilis are less well known than in E. coli. Here we provide researchers who have an interest in gram-positive RNA processing with several protocols for RNA isolation, for 5'- and 3'-mapping of mRNAs and mRNA decay fragments, and we also include a comprehensive listing of B. subtilis mutants that are deficient in ribonucleases thought to be involved in mRNA decay.

18647167
Erythromycin-induced ribosome stalling and RNase J1-mediated mRNA processing in Bacillus subtilis.
SUMMARY: Addition of erythromycin (Em) to a Bacillus subtilis strain carrying the ermC gene results in ribosome stalling in the ermC leader peptide coding sequence. Using DeltaermC, a deletion derivative of ermC that specifies the 254 nucleotide DeltaermC mRNA, we showed previously that ribosome stalling is concomitant with processing of DeltaermC mRNA, generating a 209 nucleotide RNA whose 5' end maps to codon 5 of the DeltaermC coding sequence. Here we probed for peptidyl-tRNA to show that ribosome stalling occurs after incorporation of the amino acid specified by codon 9. Thus, cleavage upstream of codon 5 is not an example of 'A-site cleavage' that has been reported for Escherichia coli. Analysis of DeltaermC mRNA processing in endoribonuclease mutant strains showed that this processing is RNase J1-dependent. DeltaermC mRNA processing was inhibited by the presence of stable secondary structure at the 5' end, demonstrating 5'-end dependence, and was shown to be a result of RNase J1 endonuclease activity, rather than 5'-to-3' exonuclease activity. Examination of processing in derivatives of DeltaermC that had codons inserted upstream of the ribosome stalling site revealed that Em-induced ribosome stalling can occur considerably further from the start codon than would be expected based on previous studies.

17576666
Processing of Bacillus subtilis small cytoplasmic RNA: evidence for an additional endonuclease cleavage site.
Small cytoplasmic RNA (scRNA) of Bacillus subtilis is the RNA component of the signal recognition particle. scRNA is transcribed as a 354-nt precursor, which is processed to the mature 271-nt scRNA. Previous work demonstrated the involvement of the RNase III-like endoribonuclease, Bs-RNase III, in scRNA processing. Bs-RNase III was found to cleave precursor scRNA at two sites (the 5' and 3' cleavage sites) located on opposite sides of the stem of a large stem-loop structure, yielding a 275-nt RNA, which was then trimmed by a 3' exoribonuclease to the mature scRNA. Here we show that Bs-RNase III cleaves primarily at the 5' cleavage site and inefficiently at the 3' site. RNase J1 is responsible for much of the cleavage that releases scRNA from downstream sequences. The subsequent exonucleolytic processing is carried out largely by RNase PH.

17297474
In vivo regulation of p21 by the Kruppel-like factor 6 tumor-suppressor gene in mouse liver and human hepatocellular carcinoma.
Kruppel-like factor (KLF) 6 is a tumor-suppressor gene functionally inactivated by loss of heterozygosity, somatic mutation and/or alternative splicing that generates a dominant-negative splice form, KLF6-SV1. Wild-type KLF6 (wtKLF6) expression is decreased in many human malignancies, which correlates with reduced patient survival. Additionally, loss of the KLF6 locus in the absence of somatic mutation in the remaining allele occurs in a number of human cancers, raising the possibility that haploinsufficiency of the KLF6 gene alone contributes to cellular growth dysregulation and tumorigenesis. Our earlier studies identified the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 as a transcriptional target of the KLF6 gene in cultured cells, but not in vivo. To address this issue, we have generated two genetic mouse models to define the in vivo role of KLF6 in regulating cell proliferation and p21 expression. Transgenic overexpression of KLF6 in the liver resulted in a runted phenotype with decreased body and liver size, with evidence of decreased hepatocyte proliferation, increased p21 and reduced proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression. In contrast, mice with targeted deletion of one KLF6 allele (KLF6+/-) display increased liver mass with reduced p21 expression, compared to wild type littermates. Moreover, in primary hepatocellular carcinoma samples, there is a significant correlation between wtKLF6 and p21 mRNA expression. Combined, these data suggest that haploinsufficiency of the KLF6 gene may regulate cellular proliferation in vivo through decreased transcriptional activation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21.

