19656909
Mechanoregulation of BK channel activity in the mammalian cortical collecting duct: role of protein kinases A and C.
Flow-stimulated net K secretion (J(K)) in the cortical collecting duct (CCD) is mediated by an iberiotoxin (IBX)-sensitive BK channel, and requires an increase in intracellular Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+](i)). The alpha-subunit of the reconstituted BK channel is phosphorylated by PKA and PKC. To test whether the BK channel in the native CCD is regulated by these kinases, J(K) and net Na absorption (J(Na)) were measured at slow (approximately 1) and fast (approximately 5 nl x min(-1) x mm(-1)) flow rates in rabbit CCDs microperfused in the presence of mPKI, an inhibitor of PKA; calphostin C, which inhibits diacylglycerol binding proteins, including PKC; or bisindolylmaleimide (BIM) and Gö6976, inhibitors of classic and novel PKC isoforms, added to luminal (L) and/or basolateral (B) solutions. L but not B mPKI increased J(K) in CCDs perfused at a slow flow rate; a subsequent increase in flow rate augmented J(K) modestly. B mPKI alone or with L inhibitor abolished flow stimulation of J(K). Similarly, L calphostin C increased J(K) in CCDs perfused at slow flow rates, as did calphostin C in both L and B solutions. The observation that IBX inhibited the L mPKI- and calphostin C-mediated increases in J(K) at slow flow rates implicated the BK channel in this K flux, a notion suggested by patch-clamp analysis of principal cells. The kinase inhibited by calphostin C was not PKC as L and/or B BIM and Gö6976 failed to enhance J(K) at the slow flow rate. However, addition of these PKC inhibitors to the B solution alone or with L inhibitor blocked flow stimulation of J(K). Interpretation of these results in light of the effects of these inhibitors on the flow-induced elevation of [Ca2+](i) suggests that the principal cell apical BK channel is tonically inhibited by PKA and that flow stimulation of J(K) in the CCD is PKA and PKC dependent. The specific targets of the kinases remain to be identified.

18579708
Effect of aldosterone on BK channel expression in mammalian cortical collecting duct.
Apical large-conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) (BK) channels in the cortical collecting duct (CCD) mediate flow-stimulated K(+) secretion. Dietary K(+) loading for 10-14 days leads to an increase in BK channel mRNA abundance, enhanced flow-stimulated K(+) secretion in microperfused CCDs, and a redistribution of immunodetectable channels from an intracellular pool to the apical membrane (Najjar F, Zhou H, Morimoto T, Bruns JB, Li HS, Liu W, Kleyman TR, Satlin LM. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 289: F922-F932, 2005). To test whether this adaptation was mediated by a K(+)-induced increase in aldosterone, New Zealand White rabbits were fed a low-Na(+) (LS) or high-Na(+) (HS) diet for 7-10 days to alter circulating levels of aldosterone but not serum K(+) concentration. Single CCDs were isolated for quantitation of BK channel subunit (total, alpha-splice variants, beta-isoforms) mRNA abundance by real-time PCR and measurement of net transepithelial Na(+) (J(Na)) and K(+) (J(K)) transport by microperfusion; kidneys were processed for immunolocalization of BK alpha-subunit by immunofluorescence microscopy. At the time of death, LS rabbits excreted no urinary Na(+) and had higher circulating levels of aldosterone than HS animals. The relative abundance of BK alpha-, beta(2)-, and beta(4)-subunit mRNA and localization of immunodetectable alpha-subunit were similar in CCDs from LS and HS animals. In response to an increase in tubular flow rate from approximately 1 to 5 nl.min(-1).mm(-1), the increase in J(Na) was greater in LS vs. HS rabbits, yet the flow-stimulated increase in J(K) was similar in both groups. These data suggest that aldosterone does not contribute to the regulation of BK channel expression/activity in response to dietary K(+) loading.

17553929
Multiple receptor interactions trigger release of membrane and intracellular calcium stores critical for herpes simplex virus entry.
Herpes simplex viruses (HSV) harness cellular calcium signaling pathways to facilitate viral entry. Confocal microscopy and small interfering RNA (siRNA) were used to identify the source of the calcium and to dissect the requisite viral-cell interactions. Binding of HSV to human epithelial cells induced no calcium response, but shifting the cells to temperatures permissive for penetration triggered increases in plasma membrane calcium followed by a global release of intracellular calcium. Transfection with siRNA targeting the proteoglycan syndecan-2 blocked viral binding and abrogated any calcium response. Transfection with siRNA targeting nectin-1, a glycoprotein D receptor, also prevented both membrane and intracellular calcium responses. In contrast, the membrane response was preserved after transfection with siRNA targeting integrinalphav, a novel glycoprotein H receptor. The membrane response, however, was not sufficient for viral entry, which required interactions with integrinalphav and release of inositol-triphosphate receptor-dependent intracellular calcium stores. Thus, calcium plays a critical, complex role in HSV entry.

17389680
Ca2+ dependence of flow-stimulated K secretion in the mammalian cortical collecting duct.
Apical low-conductance SK and high-conductance Ca(2+)-activated BK channels are present in distal nephron, including the cortical collecting duct (CCD). Flow-stimulated net K secretion (J(K)) in the CCD is 1) blocked by iberiotoxin, an inhibitor of BK but not SK channels, and 2) associated with an increase in [Ca(2+)](i), leading us to conclude that BK channels mediate flow-stimulated J(K). To examine the Ca(2+) dependence and sources of Ca(2+) contributing to flow-stimulated J(K), J(K) and net Na absorption (J(Na)) were measured at slow (approximately 1) and fast (approximately 5 nl.min(-1).mm(-1)) flow rates in rabbit CCDs microperfused in the absence of luminal Ca(2+) or after pretreatment with BAPTA-AM to chelate intracellular Ca(2+), 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2-APB), to inhibit the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP(3)) receptor or thapsigargin to deplete internal stores. These treatments, which do not affect flow-stimulated J(Na) (Morimoto et al. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 291: F663-F669, 2006), inhibited flow-stimulated J(K). Increases in [Ca(2+)](i) stimulate exocytosis. To test whether flow induces exocytic insertion of preformed BK channels into the apical membrane, CCDs were pretreated with 10 microM colchicine (COL) to disrupt microtubule function or 5 microg/ml brefeldin-A (BFA) to inhibit delivery of channels from the intracellular pool to the plasma membrane. Both agents inhibited flow-stimulated J(K) but not J(Na) (Morimoto et al. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 291: F663-F669, 2006), although COL but not BFA also blocked the flow-induced [Ca(2+)](i) transient. We thus speculate that BK channel-mediated, flow-stimulated J(K) requires an increase in [Ca(2+)](i) due, in part, to luminal Ca(2+) entry and ER Ca(2+) release, microtubule integrity, and exocytic insertion of preformed channels into the apical membrane.

