21587231
Transcription factor IRF8 directs a silencing programme for T(H)17 cell differentiation.
T(H)17 cells are recognized as a unique subset of T helper cells that have critical roles in the pathogenesis of autoimmunity and tissue inflammation. Although ROR?t is necessary for the generation of T(H)17 cells, the molecular mechanisms underlying the functional diversity of T(H)17 cells are not fully understood. Here we show that a member of interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of transcription factors, IRF8, has a critical role in silencing T(H)17-cell differentiation. Mice with a conventional knockout, as well as a T cell-specific deletion, of the Irf8 gene exhibited more efficient T(H)17 cells. Indeed, studies of an experimental model of colitis showed that IRF8 deficiency resulted in more severe inflammation with an enhanced T(H)17 phenotype. IRF8 was induced steadily and inhibited T(H)17-cell differentiation during T(H)17 lineage commitment at least in part through its physical interaction with ROR?t. These findings define IRF8 as a novel intrinsic transcriptional inhibitor of T(H)17-cell differentiation.

21147109
Characterization of interleukin-17-producing regulatory T cells in inflamed intestinal mucosa from patients with inflammatory bowel diseases.
Interleukin (IL)-17-producing CD4(+) helper T cells (Th17) mediate mucosal immunity and are involved in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). They are believed to arise from the same precursor population as regulatory T (Treg) cells, but little is known about how these T-cell subsets interact under chronic inflammatory conditions. We studied Th17 and Treg cells isolated from intestinal lamina propria of patients with IBD to investigate their role in pathogenesis. FoxP3 expression (a marker of Treg cells) and IL-17 production were assessed in CD4(+) lamina propria lymphocytes isolated from IBD patients and healthy subjects. IL-17(+)FoxP3(+) and IL-17(+) CD4(+) T-cell clones were generated by limiting dilution. An in vitro suppression assay was performed to assess the functional capacity of derived T-cell clones. IL-17(+)FoxP3(+) T cells were identified in inflamed intestinal mucosa of patients with Crohn disease (CD), but not in patients with ulcerative colitis (UC) or healthy controls. These cells shared phenotypic characteristics of Th17 and Treg cells, and showed potent suppressor activity in vitro. Transforming growth factor-? was necessary and sufficient to induce development of an IL-17(+) FoxP3(+) cell population in CD4(+) lamina propria lymphocytes derived from patients with UC. The inflammatory environment in the intestinal mucosa of patients with CD contributes to the generation of a distinct population of Treg cells that are FoxP3(+) and produce IL-17. These cells are likely to arise during differentiation of Th17 and Treg cells. Specific microenvironmental cues from tissues are likely to determine their commitment to either lineage and affect the balance between regulation and inflammation in the intestine.

21056041
Notch-1 signaling regulates intestinal epithelial barrier function, through interaction with CD4+ T cells, in mice and humans.
Interactions between lymphocytes and intestinal epithelial cells occur in the subepithelial space of the gastrointestinal tract. Normal human lamina propria lymphocytes (LPLs) induce differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells. The absence of LPLs in mice, such as in RAG1(-/-) mice, results in defects in epithelial cell differentiation. We investigated the role of lymphoepithelial interactions in epithelial differentiation and barrier function. We used adoptive transfer to determine if CD4(+) T cells (CD4(+)CD62L(+)CD45Rb(Hi) and/or CD4(+)CD62L(+)CD45Rb(Lo)) could overcome permeability defect (quantified in Ussing chambers). Immunofluorescence staining was performed to determine expression of cleaved Notch-1, villin, and claudin 5 in colon samples from mice and humans. Caco-2 cells were infected with a lentivirus containing a specific Notch-1 or scrambled short hairpin RNA sequence. Tight junction assembly was analyzed by immunoblot and immunofluorescence analyses, and transepithelial resistance was monitored. Expression of cleaved Notch-1, villin, or claudin 5 was not detected in RAG1(-/-) colonocytes; their loss correlated with increased intestinal permeability. Transfer of CD45Rb(Hi) and/or CD45Rb(Lo) cells into RAG1(-/-) mice induced expression of cleaved Notch, villin, and claudin 5 in colonocytes and significantly reduced the permeability of the distal colon. Loss of Notch-1 expression in Caco-2 cells correlated with decreased transepithelial resistance and dysregulated expression and localization of tight junction proteins. Levels of cleaved Notch-1 were increased in colonic epithelium of patients with Crohn's disease. LPLs promote mucosal barrier function, which is associated with activation of the Notch-1 signaling pathway. LPLs maintain intestinal homeostasis by inducing intestinal epithelial cell differentiation, polarization, and barrier function.

20978345
The cytomegalovirus-encoded chemokine receptor US28 promotes intestinal neoplasia in transgenic mice.
US28 is a constitutively active chemokine receptor encoded by CMV (also referred to as human herpesvirus 5), a highly prevalent human virus that infects a broad spectrum of cells, including intestinal epithelial cells (IECs). To study the role of US28 in vivo, we created transgenic mice (VS28 mice) in which US28 expression was targeted to IECs. Expression of US28 was detected in all IECs of the small and large intestine, including in cells expressing leucine rich repeat containing GPCR5 (Lgr5), a marker gene of intestinal epithelial stem cells. US28 expression in IECs inhibited glycogen synthase 3? (GSK-3?) function, promoted accumulation of ?-catenin protein, and increased expression of Wnt target genes involved in the control of the cell proliferation. VS28 mice showed a hyperplastic intestinal epithelium and, strikingly, developed adenomas and adenocarcinomas by 40 weeks of age. When exposed to an inflammation-driven tumor model (azoxymethane/dextran sodium sulfate), VS28 mice developed a significantly higher tumor burden than control littermates. Transgenic coexpression of the US28 ligand CCL2 (an inflammatory chemokine) increased IEC proliferation as well as tumor burden, suggesting that the oncogenic activity of US28 can be modulated by inflammatory factors. Together, these results indicate that expression of US28 promotes development of intestinal dysplasia and cancer in transgenic mice and suggest that CMV infection may facilitate development of intestinal neoplasia in humans.

20956091
High levels of Crohn's disease-associated anti-microbial antibodies are present and independent of colitis in chronic granulomatous disease.
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) have overlapping gastrointestinal manifestations. Serum antibodies to intestinal microbial antigens in IBD are thought to reflect a loss of tolerance in the setting of genetically encoded innate immune defects. CGD subjects studied here, with or without colitis, had considerably higher levels of ASCA IgA, ASCA IgG, anti-OmpC, anti-I2, and anti-CBir1, but absent to low pANCA, compared to IBD-predictive cutoffs. Higher antibody levels were not associated with a history of colitis. Except for higher ASCA IgG in subjects <18 years, antibody levels were not age-dependent. In comparison, 7 HIES subjects expressed negative to low antibody levels to all of these antigens; none had colitis. Our results suggest that markedly elevated levels of antimicrobial antibodies in CGD do not correlate with a history of colitis but may reflect a specific defect in innate immunity in the face of chronic antigenic stimulation.

20629103
Characterization of immunologic defects in patients with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) with intestinal disease.
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is a heterogeneous disorder commonly presenting with recurrent sinopulmonary infections. In all, 6%-10% of CVID patients develop an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)-like disorder, making these patients a unique population to investigate immune-mediated gastrointestinal disease. This study examined whether defects in peripheral and/or intestinal lymphocytes are involved in disruption of the intestinal mucosa in CVID patients with inflammatory intestinal diseases. Peripheral blood (PB) T cells from healthy controls; CD or UC; CVID; and CVID with IBD were stimulated for 48 hours with anti-CD3+CD28 or phytohemagglutinin (PHA) + phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA); cytokine production was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Cytokine expression from unstimulated lamina propria lymphocytes (LPLs) was compared by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Immunohistochemistry of mucosal biopsies was performed. Cell populations were quantified by morphometry. CVID/IBD PB T cells stimulated by anti-CD3+CD28 had trends for reduced IL-2, IL-10, IFN-?, and TNF-? compared to controls. These differences were not apparent following stimulation by PHA/PMA. Constitutive production of inflammatory cytokines by LPLs was not detected. Histologically, CVID patients had reduced/absent plasma cells with reductions in intestinal IgM and IgA. CVID patients with and without gastrointestinal (GI) disease exhibited increased CD3+ T cells, specifically CD8+, in the colon compared to normal and IBD controls, suggesting immune dysregulation. Intestinal inflammation in CVID patients with IBD-like disease may be mediated by abnormal cytokine production through a T-cell receptor-mediated pathway. However, the variability observed suggests multiple, rather than singular, mechanisms are involved. Histologic features such as reduced intestinal plasma cells and lack of intestinal immunoglobulins may be useful markers in diagnosing CVID in a patient with GI disease refractory to conventional therapies.

20600023
Thymic stromal lymphopoietin is required for gastrointestinal allergy but not oral tolerance.
Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) is a cytokine produced by epithelial cells that acts on dendritic cells, mast cells, T cells, and B cells. TSLP is involved in the pathogenesis of allergic inflammation in the lung and skin, but data indicate a regulatory role in the gastrointestinal tract. We tested the functional role of TSLP in mouse models of gastrointestinal allergy and tolerance. TSLP Receptor (TSLPR)(+/+) and TSLPR(-/-) mice were sensitized and challenged with ovalbumin; models of allergic diarrhea or systemic anaphylaxis were studied. To induce oral tolerance, mice were fed with low-dose ovalbumin before they were immunized with it. Tolerance was measured from inhibition of ear swelling in a delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction. TSLPR(-/-) mice were protected from the onset of allergic diarrhea; they did not develop mastocytosis in the jejunum and had reduced ovalbumin-immunoglobulin E in their serum, compared with TSLPR(+/+) mice. TSLPR(-/-) mice also lost T helper cell (Th) 2-mediated inflammation in the jejunum. In contrast, sensitization and oral tolerance were not impaired in TSLPR(-/-) mice. Transfer of wild-type, Th2-primed cells to TSLPR(-/-) mice completely restored the development of allergic diarrhea. Antigen presentation assays showed that TSLPR on T cells, but not dendritic cells, was required to mediate the Th2 response. TSLP is required for allergic inflammation but not primary sensitization or tolerance to food proteins in the gastrointestinal tract; it amplifies Th2 responses directly from CD4(+) T cells.

20594134
Current status of monoclonal antibody therapy for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.
Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis are complex diseases that have required the use of multiple modalities to aid in treatment. With an increasing understanding of the underlying pathogenetic mechanisms and identification of specific therapeutic targets, monoclonal antibody treatment has been an ideal strategy for inducing and maintaining remission in these patients. This article addresses approved agents and the supporting data justifying their use in Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, the safety of and immunologic reactions to these agents, as well as newer agents for treatment.

20451041
Immunologic features of infants with milk or egg allergy enrolled in an observational study (Consortium of Food Allergy Research) of food allergy.
Immune features of infants with food allergy have not been delineated. We sought to explore the basic mechanisms responsible for food allergy and identify biomarkers, such as skin prick test (SPT) responses, food-specific IgE levels, and mononuclear cell responses, in a cohort of infants with likely milk/egg allergy at increased risk of peanut allergy. Infants aged 3 to 15 months were enrolled with a positive SPT response to milk or egg and either a corresponding convincing clinical history of allergy to milk or egg or moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis. Infants with known peanut allergy were excluded. Overall, 512 infants (67% male) were studied, with 308 (60%) having a history of a clinical reaction. Skin test responses, detectable food-specific IgE, or both revealed sensitization as follows: milk, 78%; egg, 89%; and peanut, 69%. SPT responses and food-specific IgE levels were discrepant for peanut (15% for IgE > or = 0.35 kU(A)/L and negative SPT response vs 8% for positive SPT response and IgE <0.35 kU(A)/L, P = .001). Mononuclear cell allergen stimulation screening for CD25, cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CISH), forkhead box protein 3 (FOXP3), GATA3, IL10, IL4, IFNG, and T-box transcription factor (TBET) expression by using casein, egg white, and peanut revealed that only allergen-induced IL4 expression was significantly increased in those with clinical allergy to milk (compared with nonallergic subjects) and in those sensitized to peanut, despite the absence of an increase in GATA3 mRNA expression. Infants with likely milk/egg allergy are at considerably high risk of having increased peanut-specific IgE levels (potential allergy). Peanut-specific serum IgE levels were a more sensitive indicator of sensitization than SPT responses. Allergen-specific IL4 expression might be a marker of allergic risk. Absence of an increase in GATA3 mRNA expression suggests that allergen-specific IL-4 might not be of T-cell origin.

19960355
Evolving paradigms in the pathogenesis of IBD.
The pathogenesis of all immune-mediated inflammatory diseases has been carefully studied over the past several decades, but it is only recently that we have come to appreciate common pathways and genes. This is especially true for the inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, where a keener appreciation of the contributions of genetics, environment, and immune response have been dissected. In fact, in many ways, IBD has become the model for studying such disorders. The complex nature of interactions is continuing to be defined, and novel therapies targeting defects in these interactions have been developed and are being tested in the clinic. The era of bench to bedside has finally matured, and cures for debilitating diseases are now in sight. This review describes our current state of knowledge of each component of IBD pathogenesis. What has evolved is a clearer picture and novel targets for therapy.

19782082
A functional role for CCR6 on proallergic T cells in the gastrointestinal tract.
CCL20 is a chemokine that regulates the homeostatic and inflammatory trafficking of leukocytes to the small intestine and regulates the development of the gastrointestinal lymphoid architecture. T cells expressing T helper cell (Th) 2 cytokines are critical for experimental food allergy, and we hypothesized that CCL20 is involved in the localization of these cells to the gut. We evaluated the role of CCR6 in allergic diarrhea induced by sensitization and oral challenge with ovalbumin (OVA) using CCR6(+/+) and CCR6(-/-) mice. CCR6(-/-) mice were protected from OVA-induced diarrhea but surprisingly were not impaired in mastocytosis or allergen-specific immunoglobulin E. CCR6(-/-) mice were also protected from T cell-mediated diarrhea induced by anti-CD3 antibody. Allergic diarrhea was associated with an increased expression of Th2 cytokines within the intestinal mucosa that was significantly reduced in CCR6(-/-) mice. Inhibition of lymphocyte homing by treatment with FTY720 did not impair allergic diarrhea, indicating that reactivation of T cells could occur locally within the small intestine. Finally, T-cell transfer studies demonstrated that CCR6 was required both on the transferred T cells and in the recipient mouse to manifest allergic disease in the gastrointestinal tract. These studies highlight a mast cell- and immunoglobulin E-independent role for CCR6-bearing T cells in the pathogenesis of gastrointestinal allergic disease.

19665769
Pathogenesis and treatment of gastrointestinal disease in antibody deficiency syndromes.
Primary humoral immune deficiencies are characterized by limited antibody responses secondary to either impaired B-lymphocyte development or B-cell responses to T-lymphocyte signals. Given that the gastrointestinal tract is the largest lymphoid organ in the body, it is not surprising that intestinal diseases are common in immunodeficiency. These gastrointestinal diseases can be classified into one of 4 groups, infection, malignancy, inflammatory, and autoimmune, and can mimic other known disease processes, such as inflammatory bowel disease and celiac sprue. The exact pathogenesis of these gastrointestinal disorders in the setting of systemic immunodeficiency is still under investigation. However, studies suggest that defects in antibody deficiency alone do not result in gastrointestinal disease but rather that defects in cellular immunity are also involved. Treatment is difficult given an already immunocompromised state, and often therapy with immunomodulators is required for more severe processes.

19637385
Gastrointestinal manifestations in primary immune disorders.
The gastrointestinal tract is the largest lymphoid organ in the body containing T and B lymphocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells. Despite the fact that these cells are constantly confronted with antigen primarily in the form of food and bacteria, immune responses in the gut are tightly regulated to maintain homeostasis. Without this balance of active immunity and tolerance, mucosal inflammation may ensue, and manifest as Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, pernicious anemia, or celiac sprue. Therefore, it is not unreasonable that inflammatory diseases of the gut are commonly encountered in patients with primary immune deficiencies. The exact pathogenesis of gastrointestinal diseases in the setting of primary immunodeficiency remains unknown, however, both humoral and cell-mediated immunity appear to play a role in preventing intestinal inflammation. Patients presenting with atypical gastrointestinal disease and/or failure to respond to conventional therapy should be evaluated for an underlying primary immune disorder in order to initiate appropriate treatment, such as immunoglobulin or in more severe cases bone marrow transplantation, to prevent long term complications.

19592489
AP-1 activated by toll-like receptors regulates expression of IL-23 p19.
Interleukin (IL)-23, a new member of the IL-12 family, plays a central role in the Th17 immune response and in autoimmune diseases. It is clear that activated macrophages and dendritic cells produce IL-23, but the molecular mechanisms whereby inflammatory signals stimulate IL-23 expression are not fully understood. We demonstrate that induction of IL-23 p19 gene expression by LPS depends on the TLR4 and MyD88 pathways. All three MAPK pathways (ERK, JNK, and p38) that are activated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation were shown to exert a positive effect on p19 expression. We cloned a 1.3-kb putative p19 promoter and defined its transcription initiation sites by the 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends method. By analyzing IL-23 p19 promoter mutants, we have identified a promoter region (-413 to +10) that contains several important elements, including NF-kappaB and AP-1. In addition to NF-kappaB, we have demonstrated that the proximal AP-1 site is important for p19 promoter activation. Mutation of the AP-1 site resulted in the loss of p19 promoter activation. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) analysis showed that c-Jun and c-Fos bind to the AP-1 site, which was confirmed by a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Furthermore, co-transfection of c-Jun and ATF2 synergistically induced p19 promoter activation, and c-Jun and ATF2 formed a protein complex, demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation. Finally, LPS-stimulated peritoneal macrophages from IL-10-deficient mice expressed significantly higher IL-23 p19 than macrophages from wild type mice, and the addition of recombinant IL-10 strongly inhibited LPS-induced p19 expression. Thus, this study suggests that MyD88-dependent Toll-like receptor signaling induces IL-23 p19 gene expression through both MAPKs and NF-kappaB.

19587009
Inflamed lymphatic endothelium suppresses dendritic cell maturation and function via Mac-1/ICAM-1-dependent mechanism.
The lymphatic system is essential for the generation of immune responses by facilitating immune cell trafficking to lymph nodes. Dendritic cells (DCs), the most potent APCs, exit tissues via lymphatic vessels, but the mechanisms of interaction between DCs and the lymphatic endothelium and the potential implications of these interactions for immune responses are poorly understood. In this study, we demonstrate that lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) modulate the maturation and function of DCs. Direct contact of human monocyte-derived DCs with an inflamed, TNF-alpha-stimulated lymphatic endothelium reduced expression of the costimulatory molecule CD86 by DCs and suppressed the ability of DCs to induce T cell proliferation. These effects were dependent on adhesive interactions between DCs and LECs that were mediated by the binding of Mac-1 on DCs to ICAM-1 on LECs. Importantly, the suppressive effects of the lymphatic endothelium on DCs were observed only in the absence of pathogen-derived signals. In vivo, DCs that migrated to the draining lymph nodes upon inflammatory stimuli, but in the absence of a pathogen, showed increased levels of CD86 expression in ICAM-1-deficient mice. Together, these data demonstrate a direct role of LECs in the modulation of immune response and suggest a function of the lymphatic endothelium in preventing undesired immune reactions in inflammatory conditions.

19538323
Lymphoepithelial interactions: a new paradigm.
Intestinal lymphoepithelial interactions occur in the epithelium and subepithelial space. We asked whether or not lamina propria lymphocytes (LPL) could promote intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) differentiation. In contrast to epithelial cells in UC mucosa, which do not differentiate because of rapid turnover, differentiation of epithelial cells in CD mucosa occurs in the crypts. This dysregulation is driven by alterations in the crosstalk between CD LPL and CD IECs, leading to an acceleration of their differentiation. This alteration seems to involve the transcription factor CDX2 via the activation of the PI3K and MAPK pathways and provides new insights into the dysfunction of the epithelial barrier in CD versus UC. The absence of lymphocytes in Rag1-deficient mice was associated with a defect in colonic IEC differentiation, restored by co-transfer of naïve and regulatory T cells. Interestingly, the transfer of naïve T cells alone induced an acceleration of IEC differentiation similar to what was seen in the colonic mucosa of CD patients. Thus, there is a crosstalk between LPL and IECs that is altered in CD, which leads to an absorptive phenotype of IEC differentiation.

19501588
Expression of the chemokine binding protein M3 promotes marked changes in the accumulation of specific leukocytes subsets within the intestine.
Chemokines are small proteins that direct leukocyte trafficking under homeostatic and inflammatory conditions. We analyzed the differential expression of chemokines in distinct segments of the intestine and investigated the importance of chemokines for the distribution of leukocytes in the intestine during homeostatic and inflammatory conditions. We analyzed messenger RNA for all known chemokines in different segments of the gut by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. To study the effect of multiple-chemokine blockade in the gut, we generated transgenic mice that expressed the chemokine binding protein M3 in the intestine (V-M3 mice). We used flow cytometry to evaluate the changes in the numbers of leukocytes. We observed distinct chemokine expression profiles in the 6 segments of the gut. Some chemokines were expressed throughout the intestine (CCL28, CCL6, CXCL16, and CX3CL1), whereas others were expressed preferentially in the small (CCL25 and CCL5) or large intestine (CCL19, CCL21, and CXCL5). Expression of the chemokine blocker M3 in intestinal epithelial cells resulted in reduced numbers of B and T cells in Peyer's patches, reduced numbers of intraepithelial CD8alphabeta(+)/TCRalphabeta(+) and CD8alphaalpha(+)/TCRalphabeta(+) T cells, and reduced numbers of lamina propria CD8(+) T cells. Strikingly, M3 expression markedly reduced the number of eosinophils and macrophages in the small and large intestines. Dextran sulfate sodium treatment of control mice led to marked changes in the expression of chemokines and in the number of myeloid cells in the colon. These cellular changes were significantly attenuated in the presence of M3. Our study reveals a complex pattern of chemokine expression in the intestine and indicates that chemokines are critical for leukocyte accumulation in the intestine during homeostasis and inflammation.

19359427
A novel Toll-like receptor 4 antagonist antibody ameliorates inflammation but impairs mucosal healing in murine colitis.
Dysregulated innate immune responses to commensal bacteria contribute to the development of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). TLR4 is overexpressed in the intestinal mucosa of IBD patients and may contribute to uncontrolled inflammation. However, TLR4 is also an important mediator of intestinal repair. The aim of this study is to examine the effect of a TLR4 antagonist on inflammation and intestinal repair in two murine models of IBD. Colitis was induced in C57BL/6J mice with dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) or by transferring CD45Rb(hi) T cells into RAG1-/- mice. An antibody (Ab) against the TLR4/MD-2 complex or isotype control Ab was administered intraperitoneally during DSS treatment, recovery from DSS colitis, or induction of colitis in RAG1-/- mice. Colitis severity was assessed by disease activity index (DAI) and histology. The effect of the Ab on the inflammatory infiltrate was determined by cell isolation and immunohistochemistry. Mucosal expression of inflammatory mediators was analyzed by real-time PCR and ELISA. Blocking TLR4 at the beginning of DSS administration delayed the development of colitis with significantly lower DAI scores. Anti-TLR4 Ab treatment decreased macrophage and dendritic cell infiltrate and reduced mucosal expression of CCL2, CCL20, TNF-alpha, and IL-6. Anti-TLR4 Ab treatment during recovery from DSS colitis resulted in defective mucosal healing with lower expression of COX-2, PGE(2), and amphiregulin. In contrast, TLR4 blockade had minimal efficacy in ameliorating inflammation in the adoptive transfer model of chronic colitis. Our findings suggest that anti-TLR4 therapy may decrease inflammation in IBD but may also interfere with colonic mucosal healing.

19125371
Mitochondria influence Fas expression in gp120-induced apoptosis of neuronal cells.
The human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) destroys the immune system and also induces neurological disease culminating into dementia (HIV-associated dementia). Though the HIV viral protein gp120 induces apoptosis in neuronal cells, the mechanism of action is still poorly defined. Recent studies show that cells die during apoptosis by Fas aggregation aided by the mitochondrial proapoptotic proteins. Our studies show an increase in expression of Fas and its associated downstream proteins after treatment of the neuroblastoma cells, SH-SY5Y, with gp120. Fas and its associated death proteins, FADD and caspase-8 (DISC), are downregulated when treated with the caspase inhibitors. The results indicate that mitochondrial-death proteins like caspases may influence the upregulation of the death receptor Fas, and the inhibition of caspases prevents gp120-induced apoptosis.

18844620
Chromoendoscopy-targeted biopsies are superior to standard colonoscopic surveillance for detecting dysplasia in inflammatory bowel disease patients: a prospective endoscopic trial.
Patients with extensive, longstanding chronic ulcerative or Crohn's colitis face greater risks of developing colorectal cancer. Current standard surveillance relies on detecting dysplasia using random sampling at colonoscopy but may fail to detect dysplasia in many patients. Dye spraying techniques have been reported to aid in detecting otherwise subtle mucosal abnormalities in the setting of colitis. We prospectively compared dye-spray technique using methylene blue to standard colonoscopic surveillance in detecting dysplasia. One hundred fifteen patients were referred to the Chromoendoscopy Study Group and prospectively screened for the study. One hundred two (64 M, 38 F) (79 UC 23 CC) patients meeting the inclusion criteria were enrolled. Following a standard bowel preparation, each patient was examined using standard office endoscopic equipment by three methods: (a) standard surveillance colonoscopy with four random biopsies every 10 cm (for a total of at least 32 samples); (b) a targeted biopsy protocol; and finally (c) methylene blue (0.01%) dye spray was segmentally applied throughout the colon and any pit-pattern abnormality or lesion rendered visible by the dye spray was targeted and biopsied. Each patient had a single examination, which included two passes of the colonoscope. Specimens were reviewed in a blinded fashion by a single gastrointestinal pathologist. The three methods were then compared with each patient serving as his or her own control. Targeted biopsies with dye spray revealed significantly more dysplasia (16 patients with low grade and 1 patient with high grade) than random biopsies (3 patients with low-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.001) and more than targeted nondye spray (8 patients with low-grade and 1 patient with high-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.057). Targeted biopsies with and without dye spray detected dysplasia in 20 patients compared with 3 using Method (a) (P= 0.0002, two-tailed exact McNemar's Test). There were no adverse events. Colonoscopic surveillance of chronic colitis patients using methylene blue dye-spray targeted biopsies results in improved dysplasia yield compared to conventional random and targeted biopsy methods. Accordingly, this technique warrants incorporation into clinical practice in this setting and consideration as a standard of care for these patients. The value of multiple random biopsies as a surveillance technique should be revisited.

18522803
Toll-like receptor signaling in small intestinal epithelium promotes B-cell recruitment and IgA production in lamina propria.
Several lines of evidence support a role for Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling to protect the intestine from pathogenic infection. We hypothesized that TLR signaling at the level of the intestinal epithelium is critical for mucosal immune responses. We generated transgenic mice that express a constitutively active form of TLR4 in the intestinal epithelium (V-TLR4 mice). Lamina propria cellularity was evaluated by immunostaining and flow cytometry. Immunoglobulin (Ig) A levels in the stool and serum were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Chemokine and cytokine expression were analyzed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. V-TLR4 transgenic mice reproduced normally and had a normal life span. Constitutive activity of TLR4 in the intestinal epithelium promoted recruitment of B cells and an increase in fecal IgA levels. Intestinal epithelial cells of V-TLR4 mice expressed higher levels of CCL20 and CCL28, chemokines known to be involved in B-cell recruitment, and of a proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL), a cytokine that promotes T-cell-independent class switching of B cells to IgA. The changes in B-cell numbers and IgA levels were blocked by simultaneous expression in intestinal epithelial cells of M3, a herpes virus protein that binds and inhibits multiple chemokines. TLR signaling in the intestinal epithelial cells significantly elevated the production of IgA in the intestine. This effect was mediated by TLR-induced expression of a specific set of chemokines and cytokines that promoted both recruitment of B cells into the lamina propria and IgA class switching of B cells.

18506885
Interleukin 10 suppresses Th17 cytokines secreted by macrophages and T cells.
IL-17 and IL-22 are typical cytokines produced by the Th17 T cell subset, but it is unclear if Th17 cytokines can be produced by other cell types. We demonstrate that IL-10-deficient and IL-10R-deficient macrophages stimulated with lipopolysaccharide produce high levels of IL-17 and IL-22. Addition of exogenous IL-10 to IL-10-deficient macrophages abolished IL-17 production. When IL-10-deficient and IL-10R-deficient splenocytes were cultured under Th17 polarizing conditions, the population of IL-17-producing cells was increased and the cultures produced significantly higher levels of IL-17 and IL-22. The addition of recombinant IL-10 to IL-10-deficient splenocytes significantly decreased the percentage of IL-17-producing CD4(+) T cells. Finally, the mRNA for the Th17 transcription factor retinoic acid-related orphan receptor (ROR)gammat was significantly elevated in IL-10-deficient spleen cells and macrophages. These data demonstrate that Th17 cytokines and RORgammat are also expressed in macrophages and that IL-10 negatively regulates the expression of Th17 cytokines and RORgammat by both macrophages and T cells.

18054562
Allergen-IgE complexes trigger CD23-dependent CCL20 release from human intestinal epithelial cells.
In food allergic individuals, exposure to food allergens by the oral route can trigger immediate (within minutes) local hypersensitivity reactions in the intestine followed by a late-phase inflammatory response. Previous work has shown that CD23 is constitutively expressed by human intestinal epithelial cells and mediates the uptake of allergen-IgE complexes. We hypothesized that allergen-IgE complexes could also signal via CD23 to trigger an inflammatory cascade in the local environment. Caco-2 monolayers were stimulated with human IgE-antigen (Ag) complexes. IL-8 and CCL20 mRNA and protein were determined by RT-PCR and ELISA, respectively. Signaling pathways were assessed by immunoblotting. Endogenous CD23 expression was knocked down by stable transfection with CD23 shRNA retroviral plasmid. Migration assays were performed using human monocyte-derived dendritic cells. Stimulation of Caco-2 cells with IgE-Ag complexes triggered upregulation of IL-8 and CCL20 at the mRNA and protein level. Allergen complexes induced phosphorylation of ERK and JNK, but not p38 MAP kinase or NK-kappaB, and resulted in AP-1 activation. Cross-linking of CD23 replicated the findings with IgE-Ag complexes, and silencing of CD23 expression abrogated the response to allergen-IgE complexes. Supernatant from IgE-Ag-stimulated epithelial cells induced migration of dendritic cells in a CCL20-dependent manner. Finally, immunostaining of duodenal biopsies demonstrated that CCL20 was constitutively expressed by epithelial cells in vivo. Signaling via epithelial CD23 may participate in the late-phase inflammatory response by the release of chemokines capable of recruiting antigen presenting cells and effector cells of allergic inflammation.

18045591
Epithelial: lamina propria lymphocyte interactions promote epithelial cell differentiation.
Intestinal lymphoepithelial interactions occur in the epithelium and the subepithelial space. We asked whether normal, Crohn's disease (CD), or ulcerative colitis (UC) lamina propria lymphocytes (LPL) could promote intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) growth and differentiation. T84 cells were cocultured with isolated LPL. IECs were then lysed and subjected to measurement of intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP) activity; Western blot analysis for MAPK and Akt activation; and real-time polymerase chain reaction to assess caudal-related homeoprotein 2 (CDX2) messenger RNA (mRNA) levels. Tissue sections were immunostained for evidence of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) activation, CDX2, and IAP; and CDX2 mRNA expression was assessed in human colonic biopsy specimens. IAP activity was increased in T84 cells cocultured for 8 days with normal LPL (P < .05) and even greater with CD LPL (P < .001). Crypt IECs in active CD mucosa expressed IAP ex vivo. Phospho-MAPK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2, p38, and c-Jun-N-terminal kinase) and phospho-Akt were seen as early as 30 minutes after coculture. MAPK activation was greatest in T84 cells cocultured with CD LPL. There was a specific increase in Phospho-p38 MAPK and Phospho-Akt staining in the nuclei of crypt IECs in active vs inactive CD, normal mucosa, and UC mucosa. CDX2 mRNA expression was increased in CD LPL cocultured T84 cells, which did not correlate with CDX2 protein localization ex vivo. There is cross talk between LPL and IECs, which leads to IEC differentiation. The differentiation is accelerated in CD mucosa.

17916645
CD4 T cells activated in the mesenteric lymph node mediate gastrointestinal food allergy in mice.
A localized Th2 milieu has been observed in the intestine of subjects with food allergic disorders; however, the role of T cells in the pathophysiology of these disorders remains poorly understood. Our aim was to examine sites of T cell activation in response to food challenge, identify potential factors responsible for T cell recruitment to the gut, and determine the role of T cells in disease. BALB/c mice were systemically sensitized to ovalbumin (OVA) and repeatedly fed with OVA to induce allergic diarrhea. Local cytokine and chemokine expressions were assessed by quantitative PCR, and cytokine secretion levels in the mesenteric lymph node (MLN) were determined by ELISA. Homing molecule expression was determined by flow cytometry, and the role of CD4(+) T cells in promoting disease was tested by adoptive transfer. Mice developed diarrhea associated with changes in epithelial ion transport, mast cell infiltration, intestinal IgE secretion, and local upregulation of Th2 cytokines and the Th2 chemokines CCL1, CCL17, and CCL22 in the small intestine. T cell activation occurred in the MLN before symptom onset, and a single feed of OVA induced T cell proliferation, alpha(4)beta(7) upregulation, and CD62L downregulation. Cells from the MLN, including purified CD4(+) T cells, were able to transfer allergic diarrhea to naive mice. A gut-homing phenotype induced in the MLN and selective upregulation of Th2 chemoattractants are likely important factors in the gastrointestinal recruitment of pathological Th2-skewed CD4(+) T cells in food allergy.

17561966
The immune response in inflammatory bowel disease.
Ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD), collectively referred to as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), present with differing histologic and cytokine profiles. While the precise mechanisms underlying the development of IBD are not known, sufficient data have been collected to suggest that it results from a complex interplay of genetic, environmental, and immunologic factors. Animal models of colitis, along with a more detailed understanding of the immune response in the normal bowel, have led to unifying hypotheses regarding the pathogenesis. An inappropriate mucosal immune response to normal intestinal constituents is a key feature, leading to an imbalance in local pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Neutrophil and monocyte influx occurs with subsequent secretion of oxygen radicals and enzymes, leading to tissue damage. Therapy of IBD has improved and expanded as the understanding of disease mechanisms has evolved. Pharmacologic agents such as aminosalicylates, azathioprine/6-mercaptopurine, or steroids are the mainstays of therapy. Newer agents including monoclonal antibodies targeted to specific proinflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), have emerged and provide great clinical benefit, but unknown long-term toxicity and immunogenicity may limit their use.

17291293
Epithelia: lymphocyte interactions in the gut.
The mucosal immune system is governed by a unique set of rules and regulations. The local microenvironment dictates the necessity for these differences. The intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) sits at the interface between an antigen-rich lumen and a lymphocyte-rich lamina propria (LP). The cross talk that occurs between these compartments serves to maintain intestinal homeostasis. IECs have the capacity to talk to LP lymphocytes, activating populations of unique regulatory T cells. These cells have the capacity to talk back to the epithelium, influencing epithelial cell growth and differentiation. This review looks at this cross talk and places it in the context of mucosal immunoregulation.

17238179
Expression of nonclassical class I molecules by intestinal epithelial cells.
It is well recognized that the nature of the immune response is different in the intestinal tract than in peripheral lymphoid organs. The immunologic tone of the gut-associated lymphoid tissue is one of suppression rather than active immunity, distinguishing pathogens from normal flora. Failure to control mucosal immune responses may lead to inflammatory diseases such as Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) and celiac disease. It has been suggested that this normally immunosuppressed state may relate to unique antigen-presenting cells and unique T-cell populations. The intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) has been proposed to act as a nonprofessional antigen-presenting cell (APC). Previous studies have suggested that antigens presented by IECs result in the activation a CD8(+) regulatory T-cell subset in a nonclassical MHC I molecule restricted manner. We therefore analyzed the expression of nonclassical MHC I molecules by normal IECs and compared this to those expressed by inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) IECs. Normal surface IEC from the colon and, to a much lesser extent, the small bowel express nonclassical MHC I molecules on their surface. In contrast, mRNA is expressed in all intestinal epithelial cells. Surface IEC express CD1d, MICA/B, and HLA-E protein. In contrast, crypt IECs express less or no nonclassical MHC I molecules but do express mRNA for these molecules. Furthermore, the regulation of expression of distinct nonclassical class I molecules is different depending on the molecule analyzed. Interestingly, IECs derived from patients with UC fail to express any nonclassical MHC I molecules (protein and HLA-E mRNA). IECs from CD patients express HLA-E and MICA/B comparable to that seen in normal controls but fail to express CD1d. Thus, in UC there may be a failure to activate any nonclassical MHC I molecule restricted regulatory T cells that may result in unopposed active inflammatory responses. In CD only the CD1d-regulated T cells would be affected.

20704971
Treatment of disease through oral tolerance.
Extract: The immune response to soluble protein antigens differs markedly depending on the route by which that antigen enters the body. In particular, early studies demonstrated that antigens that were first encountered via the gastrointestinal tract (e.g., via oral administration) led to systemic hyporesponsiveness against that antigen. This phenomenon has been termed oral tolerance. Further studies in mouse models of human disease demonstrated the potential for oral tolerance to protect susceptible animals from developing inflammatory and/or autoimmune diseases. This breakthrough finding lead to a surge in interest in oral tolerance as a potential prophylactic/therapeutic agent in human diseases. Here we briefly describe the underlying mechanisms and important factors influencing oral tolerance elucidated through animal models and conclude with a discussion on the translation of these findings to human beings. Numerous studies in mice have demonstrated that the dose of antigen administered is a critical factor influencing oral tolerance. Moreover, two forms of oral tolerance have been delineated which differ in their mechanism of action. High doses of antigen lead to the deletion of antigen-reactive T lymphocytes (T-cells).

20664576
Attenuation of TNF-driven murine ileitis by intestinal expression of the viral immunomodulator CrmD.
Tumor necrosis factor ? (TNF?) is a key pathogenic factor in Crohn's disease and rheumatoid arthritis. TNF(?ARE) mice express high levels of TNF? and present Crohn's-like ileitis and arthritis. Alterations in the chemokine network could underline the TNF-driven ileitis. The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of TNF and chemokines in ileitis using ectromelia virus cytokine response modifier D (CrmD), a protein that binds TNF? and a limited number of chemokines. We generated transgenic mice expressing CrmD in intestinal epithelial cells (vCrmD mice) and crossed them with the TNF(?ARE) mice to test whether CrmD could affect TNF-driven inflammatory processes. During homeostasis, only the number of B cells in the lamina propria was reduced by CrmD expression. Interestingly, CrmD expression in the intestine markedly attenuated the inflammatory infiltrates in the ileum of TNF(?ARE) mice, but did not affect development of arthritis. Our results suggest that CrmD affects development of ileitis by locally affecting both TNF and chemokine function in the ileum.

19741597
CXCL13 expression in the gut promotes accumulation of IL-22-producing lymphoid tissue-inducer cells, and formation of isolated lymphoid follicles.
The chemokine CXCL13 is overexpressed in the intestine during inflammation. To mimic this condition, we created transgenic mice-expressing CXCL13 in intestinal epithelial cells. CXCL13 expression promoted a marked increase in the number of B cells in the lamina propria and an increase in the size and number of lymphoid follicles in the small intestine. Surprisingly, these changes were associated with a marked increase in the numbers of RORgammat(+)NKp46(-)CD3(-)CD4(+) and RORgammat(+)NKp46(+) cells. The RORgammat(+)NKp46(-)CD3(-)CD4(+) cells expressed CXCR5, the receptor for CXCL13, and other markers of lymphoid tissue-inducer cells, such as LTalpha, LTbeta, and TNF-related activation-induced cytokine (TRANCE). RORgammat(+)NKp46(-)CD3(-)CD4(+) gut LTi cells produced IL-22, a cytokine implicated in epithelial repair; and expressed the IL-23 receptor, a key regulator of IL-22 production. These results suggest that overexpression of CXCL13 in the intestine during inflammatory conditions favors mobilization of B cells and of LTi and NK cells with immunomodulatory and reparative functions.

19571798
Suppression of Th1 and Th17, but not Th2, responses in a CD8(+) T cell-mediated model of oral tolerance.
The role of CD8(+) T cells in oral tolerance remains unclear. To address this, we developed a model to induce CD8(+) Tregs by feeding the major histocompatibility complex class I immunodominant epitope of OVA, OVA((257-264)). OVA((257-264)) feeding induced tolerance similar to that observed in OVA protein-fed mice, capable of suppressing the production of Th1 and Th17 cytokines and inhibiting a Th1-driven delayed-type hypersensitivity response following immunization with whole OVA (wOVA) protein. OVA((257-264)) peptide-induced suppression could be transferred to naive mice with CD8(+) cells, but not CD8-depleted cells, isolated from mesenteric lymph nodes of peptide-fed mice. Interestingly, while capable of inhibiting Th1 and Th17 responses, OVA((257-264)) feeding could not suppress any feature of a Th2 inflammatory response, though OVA protein feeding could, suggesting that these cells function through a different mechanism than their CD4(+) counterparts generated in response to feeding with wOVA. Thus, CD8(+) T cells are functionally capable of mediating tolerance to Th1 and Th17 responses.

19079331
Immunophysiology of experimental food allergy.
Animal models of food allergy have been used to identify mechanisms involved in the development of sensitization to food proteins as well as immunologic mechanisms of adverse reactions to allergen reexposure. To counteract the normal tolerant responses to antigen generated in the gastrointestinal tract, investigators have used mucosal adjuvants or manipulated the mucosal barrier, taken advantage of endogenous adjuvanticity of some food allergens, or bypassed the oral route and sensitized through the skin. Site of antigen uptake in the gastrointestinal tract is a critical factor in both sensitization and anaphylaxis, and antigen uptake can be facilitated by immunoglobulin-E (IgE)-antigen complexes binding to CD23 on the epithelial cell surface. Studies on systemic anaphylaxis or local gastrointestinal manifestations of food allergy in mice have highlighted the contribution of IgE, mast cells, and pathogenic Th2 lymphocytes in experimental food allergy.

18588554
Pasteurization of milk proteins promotes allergic sensitization by enhancing uptake through Peyer's patches.
The underlying mechanisms responsible for allergic sensitization to food proteins remain elusive. To investigate the intrinsic properties (as well as the effect of pasteurization) of the milk proteins alpha-lactalbumin, beta-lactoglobulin and casein that promote the induction of milk allergy. Alteration of structure and immune-reactivity of native and pasteurized proteins was assessed by gel filtration and ELISA. Uptake of these proteins was compared in vitro and in vivo. The biological effect was assessed by orally sensitizing C3H/HeJ mice with milk proteins followed by a graded oral challenge. Required dose to induce anaphylaxis, symptoms and mean body temperature was recorded. Antigen-specific antibodies and cytokine production by splenocytes were analyzed. Soluble beta-lactoglobulin and alpha-lactalbumin but not insoluble casein were readily transcytosed through enterocytes in vitro and in vivo. Pasteurization caused aggregation of beta-lactoglobulin and alpha-lactalbumin inhibiting uptake by intestinal epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, aggregation redirected uptake to Peyer's patches, which promoted significantly higher Th2-associated antibody and cytokine production in mice than their native counterparts. Despite this only the soluble forms of beta-lactoglobulin and alpha-lactalbumin elicited anaphylaxis (following priming) when allergens were administered orally. Aggregated beta-lactoglobulin and alpha-lactalbumin as well as casein required systemic administration to induce anaphylaxis. These results indicate that triggering of an anaphylactic response requires two phases (1) sensitization by aggregates through Peyer's patches and (2) efficient transfer of soluble protein across the epithelial barrier. As the majority of common food allergens tend to form aggregates, this may be of clinical importance.

