21530747
Intestinal inflammation and cancer.
Patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease are at increased risk for developing colorectal cancer (CRC). Chronic inflammation is believed to promote carcinogenesis. The risk for colon cancer increases with the duration and anatomic extent of colitis and presence of other inflammatory disorders (such as primary sclerosing cholangitis), whereas it decreases when patients take drugs to reduce inflammation (such as mesalamine and steroids). The genetic features that lead to sporadic CRC-chromosome instability, microsatellite instability, and DNA hypermethylation-also occur in colitis-associated CRC. Unlike the normal colonic mucosa, cells of the inflamed colonic mucosa have these genetic alterations before there is any histologic evidence of dysplasia or cancer. The reasons for these differences are not known, but oxidative stress is likely to be involved. Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species produced by inflammatory cells can affect regulation of genes that encode factors that prevent carcinogenesis (such as p53, DNA mismatch repair proteins, and DNA base excision-repair proteins), transcription factors (such as nuclear factor-?B), or signaling proteins (such as cyclooxygenases). Administration of agents that cause colitis in healthy rodents or genetically engineered, cancer-prone mice accelerates development of colorectal tumors. Mice genetically prone to inflammatory bowel disease also develop CRC, especially in the presence of bacterial colonization. Individual components of the innate and adaptive immune response have also been implicated in carcinogenesis. These observations offer compelling support for the role of inflammation in colon carcinogenesis.

21308408
Interpersonal influences on patients' surgical decision making: the role of close others.
Patients make medical decisions in consultation with their partner, family, and friends. However, little is known about the ways in which these close others influence their decisions, particularly with respect to discrete decisions such as those related to medical treatments. This cross-sectional study investigated their influence on the surgical decisions of inflammatory bowel disease patients referred for surgery to remove their colon (N = 91). Guided by research on social control and classic research on power and influence in close relationships, we identified four types of close other decision influence: persuasion, assistance with understanding, indirect influence, and negative influence. Linear logistic and regression analyses showed that patients were more likely to have surgery when their close other used persuasion, and they reported lower decisional conflict when their close other helped them understand the decision. Patients were less likely to have surgery and reported greater decisional conflict when their close other used negative influence tactics. Findings demonstrate the importance of considering social context when investigating patient decision making.

21273157
Descriptive characteristics of a colon disease family registry at an urban hospital.
Hospital registries are an important component of cancer screening efforts of individuals and communities. This paper describes the structure and goals of a Colon Disease Family Registry at a metropolitan hospital. Patient characteristics, differences between gastrointestinal diseases among probands, subjective distress in relation to perception of colorectal cancer, and quality of life were examined. Participants were patients with colorectal cancer (CRC), familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma (HNPCC) and inflammatory bowel disease ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease representing a range of colonic diseases. A total of 630 probands were recruited into the registry and administered a questionnaire. Of the 630 probands, 198 (31.4%) were diagnosed with CRC, 36 (5.3%) with FAP or HNPCC and 272 (43.2%) with UC or Crohn's. The majority of all three groups had some level of college education, was white, and reported a household income greater then $70,000. The Impact of Event Scale score was found to be of notable significance when categorized by relation to proband (p<0.01) and proband diagnoses (p ? 0.000). On the quality of life item, the largest difference was between FAP or HNPCC and UC or Crohn's without CRC. Subjective distress scores were higher for CRC probands in comparison to probands with other colorectal diseases. Quality of life was relatively high for all probands. Psychological distress should be explored in more depth and more frequently to screen for any concomitant psychiatric disorders like post-traumatic symptoms that have been linked to a cancer diagnosis.

20309919
Colonoscopy versus computed tomography colonography for colorectal cancer screening.
Colorectal cancer is second only to lung cancer as the leading cause of death among North Americans of both sexes. Although screening rates for colorectal cancer in the United States have increased over the past decade, these rates (in the range of 45%-60%) are still lower than the screening rates for breast cancer (approximately 80%). Optical colonoscopy has been recognized as the preferred method for colorectal cancer screening in the United States, but computed tomography colonography has recently been gaining favor. This article compares the 2 methods with respect to both advantages and disadvantages.

20064291
Practical advances in stool screening for colorectal cancer.
The rationale for screening for colorectal cancer (CRC) is well established, and several tests are currently recommended. Colonoscopy has become a popular modality in most of the United States and other countries. Despite colonoscopy being highly accurate and therapeutic, many patients prefer a noninvasive screening test. Testing stool for occult blood by the chemical guaiac reagent (gFOBT) has been available for decades and is effective at reducing mortality from CRC. However, because of limitations in sensitivity and specificity, newer fecal immunochemical tests (FITs) were developed that detect occult blood using enzyme immunoassays. Because of their improved sensitivity and specificity, FITs have replaced gFOBT for screening in many settings. Detecting neoplasia-associated genetic changes in stool has also become feasible; first-generation stool DNA tests showed greater sensitivity for CRC, with similar specificity to gFOBT. Improvements to stool DNA tests have made them more sensitive and less complex. As the performance characteristics for FIT and stool DNA tests continue to evolve, stool-based testing for CRC is expected to become a more reliable component in the armamentarium for CRC screening.

20485613
Colorectal cancer in inflammatory bowel disease.
Patients with long-standing inflammatory bowel disease have an increased risk of developing colorectal cancer (CRC). CRC risk increases with longer duration of colitis, greater anatomic extent of colitis, the presence of primary sclerosing cholangitis, family history of CRC and severity of inflammation of the colon. Chemoprevention includes aminosalicylates, ursodeoxycholic acid, and possibly folic acid. To reduce CRC mortality in IBD, colonoscopic surveillance remains the major way to detect early mucosal dysplasia. When dysplasia is confirmed, proctocolectomy is considered for these patients. Ulcerative colitis patients with total proctocolectomy and ileal pouch anal-anastomosis have a rather low risk of dysplasia in the ileal pouch, but the anal transition zone should be monitored periodically. New endoscopic and molecular screening approaches may further refine our current surveillance guidelines and our understanding of the natural history of dysplasia.

18200660
Cancer in inflammatory bowel disease.
Patients with long-standing inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) have an increased risk of developing colorectal cancer (CRC). Many of the molecular alterations responsible for sporadic colorectal cancer, namely chromosomal instability, microsatellite instability, and hypermethylation, also play a role in colitis-associated colon carcinogenesis. Colon cancer risk in inflammatory bowel disease increases with longer duration of colitis, greater anatomic extent of colitis, the presence of primary sclerosing cholangitis, family history of CRC and degree of inflammation of the bowel. Chemoprevention includes aminosalicylates, ursodeoxycholic acid, and possibly folic acid and statins. To reduce CRC mortality in IBD, colonoscopic surveillance with random biopsies remains the major way to detect early mucosal dysplasia. When dysplasia is confirmed, proctocolectomy is considered for these patients. Patients with small intestinal Crohn's disease are at increased risk of small bowel adenocarcinoma. Ulcerative colitis patients with total proctocolectomy and ileal pouch anal-anastomosis have a rather low risk of dysplasia in the ileal pouch, but the anal transition zone should be monitored periodically. Other extra intestinal cancers, such as hepatobiliary and hematopoietic cancer, have shown variable incidence rates. New endoscopic and molecular screening approaches may further refine our current surveillance guidelines and our understanding of the natural history of dysplasia.

18054559
Toll-like receptor-4 promotes the development of colitis-associated colorectal tumors.
Chronic inflammation is a risk factor for colon cancer in patients with ulcerative colitis (UC). The molecular mechanisms linking inflammation and colon carcinogenesis are incompletely understood. We tested the hypothesis that Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) is involved in tumorigenesis in the setting of chronic inflammation. Tissues from UC patients with cancer were examined for TLR4 expression. Colitis-associated neoplasia was induced using azoxymethane injection followed by dextran sodium sulfate treatment in TLR4-deficient or wild-type mice. Inflammation, polyps, and microscopic dysplasia were scored. Cyclooxygenase (Cox)-2 and prostaglandin E(2) production were analyzed by real-time polymerase chain reaction, immunohistochemistry, or enzyme immunoassay. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) phosphorylation and amphiregulin production were examined by Western blot analysis and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, respectively. We show that TLR4 is overexpressed in human and murine inflammation-associated colorectal neoplasia. TLR4-deficient mice were protected markedly from colon carcinogenesis. Mechanistically, we show that TLR4 is responsible for induction of Cox-2, increased prostaglandin E(2) production, and activation of EGFR signaling in chronic colitis. Amphiregulin, an EGFR ligand, was induced in a TLR4, Cox-2-dependent fashion and contributes to activation of EGFR phosphorylation in colonic epithelial cells. TLR4 signaling is critical for colon carcinogenesis in chronic colitis. TLR4 activation appears to promote the development of colitis-associated cancer by mechanisms including enhanced Cox-2 expression and increased EGFR signaling. Inhibiting TLR4 signaling may be useful in the prevention or treatment of colitis-associated cancer.

17607717
Distress among inflammatory bowel disease patients at high risk for colorectal cancer: a preliminary investigation of the effects of family history of cancer, disease duration, and perceived social support.
Patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are one of only three groups at high risk for colorectal cancer (CRC), a leading cause of cancer-related mortality. Yet, no research has examined psychological effects of their high-risk status. The present study offered an initial investigation of three potential predictors of patient distress: disease duration, family history of cancer, and perceived social support. Longer disease duration and stronger family history of cancer are associated with elevated CRC risk in this already high-risk population. Perceived support was conceptualized as a resource that could decrease vulnerability to distress or buffer adverse psychological effects of disease duration and family history. Men and women (n = 223) with IBD participating in a colon disease family registry completed measures for this cross-sectional study. Family history of CRC and non-colorectal cancers among first-degree relatives (FDRs) and more distant relatives (DRs) was examined separately. Hierarchical multiple regression analyses revealed that having greater perceived support predicted lower generalized distress (p<0.001). Having an FDR history of CRC predicted higher CRC-specific distress (p = 0.02). Having a DR history of CRC also predicted higher CRC-specific distress, but only among patients diagnosed more recently (p = 0.03). Clinical implications of these findings are discussed along with future research directions.

17205277
Demographic, medical, and psychosocial correlates to CAM use among survivors of colorectal cancer.
Complementary and alternative medicines (CAM) use among cancer patients is becoming more prevalent; however, our understanding of factors contributing to patients' decisions to participate in CAM is limited. This study examined correlates of CAM use among colorectal cancer (CRC) survivors, an understudied population that experiences many physical and psychological difficulties. The sample was 191, predominantly white, CRC survivors (mean age = 59.9 +/- 12.6) who were members of a colon disease registry at a NYC metropolitan hospital. Participants completed assessments of sociodemographic characteristics, psychosocial factors [e.g., psychological functioning, cancer specific distress, social support (SS), quality of life (QOL)], and past CAM use (e.g., chiropractic care, acupuncture, relaxation, hypnosis, and homeopathy). Seventy-five percent of participants reported using at least one type of CAM; most frequently reported was home remedies (37%). Younger (p < 0.01) or female patients (p < 0.01) were more likely to participate in CAM than their older male counterparts. Among psychosocial factors, poorer perceived SS (p = 0.00), more intrusive thoughts (p < 0.05), and poorer overall perceived QOL (p < 0.05) were associated to CAM use. In a linear regression model (including age, gender, SS, intrusive thoughts, and perceived QOL), only age remained a significant predictor of CAM use. These findings demonstrate that CAM use is prevalent among CRC survivors and should be assessed routinely by providers. CAMs may serve as a relevant adjunct to treatment among CRC patients as well as an indication of need for additional SS, especially among younger patients.

17161655
Improved fecal DNA test for colorectal cancer screening.
Fecal DNA testing has shown greater sensitivity than guaiac-based occult blood tests for noninvasive colorectal cancer (CRC) screening. The prototype assay (version 1), which analyzed 22 gene mutations and DNA integrity assay (DIA), showed a sensitivity of 52% for CRC detection and a specificity of 94% in average-risk individuals. The present study was conducted to determine the sensitivity and specificity of a second-generation assay (version 2) that uses improved DNA stabilization/isolation techniques and a new promoter methylation marker. Forty patients with CRC and 122 subjects with normal colonoscopy provided stool samples to which DNA preservation buffer was added immediately. DNA was purified using gel-based capture, and analyzed for the original panel of 22 mutations, DIA, and 2 new promoter methylation markers. By using DNA that was optimally preserved and purified from stool, the sensitivity of the prototype version 1 assay increased to 72.5% because of enhanced performance of DIA. Vimentin gene methylation alone provided sensitivity and specificity of 72.5% and 86.9%, respectively. The optimal combination of vimentin methylation plus DIA resulted in 87.5% sensitivity and 82% specificity; cancers were detected regardless of stage or location. False-positive vimentin methylation was associated with older age. An improved fecal DNA test that incorporates only 2 markers shows much higher sensitivity for CRC. The new assay is easier to perform and should be less costly, thereby facilitating its use for noninvasive CRC screening.

