19863813
Proteomics, pathway array and signaling network-based medicine in cancer.
ABSTRACT: Cancer is a multifaceted disease that results from dysregulated normal cellular signaling networks caused by genetic, genomic and epigenetic alterations at cell or tissue levels. Uncovering the underlying protein signaling network changes, including cell cycle gene networks in cancer, aids in understanding the molecular mechanism of carcinogenesis and identifies the characteristic signaling network signatures unique for different cancers and specific cancer subtypes. The identified signatures can be used for cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and personalized treatment. During the past several decades, the available technology to study signaling networks has significantly evolved to include such platforms as genomic microarray (expression array, SNP array, CGH array, etc.) and proteomic analysis, which globally assesses genetic, epigenetic, and proteomic alterations in cancer. In this review, we compared Pathway Array analysis with other proteomic approaches in analyzing protein network involved in cancer and its utility serving as cancer biomarkers in diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic target identification. With the advent of bioinformatics, constructing high complexity signaling networks is possible. As the use of signaling network-based cancer diagnosis, prognosis and treatment is anticipated in the near future, medical and scientific communities should be prepared to apply these techniques to further enhance personalized medicine.

19109478
Detection and toxin typing of Clostridium perfringens in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue samples by PCR.
Since current microbiology methods are not suitable to detect Clostridium perfringens in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue samples, we developed a PCR assay to detect toxin-encoding genes and the 16S rRNA gene of C. perfringens. We successfully detected and genotyped C. perfringens in tissue sections from two autopsy cases.

17516867
Molecular mechanism of anti-prostate cancer activity of Scutellaria baicalensis extract.
Scutellaria baicalensis is a widely used Chinese herbal medicine historically used in antiinflammatory and anticancer therapy. The goals of the study were to 1) determine its in vitro and in vivo anti-prostate cancer activity, 2) investigate its molecular mechanism directed at cell proliferation control including cyclooxygenase-2(COX-2) prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and cyclins/cdks pathways, and 3) compare it with those of PC-SPES (PC stands for prostate cancer and spes is Latin for hope), a former herbal mixture for prostate cancer treatment of which S. baicalensis is a major constituent. Two human prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP, androgen dependent, and PC-3, androgen independent) were assessed for growth inhibition. S. baicalensis exerted dose- and time-dependent increased growth inhibition in both cell lines. However, the PC-3 cells IC50 (50% growth inhibition concentration) were slightly more sensitive than LNCaP cells (IC50=0.15 mg/ml), although the former is androgen independent. S. baicalensis was more effective in inhibition of cell growth compared with PC-SPES (IC50=0.38 mg/ml for PC-3 cells). Significant reduction of PGE2 synthesis in both cells after treatment with S. baicalensis resulted from direct inhibition of COX-2 activity rather than COX-2 protein suppression. S. baicalensis also inhibited prostate-specific antigen production in LNCaP cells. Finally, S. baicalensis suppressed expression of cyclin D1 in LNCaP cells, resulting in a G1 phase arrest, while inhibiting cdk1 expression and kinase activity in PC-3 cells, ultimately leading to a G2/M cell cycle arrest. Animal studies showed a 50% reduction in tumor volume after a 7-wk treatment period. This study demonstrated that S. baicalensis may be a novel anticancer agent for the treatment of prostate cancer.

