21452191
Rarity of malignant mesothelioma prior to the widespread commercial introduction of asbestos: The Mount Sinai autopsy experience 1883-1910.
Most malignant mesotheliomas are related to asbestos exposure. Whether malignant mesothelioma occurs in the absence of asbestos exposure remains unsettled. To address this question we reviewed a series of 2,025 autopsies performed at the Mount Sinai Hospital between 1883 and 1910, prior to the widespread commercial introduction of asbestos. Retrospective autopsy review. No cases of malignant mesothelioma were identified in 2,025 autopsies performed between 1883 and 1910. Malignant mesothelioma was rare prior to the widespread commercial introduction of asbestos. Am. J. Ind. Med. 54:467-469, 2011. © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

20421108
Laparoscopic antrectomy for the treatment of type I gastric carcinoid tumors.
While the optimal treatment for type I gastric carcinoid tumors remains controversial, there is evidence to suggest that in multifocal disease, antrectomy may not only control local disease but also may lead to enterochromaffin-like cell (ECL) hyperplasia regression compared to medical and endoscopic treatments. A single institution retrospective review of eight consecutive patients with multifocal type I gastric carcinoid tumor patients with no evidence of metastatic disease was performed from 2005 to 2006. All of these patients underwent laparoscopic antrectomy with Billroth II reconstruction. Patients' preoperative gastrin, chromogranin A levels, and biopsy and surgical specimen slides were compared with postoperative laboratory and biopsy slides. Pathology slides were reanalyzed by a blinded pathologist from our institution for evidence of tumor and ECL hyperplasia regression. All patients tolerated the procedure well with no reoperations or mortalities. Six of eight patient complained of mild reflux which was treated medically. One of eight had a mild wound infection which resolved with a course of cephalexin. Gastrin levels significantly decreased (98.9%) in all patients (P = 0.001). Furthermore, chromogranin A levels also significantly decreased (81.4%). Eight of eight patients showed no evidence of carcinoid tumor after surgery at mean biopsy follow-up of 17 mo (range 2-35 mo), however there was ECL hyperplasia after resection. Four of eight patients (50%) showed regression of ECL hyperplasia on postop biopsy, while the remaining four of eight showed no evidence of regression. This is the largest case series to investigate the surgical, clinical, and histologic outcomes of laparoscopic antrectomy in type I gastric carcinoid. Our data suggest that laparoscopic antrectomy is a safe and minimally invasive approach to treat nonmetastatic type I gastric carcinoid. All patients had no evidence of gross or microscopic disease at follow-up biopsy and almost half had regression of ECL hyperplasia at follow-up suggesting that antrectomy may be sufficient to prevent tumor recurrence. However, continued regular endoscopic surveillance and medical follow-up of patients with ECL hyperplasia are recommended.

20070559
The changing face of post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease in the era of molecular EBV monitoring.
Pediatric PTLD is often associated with primary EBV infection and immunosuppression. The aim was to retrospectively review the spectrum of histologically documented PTLD for two time intervals differentiated by changes in use of molecular EBV monitoring. Eleven of 146 patients (7.5%) in 2001-2005 (Era A) and 10 of 92 (10.9%) in 1993-1997 (Era B) were diagnosed with PTLD. The median age at liver transplantation (0.8 and 0.9 yr, respectively) and the median duration between liver transplant and diagnosis of PTLD (0.6 and 0.7 yr, respectively) were similar in both eras. However, patients in Era A presented with significantly less advanced histological disease compared to patients in Era B (p=0.03). Specifically, nine patients (82%) in Era A had Pl hyperplasia/polymorphic PTLD, whereas in Era B, six had advanced histological disease (five monomorphic and one unclassified). Three transplant recipients in Era B died secondary to PTLD, whereas there were no PTLD-related deaths in Era A (p=0.03). Heightened awareness of risk for PTLD, alterations in baseline immunosuppression regimens, implementation of molecular EBV monitoring, pre-emptive reduction in immunosuppression and improved therapeutic options may have all contributed to a milder PTLD phenotype and improved clinical outcomes.

19940753
Pagetoid reticulosis after radiotherapy of primary cutaneous anaplastic large-cell lymphoma.
We describe a 60-year-old man with a history of primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma on the chest, who presented with a new scaly red plaque on the same site 11 years after radiation therapy. Histological examination revealed a dense epidermotropic infiltrate of atypical mononuclear cells consistent with pagetoid reticulosis. Immunohistochemistry revealed the infiltrate to be CD4, CD8, and CD30. Remarkably, all the atypical cells were strongly CD30, and furthermore, the CD30 cells were found exclusively in the epidermis. In the initial cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma lesion, the CD4, CD8, and focally CD30 atypical cells were well confined within the dermis with no epidermal component. To our knowledge, the present case seems to be the first description of pagetoid reticulosis presenting at the site of a previously treated dermal anaplastic large cell lymphoma. This case also represents an extreme presentation of epidermotropism and CD30 expression in pagetoid reticulosis.

18486893
Renal benign epithelial nodal inclusions.
There are 3 case series reports describing benign epithelial inclusions in nodal sinuses of perinephric lymph nodes of pediatric patients. The majority of these inclusions were observed in perinephric lymph nodes removed during nephrectomies from pediatric patients with Wilms' tumors. We report 2 cases of benign renal tubular epithelial inclusions located in the perinephric hilar lymph nodes. One of our cases is, to our knowledge, the first case of benign renal epithelial inclusions reported in an adult patient.

18237237
Hepatic involvement in congenital acute megakaryoblastic leukemia: a case report with emphasis on the liver pathology findings.
We report the case of a 4-week-old infant diagnosed with acute megakaryoblastic leukemia with the t (1;22) (p13, q13) who presented with ascites caused by massive infiltration of hepatic sinusoids by leukemic cells. The bone marrow by microscopy and flow cytometry and the peripheral blood smear did not initially show the presence of blasts. Marrow fibrosis appeared after infiltrative disease in the liver and liver fibrosis. We describe the microscopic liver findings and associated clinical presentation that, in the absence of bone marrow involvement, can be difficult to diagnose as leukemia. Few cases have been reported in the medical literature with the liver as the primary site of involvement in congenital leukemia. Awareness of this unusual clinical presentation and of the characteristic liver pathology may facilitate the pathologic diagnosis.

