21344351
Fibrolamellar carcinoma: a review with focus on genetics and comparison to other malignant primary liver tumors.
Fibrolamellar carcinoma is a rare primary malignant liver neoplasm that usually affects adolescents and young adults with no underlying liver disease. Morphologically, the tumor cells resemble oncocytic hepatocytes arranged in cords with a stroma of lamellated collagen fibers. Immunohistochemical studies have found that fibrolamellar carcinomas express markers associated with both biliary (CK7 and epithelial membrane antigen) and hepatocytic (heppar-1and glypican-3) differentiation, as well as markers associated with hepatic progenitor cells (CK19 and EpCAM) and stem cells (CD133 and CD44). Genetic studies show fewer alterations compared with classic hepatocellular carcinoma. Pooled data from comparative genomic hybridization studies show that fibrolamellar carcinomas have fewer and less frequent genomic alterations when compared with classic hepatocellular carcinoma, cholangiocarcinoma, and hepatoblastoma. Of the alterations seen in fibrolamellar carcinoma, the most frequent are gains in 1q and 8q (also frequently seen in other hepatic tumors) and loss of 18q. Fibrolamellar carcinoma also has less frequent methylation of tumor suppressor promoters compared with hepatocellular carcinoma and minimal alterations in mitochondrial DNA. Fibrolamellar carcinoma is associated with better survival than hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma, presumably due to the young age of the patients and the lack of cirrhosis. These features make more aggressive surgical therapy possible. There is currently very little information on the effectiveness of chemotherapy for fibrolamellar carcinoma.

21292820
Bortezomib enhances the efficacy of fulvestrant by amplifying the aggregation of the estrogen receptor, which leads to a proapoptotic unfolded protein response.
Fulvestrant is known to promote the degradation of the estrogen receptor (ER) in the nucleus. However, fulvestrant also promotes the aggregation of the newly synthesized ER in the cytoplasm. Accumulation of protein aggregates leads to cell death but this effect is limited as a result of their elimination by the proteasome. We tested whether combining fulvestrant with the proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib, could enhance the accumulation of ER aggregates and cause apoptotic cell death. The rate of aggregation of the ER was monitored in ER(+) breast cancer cells lines, T47D, ZR-75.1, BT474, MDA-MB-361, MCF-7, fulvestrant resistance MCF-7, and tamoxifen-resistant T47D-cyclin D1 cells. Activation of the unfolded protein response, apoptosis, and metabolic rate were also monitored in these cell lines following treatment with fulvestrant, bortezomib, or bortezomib in combination with fulvestrant. We found that bortezomib enhances the fulvestrant-mediated aggregation of the ER in the cytoplasm without blocking the degradation of the ER in the nucleus. Further, these aggregates activate a sustained unfolded protein response leading to apoptotic cell death. Further, we show that the combination induced tumor regression in a breast cancer mouse model of tamoxifen resistance. Adding bortezomib to fulvestrant enhances its efficacy by taking advantage of the unique ability of fulvestrant to promote cytoplasmic aggregates of the ER. As this effect of fulvestrant is independent of the transcriptional activity of the ER, these results suggest that this novel combination may be effective in breast cancers that are ER(+) but estrogen independent. Clin Cancer Res; 17(8); 2292-300. ©2011 AACR.

20547842
Interference with Sin3 function induces epigenetic reprogramming and differentiation in breast cancer cells.
Sin3A/B is a master transcriptional scaffold and corepressor that plays an essential role in the regulation of gene transcription and maintenance of chromatin structure, and its inappropriate recruitment has been associated with aberrant gene silencing in cancer. Sin3A/B are highly related, large, multidomian proteins that interact with a wide variety of transcription factors and corepressor components, and we examined whether disruption of the function of a specific domain could lead to epigenetic reprogramming and derepression of specific subsets of genes. To this end, we selected the Sin3A/B-paired amphipathic alpha-helices (PAH2) domain based on its established role in mediating the effects of a relatively small number of transcription factors containing a PAH2-binding motif known as the Sin3 interaction domain (SID). Here, we show that in both human and mouse breast cancer cells, the targeted disruption of Sin3 function by introduction of a SID decoy that interferes with PAH2 binding to SID-containing partner proteins reverted the silencing of genes involved in cell growth and differentiation. In particular, the SID decoy led to epigenetic reprogramming and reexpression of the important breast cancer-associated silenced genes encoding E-cadherin, estrogen receptor alpha, and retinoic acid receptor beta and impaired tumor growth in vivo. Interestingly, the SID decoy was effective in the triple-negative M.D. Anderson-Metastatic Breast-231 (MDA-MB-231) breast cancer cell line, restoring sensitivity to 17beta-estradiol, tamoxifen, and retinoids. Therefore, the development of small molecules that can block interactions between PAH2 and SID-containing proteins offers a targeted epigenetic approach for treating this type of breast cancer that may also have wider therapeutic implications.

18929564
Pivotal role of mTOR signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma.
The advent of targeted therapies in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has underscored the importance of pathway characterization to identify novel molecular targets for treatment. We evaluated mTOR signaling in human HCC, as well as the antitumoral effect of a dual-level blockade of the mTOR pathway. The mTOR pathway was assessed using integrated data from mutation analysis (direct sequencing), DNA copy number changes (SNP-array), messenger RNA levels (quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction and gene expression microarray), and protein activation (immunostaining) in 351 human samples [HCC (n = 314) and nontumoral tissue (n = 37)]. Effects of dual blockade of mTOR signaling using a rapamycin analogue (everolimus) and an epidermal/vascular endothelial growth factor receptor inhibitor (AEE788) were evaluated in liver cancer cell lines and in a xenograft model. Aberrant mTOR signaling (p-RPS6) was present in half of the cases, associated with insulin-like growth factor pathway activation, epidermal growth factor up-regulation, and PTEN dysregulation. PTEN and PI3KCA-B mutations were rare events. Chromosomal gains in RICTOR (25% of patients) and positive p-RPS6 staining correlated with recurrence. RICTOR-specific siRNA down-regulation reduced tumor cell viability in vitro. Blockage of mTOR signaling with everolimus in vitro and in a xenograft model decelerated tumor growth and increased survival. This effect was enhanced in vivo after epidermal growth factor blockade. MTOR signaling has a critical role in the pathogenesis of HCC, with evidence for the role of RICTOR in hepato-oncogenesis. MTOR blockade with everolimus is effective in vivo. These findings establish a rationale for targeting the mTOR pathway in clinical trials in HCC.

18245487
Tamoxifen stimulates the growth of cyclin D1-overexpressing breast cancer cells by promoting the activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3.
De novo or acquired resistance to tamoxifen is a major clinical challenge for the management of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancers. Although cyclin D1 overexpression is associated with a better outcome for breast cancer patients, its overexpression is also linked to tamoxifen resistance. We previously reported that the beneficial effect of cyclin D1 correlates with its ability to repress the antiapoptotic transcription factor signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). In contrast, molecular pathways linking overexpression of cyclin D1 to tamoxifen resistance have not been established. In the current study, the effect of tamoxifen on the growth of genetically matched high or low cyclin D1-expressing breast cancer cells was characterized and the interactions between cyclin D1, ER, and STAT3 in response to tamoxifen treatment were determined. We show that repression of STAT3 by cyclin D1 inhibits cell growth on Matrigel and in tumors in vivo; however, treatment with tamoxifen abolishes cyclin D1-mediated repression of STAT3 and growth suppression. We show that tamoxifen induces a redistribution of cyclin D1 from STAT3 to the ER, which results in the activation of both STAT3 and the ER. These results offer a molecular mechanism for the dual effect of cyclin D1 overexpression in breast cancer and support the notion that the level of cyclin D1 expression and activated STAT3 are important markers to predict response to tamoxifen treatment.

18156491
The MMSET protein is a histone methyltransferase with characteristics of a transcriptional corepressor.
MMSET, identified by its fusion to the IgH locus in t(4;14)-associated multiple myeloma, possesses domains found within chromatin regulators, including the SET domain. MMSET protein is overexpressed and highly associated with chromatin in myeloma cell lines carrying t(4;14). MMSET possesses methyltransferase activity for core histone H3 lysine 4 and histone 4 lysine 20, whereas MMSET made in cells only modified H4. Segments of MMSET fused to the Gal4 DNA binding domain repressed transcription of a chromatin-embedded Gal4 reporter gene. MMSET-mediated repression was associated with increased H4K20 methylation gene and loss of histone acetylation. Consistent with this repressive activity, MMSET could form a complex with HDAC1 and HDAC2, mSin3a, and the histone demethylase LSD1, suggesting that it is a component of corepressor complexes. Furthermore, MMSET coexpression enhances HDAC1- and HDAC2-mediated repression in transcriptional reporter assays. Finally, shRNA-mediated knockdown of MMSET compromised viability of a myeloma cell line, suggesting a biologic role for the protein in malignant cell growth. Collectively, these data suggest that, by acting directly as a modifier of chromatin as well as through binding of other chromatin-modifying enzymes, MMSET influences gene expression and potentially acts as a pathogenic agent in multiple myeloma.

17640361
De-regulation of common housekeeping genes in hepatocellular carcinoma.
Tumorigenesis is associated with changes in gene expression and involves many pathways. Dysregulated genes include "housekeeping" genes that are often used for normalization for quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qPCR), which may lead to unreliable results. This study assessed eight stages of hepatitis C virus (HCV) induced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) to search for appropriate genes for normalization. Gene expression profiles using microarrays revealed differential expression of most "housekeeping" genes during the course of HCV-HCC, including glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and beta-actin (ACTB), genes frequently used for normalization. QPCR reactions confirmed the regulation of these genes. Using them for normalization had strong effects on the extent of differential expressed genes, leading to misinterpretation of the results. As shown here in the case of HCV-induced HCC, the most constantly expressed gene is the arginine/serine-rich splicing factor 4 (SFRS4). The utilization of at least two genes for normalization is robust and advantageous, because they can compensate for slight differences of their expression when not co-regulated. The combination of ribosomal protein large 41 (RPL41) and SFRS4 used for normalization led to very similar results as SFRS4 alone and is a very good choice for reference in this disease as shown on four differentially expressed genes.

17504161
Targeting the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in cancer therapy.
The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway plays a central role in the degradation of proteins involved in several pathways including the cell cycle, cellular proliferation and apoptosis. Bortezomib is the first proteasome inhibitor to enter clinical use, and received approval by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of patients with multiple myeloma, therefore validating inhibition of the proteasome as an anticancer target. The approval of Bortezomib was based on a large, international, multicenter phase III trial showing its efficacy and safety compared with conventional therapy. Preclinical data also demonstrates the synergistic effect of bortezomib with other chemotherapeutic agents and its ability to overcome drug resistance. Since then several other proteasome inhibitors have been developed. The anti-tumor activities of bortezomib have been attributed to its effect on pro-apoptotic pathways including the inhibition of NF-kappaB and induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress. However, the molecular mechanisms are not fully understood. In this review, we will summarize the molecular mechanism of apoptosis by bortezomib.

17393520
Genome-wide molecular profiles of HCV-induced dysplasia and hepatocellular carcinoma.
Although HCC is the third-leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide, there is only an elemental understanding of its molecular pathogenesis. In western countries, HCV infection is the main etiology underlying this cancer's accelerating incidence. To characterize the molecular events of the hepatocarcinogenic process, and to identify new biomarkers for early HCC, the gene expression profiles of 75 tissue samples were analyzed representing the stepwise carcinogenic process from preneoplastic lesions (cirrhosis and dysplasia) to HCC, including 4 neoplastic stages (very early HCC to metastatic tumors) from patients with HCV infection. We identified gene signatures that accurately reflect the pathological progression of disease at each stage. Eight genes distinguish between control and cirrhosis, 24 between cirrhosis and dysplasia, 93 between dysplasia and early HCC, and 9 between early and advanced HCC. Using quantitative real-time reverse-transcription PCR, we validated several novel molecular tissue markers for early HCC diagnosis, specifically induction of abnormal spindle-like, microcephaly-associated protein, hyaluronan-mediated motility receptor, primase 1, erythropoietin, and neuregulin 1. In addition, pathway analysis revealed dysregulation of the Notch and Toll-like receptor pathways in cirrhosis, followed by deregulation of several components of the Jak/STAT pathway in early carcinogenesis, then upregulation of genes involved in DNA replication and repair and cell cycle in late cancerous stages. CONCLUSION: These findings provide a comprehensive molecular portrait of genomic changes in progressive HCV-related HCC.

17217047
The design of selective and non-selective combination therapy for acute promyelocytic leukemia.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is an unique subtype of acute myeloid leukemia typically carrying a specific reciprocal chromosome translocation, t(15;17), leading to the expression of a leukemia-generating fusion protein, PML-RARalpha. APL patients are responsive to APL-selective reagents such as all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) or arsenic trioxide and non-selective cytotoxic chemotherapy. Nearly all de novo APL patients undergo clinical remission when treated with ATRA plus chemotherapy or with the combinational selective therapy, ATRA plus As2O3. Combining ATRA with As2O3 as an induction followed by chemotherapy consolidation results in more profound clinical remissions compared to treatment with any agent alone or any of the other possible combinations. The mechanism of action of each of these agents differs. ATRA induces APL cell differentiation and PML-RARalpha proteolysis. As2O3 induces APL cell partial differentiation, PML-RARalpha proteolysis, and apoptosis. Chemotherapy, mainly using anthracyclines, induces APL cell death. The combined effects of selective APL therapy (ATRA and As2O3) and/or non-selective chemotherapy in APL cells in vitro and their mechanisms in relation to clinical protocol design are discussed.

