21285373
Primary cilia dynamics instruct tissue patterning and repair of corneal endothelium.
Primary cilia are required for several signaling pathways, but their function in cellular morphogenesis is poorly understood. Here we show that emergence of an hexagonal cellular pattern during development of the corneal endothelium (CE), a monolayer of neural crest-derived cells that maintains corneal transparency, depends on a precise temporal control of assembly of primary cilia that subsequently disassemble in adult corneal endothelial cells (CECs). However, cilia reassembly occurs rapidly in response to an in vivo mechanical injury and precedes basal body polarization and cellular elongation in mature CECs neighboring the wound. In contrast, CE from hypomorphic IFT88 mutants (Tg737(orpk)) or following in vivo lentiviral-mediated IFT88 knockdown display dysfunctional cilia and show disorganized patterning, mislocalization of junctional markers, and accumulation of cytoplasmic acetylated tubulin. Our results indicate an active role of cilia in orchestrating coordinated morphogenesis of CECs during development and repair and define the murine CE as a powerful in vivo system to study ciliary-based cellular dynamics.

21060046
Intraoperative floppy iris syndrome: report of a case and histopathologic analysis.
To understand the role of the ?(1A)-adrenoreceptors (ARs) in the pathophysiologic mechanism of intraoperative floppy iris syndrome (IFIS). Iris specimens from a patient with tamsulosin hydrochloride-induced IFIS were obtained during trabeculectomy. Specimens underwent histological analysis and immunohistochemical analysis with antibodies specific for actin, myoglobin, ?(1A)-ARs, and myosin. Iris specimens from a patient without IFIS were used for comparison. Samples were processed for transmission electron microscopy. Histological examination showed normal dilator muscle, arterioles, stroma, and pigment epithelium. Actin, myosin, and myoglobin distribution and intensities were similar between IFIS and non-IFIS tissue. The staining pattern and colocalization with myosin suggested that ?(1A)-ARs are present in iris arteriolar muscularis in addition to the dilator muscle in both IFIS and control irides. Significantly less staining of IFIS tissue was found compared with the non-IFIS iris. Ultrastructures of melanocytes and stroma appeared to be normal. Iris arterioles possessed thick endothelial basement membranes, semilongitudinally oriented muscularis, and abundant perivascular collagen coats. We confirm the presence of ?(1A)-ARs in human iris by results of immunohistochemical analysis. The ?(1A)-ARs localize to iris arteriolar muscularis in addition to the iris dilator muscle. This localization suggests that IFIS may develop because of iris vascular dysfunction and that iris vasculature may have structural in addition to nutritive functions.

19737878
Gene expression changes in areas of focal loss of retinal ganglion cells in the retina of DBA/2J mice.
Purpose. To determine whether differences in gene expression occur between areas of focal retinal ganglion cell (RGC) loss and of relative RGC preservation in the DBA/2 mouse retina and whether they can provide insight into the pathophysiology of glaucoma. Methods. Areas of focal RGC loss (judged by lack of Fluorogold labeling; Fluorochrome, Denver, CO), adjacent areas with relative RGC preservation in DBA/2 retina, and Fluorogold-labeled retina from DBA/2(-pe) (pearl) mice were dissected and used for microarray analysis. RT-PCR and immunoblot analysis were used to confirm differential gene expression. Bioinformatic analysis was used to identify gene networks affected in the glaucomatous retina. Results. Microarray analysis identified 372 and 115 gene chip IDs as up- and downregulated, respectively, by 0.5-fold in areas of RGC loss. Differentially expressed genes included those coding for cytoskeletal proteins, enzymes, transport proteins, extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, and immune response proteins. Several genes were confirmed by RT-PCR. For at least two genes, differential protein expression was verified. Bioinformatics analysis identified multiple affected functional gene networks. Pearl mice appeared to have significantly different gene expression, even when compared with relatively preserved areas of the DBA/2 retina. Conclusions. Regional gene expression changes occur in areas of focal RGC loss in the DBA/2 retina. The genes involved code for proteins with diverse cellular functions. Further investigation is needed to determine the cellular localization of the expression of these genes during the development of spontaneous glaucoma in the DBA/2 mouse and to determine whether some of these gene expression changes are causative or protective of RGC loss.

18515586
Comparison of anterior segment structures in two rat glaucoma models: an ultrasound biomicroscopic study.
Optic nerve disease in chronic IOP elevation rat glaucoma models develops at different rates. This study was undertaken to investigate whether anterior chamber (AC) changes develop in two popular models in vivo and whether the changes are related to IOP. Ten female Wistar rats and 12 male Brown-Norway rats were subjected to episcleral vein cauterization (EVC) and hypertonic saline episcleral vein sclerosis (HSEVS), respectively. Contralateral untreated eyes served as controls. IOP was recorded for a period of 5 to 6 weeks, and with the rats under anesthesia, the eyes were imaged with an ultrasound biomicroscope. Measurements of the AC depth (ACD), trabecular-iris angle (TIA), iris thickness at the thickest point near the pupillary margin (IT), angle opening distance (AOD; at 200 microm from the scleral spur), and ciliary body area (CBA) were compared between control eyes of the two strains and between experimental and control eyes within each strain. The differences were correlated with IOP history. Eyes subjected to EVC demonstrated greater increases in IOP than eyes subjected to HSEVS. Between rat strains, control eyes differed significantly in all the parameters studied, except for ACD. No difference was detected between experimental and control eyes in the EVC group. In contrast, experimental eyes in the HSEVS group had approximately 71% larger ACDs and approximately 32% smaller CBAs than did the contralateral control eyes (P < 0.001). ACD and CBA correlated well (R2 = 0.80 and 0.51, respectively) with IOP in the HSEVS group. Two of the experimental eyes in this group showed the presence of ultrasound-scattering material in the AC. Despite apparently higher IOP exposure, eyes in the EVC rat model of glaucoma do not undergo changes in the AC. In contrast, eyes subjected to HSEVS display deepening of the AC and reduction in size of the ciliary body within 5 to 6 weeks. These changes correlate to IOP exposure and may be the result of specific changes induced by the experimental intervention. These models are likely to rely on different mechanisms of pressure elevation and cannot be used interchangeably.

17224751
Noninvasive determination of intraocular pressure (IOP) in nonsedated mice of 5 different inbred strains.
Noninvasive intraocular pressure (IOP) measurement in mice is critically important for understanding the pathophysiology of glaucoma. Rebound tonometry is one of the methods that can be used for obtaining such measurements. We evaluated the ability of the rebound tonometer (RT) to determine IOP differences among various mouse strains and whether differences in corneal thickness may affect IOP measurements in these animals. Five different commonly used mouse strains (BALB/C, CBA/CAHN, AKR/J, CBA/J, and 129P3/J) were used. IOP was measured in eyes from 12 nonsedated animals (6 male and 6 female) from each strain at 2 to 3 months of age using the RT. IOPs were measured in all animals, on 2 different days between 10 AM and 12 PM. Subsequently, a number of eyes from each strain were cannulated to provide a calibration curve specific for that strain. Tonometer readings for all strains were converted to apparent IOP values using the calibration data obtained from the calibration curve of the respective strain. For comparison purposes, IOP values were also obtained using the C57BL/6 calibration data previously reported. IOP for the 5 strains, male and female animals, and the different occasion of measurement were compared using repeat measures analysis of variance. The central corneal thickness (CCT) of another group of 8 male animals from each of the 5 strains was also measured using an optical low coherence reflectometry (OLCR) pachymeter modified for use with mice. CCT values were correlated to mean IOPs of male animals and to the slopes and intercept of individual strain calibration curves. Noninvasive IOP measurements confirm that the BALB/C strain has lower and the CBA/CAHN has higher relative IOPs than other mouse strains while the AKR/J, the CBA/J, and the 129P3/J strains have intermediate IOPs. There is a very good correlation of apparent IOP values obtained by RT with previously reported true IOPs obtained by cannulation. There was a small but statistically significant difference in IOP between male and female animals in 2 strains (129P3/J and AKR/J) with female mice having higher relative IOPs. No correlation between CCT and IOP was detected. CCT did not correlate with any of the constants describing the calibration curves in the various strains. Noninvasive IOP measurement in mice using the RT can be used to help elucidate IOP phenotype, after prior calibration of the tonometer. CCT has no effect on mouse IOP measurements using the RT.

