21092800
The Bentall procedure: is it the gold standard? A series of 597 consecutive cases.
We compared aortic root reconstructions using conduits with biological valves and mechanical valves. Of 597 patients (1995-2008), 307 (mean age 71 years [23-89 years]) had biological valves and 290 (mean age 51 years [21-82 years]) had mechanical valves. The subgroup of 242 patients aged 50 to 70 years included 133 with biological and 109 with mechanical valves. Overall hospital mortality was 3.9% with biological valves (n = 15; elective: 3.7% [n = 10]) versus 2.8% with mechanical valves (n = 8; elective: 1.4% [n = 3]). In patients 50 to 70 years, age greater than 65 years (relative risk: 3.3 [P = .0001]), clot (relative risk: 2.5 [P = .05]), coronary artery disease (relative risk:3.5 [P < .0001]), and degenerative etiology (relative risk: 0.4 [P = .006]) were independent risk factors for long-term survival (after postoperative day 30); there was no difference in long-term survival between biological and mechanical valves (relative risk: 0.9 [P = .74]). The linearized rate for valve/ascending aorta reoperation was 0.86%/pt-y (2 in 2310 pt-y) after mechanical valves and 2.5%/pt-y (4 in 1586 pt-y) after Bentall procedures with the biological valve. The choice of valve for aortic root reconstruction seems to have no influence on long-term outcome. Emergency operation and the presence of clot/atheroma have a significant impact on short-term outcome. Reoperation for either ascending aorta and/or aortic valve is low.

20880370
Adding emotional stressors to training in simulated cardiopulmonary arrest enhances participant performance.
Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) skills tend to degrade over time. There is mounting evidence that high-fidelity simulation (HFS) is advantageous to teaching ACLS. The aspects of HFS that enhance learning are not entirely clear, but the anxiety generated by a scenario may enhance retention through well-established learning pathways. We sought to determine whether an HFS with added emotional stress could provoke anxiety and, if so, whether or not participants learning ACLS would demonstrate better written and applied knowledge retention 6 months after their initial course. Twenty-five student volunteers from Year 1 and 2 at Mount Sinai School of Medicine were randomly assigned to a control group or an emotional content (EC) group for a sudden cardiac death management course. All subjects were monitored for heart rate and were assessed using the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Control group participants experienced an HFS in which actors were not scripted to add stress, whereas EC group participants were exposed to an emotionally charged environment using the same actors. Participants across the two groups were well matched by resting heart rates, baseline anxiety and prior ACLS knowledge. The EC group participants experienced greater anxiety than controls (mean state anxiety score: 35.0 versus 28.2 [p<0.05]; average heart rate [HR]: 94.6 bpm versus 72.9 bpm [p<0.05]; maximum HR: 120.8 bpm versus 95.3 bpm [p<0.05]). Six months later, written test scores were similar, but the EC group participants achieved higher practical competency examination ('mega code') scores than controls (32.5 versus 25.0; p<0.05). Independent t-tests and Spearman rank coefficients were employed where applicable. Simulation with added emotional stressors led to greater anxiety during ACLS instruction but correlated with enhanced performance of ACLS skills after this course. The quantitative and qualitative values of added stressors need further exploration, but these values represent important variables in simulation-based education.

20841364
The efficacy of post-cardiopulmonary bypass dosing of vancomycin in cardiac surgery.
Objective. Vancomycin is administered widely to patients undergoing cardiac surgery as prophylaxis against resistant Gram-positive sternal wound and venous donor site infections. The purpose of this study was to determine the efficacy of a standardized prebypass and postbypass dosing regimen of vancomycin by assessing plasma concentrations in the immediate postoperative period and postoperative surgical site infections (SSIs). Design. Retrospective cohort study. Setting . Cardiothoracic surgical intensive care unit in a tertiary care academic medical center. Methods. A total of 34 consecutive adult patients who had undergone cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) were analyzed retrospectively. Each patient received 1000 mg of vancomycin administered over 1 hour around the time of induction of anesthesia and 500 mg after discontinuation of CPB. Trough vancomycin levels were sampled in the intensive care unit 12 hours after the last dose given in the operating room. Along with patient characteristics, postoperative readmission rates and SSIs were recorded for 1 year after surgery. Results. The nadir serum vancomycin level before the next dose was 9.3 ± 4.5 µg/mL (mean ± standard deviation). One superficial SSI was noted. Readmission rate for SSIs was 2.94%. Conclusion . Vancomycin concentrations in the serum were greater than the minimum inhibitory concentration for most staphylococci ranging from 4 to 19.3 µg/mL producing acceptable therapeutic serum concentrations and low rate of infectious complications. Thus postbypass dosing is acceptable in vancomycin cardiac surgical prophylaxis.

20647262
Predictive model for postoperative delirium in cardiac surgical patients.
Delirium is a common complication following cardiac surgery, and the predictors of delirium remain unclear. The authors performed a prospective observational analysis to develop a predictive model for postoperative delirium using demographic and procedural parameters. A total of 112 adult postoperative cardiac surgical patients were evaluated twice daily for delirium using the Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS) and Confusion Assessment Model for the ICU (CAM-ICU). The incidence of delirium was 34% (n = 38). Increased age (odds ratio [OR] = 2.5; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.6-3.9; P < .0001, per 10 years) and increased duration of surgery (OR = 1.3; 95% CI = 1.1-1.5; P = .0002, per 30 minutes) were independently associated with postoperative delirium. Gender, BMI, diabetes mellitus, preoperative ejection fraction, surgery type, length of cardiopulmonary bypass, intraoperative blood component administration, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II score, Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score, and Charlson Comorbidity Index, were not independently associated with postoperative delirium.

19833534
Inadequate visualization and reporting of ventricular function from transthoracic echocardiography after cardiac surgery.
The purpose of this study was to determine the incidence of and risk factors for inadequate reporting of ventricular function from transthoracic echocardiography after cardiac surgery. A retrospective study of cardiac surgical patients at 1 university hospital. The first 300 consecutive patients who had transthoracic echocardiogram within the first 7 days after cardiac surgery. None. The primary outcomes for this study were inadequate visualization of the left ventricle, the right ventricle, or both ventricles. Analysis of data from 300 patients identified inadequate imaging of the left ventricle in 50 (17%) cases, inadequate imaging of the right ventricle in 112 (37%) cases, inadequate imaging of both ventricles in 37 (12%) cases, and inadequate imaging of either the left or right ventricle in 125 (42%) cases. Increasing age, earlier postoperative day, male sex, and median sternotomy were associated with inadequate imaging. Transthoracic imaging is often inadequate in patients who have undergone recent cardiac surgery. Patient and surgical characteristics influence reporting of right and left ventricular function.

18848502
Progression to colorectal neoplasia in ulcerative colitis: effect of mesalamine.
Some studies have suggested that mesalamine can prevent the development of colorectal cancer in patients with ulcerative colitis (UC). The aim of this study was to compare rates of progression with advanced neoplasia in patient cohorts with UC taking low and high doses of mesalamine and to determine where in the process of neoplastic progression mesalamine might act. Three cohorts of UC patients were identified from an institutional database: 311 patients with no dysplasia (NoD), 56 with indefinite dysplasia (IND), and 26 with flat low-grade dysplasia (fLGD). The impact of mesalamine exposure on the subsequent development of advanced neoplasia (high-grade dysplasia or colorectal cancer) was assessed using life-table methods. Seventeen of 311 patients with NoD progressed to advanced neoplasia (5-year rate, 1.1%). This rate was lower than the 5-year rate for the IND (9%; P = .02 vs NoD) and fLGD (45%; P < .001 vs NoD and P = .001 vs IND) cohorts. Among the NoD cohort, the hazard ratio for mesalamine users versus nonusers was 0.70 (95% confidence interval, 0.20-2.44), and for each 1 g/d increase in dose, the hazard ratio was 0.92 (95% confidence interval, 0.58-1.47). For patients with IND, no patients on greater than 2 g/d progressed versus 13.8% on low-dose mesalamine (P = .11). For fLGD, 62.5% on high dose progressed, versus 27.8% on low dose (P = .054). In long-standing UC, patients with fLGD have a higher rate of progression to advanced neoplasia than those with NoD or IND. However, at none of these stages of disease did mesalamine use show definitive chemopreventive activity.

18844620
Chromoendoscopy-targeted biopsies are superior to standard colonoscopic surveillance for detecting dysplasia in inflammatory bowel disease patients: a prospective endoscopic trial.
Patients with extensive, longstanding chronic ulcerative or Crohn's colitis face greater risks of developing colorectal cancer. Current standard surveillance relies on detecting dysplasia using random sampling at colonoscopy but may fail to detect dysplasia in many patients. Dye spraying techniques have been reported to aid in detecting otherwise subtle mucosal abnormalities in the setting of colitis. We prospectively compared dye-spray technique using methylene blue to standard colonoscopic surveillance in detecting dysplasia. One hundred fifteen patients were referred to the Chromoendoscopy Study Group and prospectively screened for the study. One hundred two (64 M, 38 F) (79 UC 23 CC) patients meeting the inclusion criteria were enrolled. Following a standard bowel preparation, each patient was examined using standard office endoscopic equipment by three methods: (a) standard surveillance colonoscopy with four random biopsies every 10 cm (for a total of at least 32 samples); (b) a targeted biopsy protocol; and finally (c) methylene blue (0.01%) dye spray was segmentally applied throughout the colon and any pit-pattern abnormality or lesion rendered visible by the dye spray was targeted and biopsied. Each patient had a single examination, which included two passes of the colonoscope. Specimens were reviewed in a blinded fashion by a single gastrointestinal pathologist. The three methods were then compared with each patient serving as his or her own control. Targeted biopsies with dye spray revealed significantly more dysplasia (16 patients with low grade and 1 patient with high grade) than random biopsies (3 patients with low-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.001) and more than targeted nondye spray (8 patients with low-grade and 1 patient with high-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.057). Targeted biopsies with and without dye spray detected dysplasia in 20 patients compared with 3 using Method (a) (P= 0.0002, two-tailed exact McNemar's Test). There were no adverse events. Colonoscopic surveillance of chronic colitis patients using methylene blue dye-spray targeted biopsies results in improved dysplasia yield compared to conventional random and targeted biopsy methods. Accordingly, this technique warrants incorporation into clinical practice in this setting and consideration as a standard of care for these patients. The value of multiple random biopsies as a surveillance technique should be revisited.

18603059
Extubation in the operating room after congenital heart surgery in children.
Early extubation in the operating room after surgery for congenital heart disease has been described; however, postoperative mechanical ventilation in the intensive care unit remains common practice in many institutions. The goal of this study was to identify perioperative factors associated with not proceeding with planned operating room extubation. We performed a retrospective chart review of 224 patients (aged 1 month to 18 years, median 20 months) undergoing surgery for congenital heart defects requiring cardiopulmonary bypass. Patients mechanically ventilated preoperatively were excluded. A stepwise logistic regression model was used to test for the independent influence of various perioperative factors on extubation in the operating room. Overall, 79% of patients were extubated in the operating room. Younger age and longer cardiopulmonary bypass time were the strongest predictors for not extubating. Each step down to a younger age group (<2, 2-4, 4-6, 6-12, >12 months) reduced the chance of extubation in the operating room by 56%. Cardiopulmonary bypass time for more than 150 minutes was associated with an 11.8-fold increased risk of not being extubated. Male gender and high inotrope requirement after cardiopulmonary bypass were also significantly associated with fewer children being extubated. Extubation in the operating room after surgery for congenital heart disease was successful in the majority of patients. The strongest independent risk factors for failure of this strategy included younger age and longer cardiopulmonary bypass time.

18392679
Atorvastatin does not improve liver biochemistries or Mayo Risk Score in primary biliary cirrhosis.
Statin treatment reduces hypercholesterolemia and may be anti-inflammatory. Case reports noted decreased alkaline phosphatase and histological improvement following statin treatment in primary biliary cirrhosis. The objective of this study was to assess the long-term effects of statin treatment in primary biliary cirrhosis. A retrospective analysis compared clinical and biochemical data from 15 hypercholesterolemic individuals with primary biliary cirrhosis who were treated long-term with atorvastatin with an age and gender matched, primary biliary cirrhosis control group. A significant decrease in total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol (p < or = 0.002) was observed throughout atorvastatin treatment (median time 2.5 years). LDL-cholesterol levels in the control group were not significantly changed after 2 years (p > 0.050). No significant changes were noted in alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin and Mayo Risk Score in either group (p > 0.05). Long-term atorvastatin treatment reduced LDL-cholesterol in primary biliary cirrhosis, but there was no evidence of any anti-inflammatory effect.

18374757
Optimizing selective cerebral perfusion: deleterious effects of high perfusion pressures.
Selective cerebral perfusion is a proven adjunct to hypothermia for neuroprotection in complex aortic surgery. The ideal conditions for the provision of selective cerebral perfusion, however, including optimal perfusion pressure, remain unknown. We investigated the effects of various perfusion pressures during selective cerebral perfusion on cerebral physiology and outcome in a long-term porcine model. Thirty piglets (26.3 +/- 1.4 kg), cooled to 20 degrees C on cardiopulmonary bypass with alpha-stat pH management (mean hematocrit 23.6%), were randomly assigned to 90 minutes of selective cerebral perfusion at a pressure of 50 (group A), 70 (group B), or 90 (group C) mm Hg. With fluorescent microspheres and sagittal sinus sampling, cerebral blood flow and cerebral oxygen metabolism were assessed at baseline, after cooling, at two points during selective cerebral perfusion, and for 2 hours after cardiopulmonary bypass. Visual evoked potentials were monitored during recovery. Neurobehavioral scores were assessed blindly from standardized videotaped sessions for 7 postoperative days. Cerebral blood flow during selective cerebral perfusion was significantly increased by higher-pressure perfusion (P = .04), although all groups sustained similar levels of cerebral oxygen metabolism during selective cerebral perfusion (P = .88). After the end of cardiopulmonary bypass, the cerebral oxygen metabolism increased to above baseline in all groups, with the highest levels seen in group C (P = .06). Intracranial pressure was significantly higher during selective cerebral perfusion in group C (P = .0002); visual evoked potentials did not differ among groups. Neurobehavioral scores were significantly better in group A (P = .0002). Selective cerebral perfusion at 50 mm Hg provides neuroprotection superior to that at higher pressures. The increased cerebral blood flow with higher-pressure selective cerebral perfusion is associated with cerebral injury, reflected by high post-cardiopulmonary bypass cerebral oxygen metabolism and poorer neurobehavioral recovery.

17720376
Preservation of spinal cord function after extensive segmental artery sacrifice: regional variations in perfusion.
Sacrifice of intercostal and lumbar arteries simplifies thoracoabdominal aneurysm surgery and enables endovascular stenting. Little is known about alterations in cord perfusion after extensive segmental artery sacrifice. We explored this question using hypothermia to reduce metabolism. Twelve juvenile Yorkshire pigs (mean weight, 22.3 kg) were randomized to segmental artery sacrifice at 32 degrees C or 37 degrees C. Cord integrity was assessed with myogenic-evoked potential (MEP) monitoring. Stepwise craniocaudal sacrifice of segmental arteries was continued until MEP diminution occurred; the last segmental artery was then reopened. Fluorescent microspheres were used to measure spinal cord blood flow (SCBF) at baseline, 5 minutes, 1 hour, and 3 hours after segmental artery sacrifice. Hind limb function was monitored for 5 days. All animals recovered normal hind limb function. At 32 degrees C, more segmental arteries, 16.5 versus 15 (p = 0.03), could be sacrificed without MEP loss. Baseline SCBF at 32 degrees C was 50% that at 37 degrees C (p = 0.003) and remained fairly stable throughout. At 37 degrees C, SCBF to the craniocaudal extremes of the cord (C1 to T3 and L2 to L6) increased markedly (p = 0.01) at 1 hour and returned toward normal at 3 hours. Concomitantly, SCBF fell in the middle portion of the cord (T9 to T13) at 1 hour before returning to normal at 3 hours. Almost all segmental arteries can be sacrificed with preservation of spinal cord function. No major change occurs in the central cord in normothermic animals, but there is significant transient hyperemia in segments adjacent to extrasegmental vessels. Hypothermia reduces SCBF and abolishes this possible steal phenomenon. Metabolic and hemodynamic manipulation should enable routine sacrifice of all segmental arteries without spinal cord injury.

17720373
Perfusing the cold brain: optimal neuroprotection for aortic surgery.
Selective cerebral perfusion (SCP) may enhance the neuroprotective benefits of hypothermia during aortic surgery. However, despite its widespread adoption, there is no consensus regarding optimal implementation of SCP. We used a survival porcine model to explore the physiologic characteristics and behavioral benefits of various protocols involving hypothermic circulatory arrest (HCA) and SCP. Thirty pigs (26.3 +/- 1.4 kg), cooled to 15 degrees C on cardiopulmonary bypass, using alpha-stat pH management (mean hematocrit 30%), were randomly allocated to differing brain protection strategies: 90 minutes of HCA (group A); 30 minutes of HCA, then 60 minutes of SCP (group B); or 90 minutes of SCP (group C). Using fluorescent microspheres and sagittal sinus sampling, cerebral blood flow (CBF [mL x 100g(-1) x min(-1)]) and cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen (CMRO2 [mL x 100g(-1) x min(-1)]) were assessed at baseline, after cooling, during SCP (where applicable), and for 2 hours after cardiopulmonary bypass. Neurobehavioral scores were assessed blindly from standardized videotaped sessions for 7 days postoperatively. Cerebral blood flow was significantly higher (p = 0.0001) during SCP (60 and 90 minutes) if preceded by HCA. The CMRO2 was also significantly higher in group B versus group C (p = 0.016) at 60 minutes. The CMRO2 in all three groups rebounded promptly toward baseline after weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass. Postoperative neurobehavioral scores were significantly worse in group A. Continuous SCP provides the best brain protection overall. However, an initial period of HCA does not seem to impair late outcome; perhaps the elevated CBF and CMRO2 observed reflect a beneficial cerebral response to a recoverable insult. Clearly, 90 minutes of HCA induces permanent brain injury, even in this carefully controlled setting.

17644341
Avoidance of hemodilution during selective cerebral perfusion enhances neurobehavioral outcome in a survival porcine model.
The ideal hematocrit (HCT) level during hypothermic selective cerebral perfusion (SCP)--to ensure adequate oxygen delivery without excessive perfusion--has not yet been determined. Twenty pigs (26.0+/-2.6 kg) were randomized to low or high HCT management. The cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) circuit was primed with crystalloid in the low HCT group (21+/-1%), and with donor blood in the high HCT group (30+/-1%). Pigs were cooled to 20 degrees C and SCP was carried out for 90 min. During rewarming, whole blood was added in the low HCT group and crystalloid in the high HCT group to produce equivalent HCT levels by the end of the procedure. Using fluorescent microspheres and sagittal sinus sampling, cerebral blood flow (CBF) and oxygen metabolism (CMRO2) were assessed at baseline, after cooling, at two points during SCP (30 and 90 min), and at 15 min and 2 h post-CPB. In addition, a range of physiological and metabolic parameters, including intracranial pressure (ICP), were recorded throughout the procedure. The animals' behavior was videotaped and assessed blindly for 7 days postoperatively (maximum score=5). HCT levels were equivalent at baseline, 2 h post-CPB, and at sacrifice, but significantly different (p<0.0001) during cooling and SCP. Mean arterial pressure, pH and pCO2, and CMRO2 were equivalent between groups throughout. ICP was similar in the two groups throughout cooling, SCP, and rewarming, but was significantly higher in the low HCT animals after the termination of CPB. CBF was similar at baseline, but thereafter markedly higher in the low HCT group. Neurobehavioral performance was significantly better in the high HCT animals (median score 3.5 vs 4.5 on day 3, and 4.5 vs 4.75 on day 7, p=0.003). Higher HCT levels for SCP produced a significantly superior functional outcome, suggesting that the higher CBF with a lower HCT may be injurious, possibly because of an increased embolic load.

17198797
The fate of the distal aorta after repair of acute type A aortic dissection.
The residual aorta's behavior after repair of acute type A dissection is incompletely understood. We analyzed segmental growth rates, distal reoperation, and factors influencing long-term survival. One hundred seventy-nine consecutive patients (70% male; mean age, 60 years) with acute type A dissection underwent aggressive resection of the intimal tear and open distal anastomosis (1986-2003). Hospital mortality was 13.4%. Survivors had serial computed tomographic scans: digitization yielded distal segmental dimensions. Segment-specific average rates of enlargement and factors influencing faster growth were analyzed. Distal reoperations and patient survival were examined. Eighty-nine (57%) patients had imaging data sufficient for growth rate calculations. The median diameters after repair were as follows: aortic arch, 3.6 cm; descending aorta, 3.7 cm; and abdominal aorta, 3.2 cm. Subsequent growth rates were 0.8, 1.0, and 0.8 mm/y, respectively. Initial size of greater than 4 cm (P = .005) and initial diameter of less than 4 cm with a patent false lumen (P = .004) predicted greater growth in the descending aorta, and male sex (P = .05) significantly affected growth in the abdominal aorta. No significant factors were found for the aortic arch. There were 25 distal aortic reoperations (16 patients), and risk of reoperation was 16% at 10 years. Risk factors reducing long-term survival after repair of acute type A dissection included age (P < .0001), new neurological deficit at presentation (P = .04), absence of preoperative thrombus in the false lumen of the ascending aorta (P = .03), and a patent distal false lumen postoperatively (P = .06) but not distal reoperation. Growth of the distal aorta after repair of acute type A dissection is typically slow and linear. Distal reoperation is uncommon, and late risk of death is approximately twice that of a healthy population.

20626383
Clinical trial: 2-L polyethylene glycol-based lavage solutions for colonoscopy preparation - a randomized, single-blind study of two formulations.
The 2-L polyethylene glycol (PEG) lavage solutions provide efficacy similar to that of standard 4-L PEG formulations in spite of the reduced volume. The comparative efficacy and tolerability of two formulations of 2-L PEG solution remain unknown. To assess the efficacy, safety and tolerability of PEG + Bis compared with PEG + Asc, and to study the effect of bowel cleansing quality on adenoma detection rates. Patients were randomized to receive either 2-L PEG with ascorbic acid (PEG + Asc) or 2-L PEG plus bisacodyl 10 mg (PEG + Bis). The primary endpoint was overall colon cleansing score, assessed by blinded investigators using a validated four-point scale. Secondary endpoints included adenoma detection rate, patient tolerability and compliance and adverse events. Fifty-two patients received PEG + Asc and 55 patients received PEG + Bis. Overall colon cleansing scores (+/-s.d.) were 1.40 +/- 0.69 and 1.75 +/- 0.70 (P < 0.003) in the PEG + Asc and PEG + Bis groups, respectively. Excellent and good ratings were recorded in 69% and 23% receiving PEG + Asc compared to 38% and 51% (P = 0.01) of patients receiving PEG + Bis. More adenomas were detected in colonoscopies performed with PEG + Asc (39%) than in those performed with PEG + Bis (20%) (P = 0.04). Patient tolerability and safety were similar with both preparations. The use of PEG + Asc resulted in better colon cleansing and higher adenoma detection rates compared with PEG + Bis.

19183162
A randomized, placebo-controlled study of the effects of naproxen, aspirin, celecoxib or clopidogrel on gastroduodenal mucosal healing.
Many individuals with gastroduodenal ulcers require on-going, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) or anti-platelet therapy. To evaluate the effects of these agents on gastroduodenal mucosal healing. Helicobacter pylori-negative volunteers were randomized to receive naproxen, celecoxib, aspirin, clopidogrel or placebo. Antral and duodenal lesions were created endoscopically with a biopsy forceps. After 7 days of medication dosing, each lesion was scored [from 0 (low) to 8 (high)] using a validated methodology. The primary endpoint was the mean injury score. The secondary endpoint was the percentage of subjects with > or = 1 unhealed lesion. In all, 108 subjects completed the study. Naproxen impaired antral lesion healing more than placebo, clopidogrel, aspirin or celecoxib (mean injury score of 4.3 vs. 3.0, 2.7, 3.2, and 3.2, respectively, P < 0.05). Naproxen impaired duodenal lesion healing more than placebo, clopidogrel or aspirin (mean injury score of 4.0 vs. 2.4, 2.6, and 2.2, respectively, P < 0.05). More subjects taking naproxen than placebo or clopidogrel had > or =1 unhealed antral lesions (72.2% vs. 36.0% and 32.0%, respectively, P < 0.05) and unhealed duodenal lesions (61.1% vs. 16.0% and 28.0%, respectively, P < 0.05). Naproxen may impair gastroduodenal healing more than aspirin or celecoxib in H. pylori negative subjects. Clopidogrel did not impair mucosal healing.

