21552260
Nemo kinase phosphorylates ?-catenin to promote ommatidial rotation and connects core PCP factors to E-cadherin-?-catenin.
Frizzled planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling regulates cell motility in several tissues, including ommatidial rotation in Drosophila melanogaster. The Nemo kinase (Nlk in vertebrates) has also been linked to cell-motility regulation and ommatidial rotation but its mechanistic role(s) during rotation remain obscure. We show that nemo functions throughout the entire rotation movement, increasing the rotation rate. Genetic and molecular studies indicate that Nemo binds both the core PCP factor complex of Strabismus-Prickle, as well as the E-cadherin-?-catenin (E-cadherin-Armadillo in Drosophila) complex. These two complexes colocalize and, like Nemo, also promote rotation. Strabismus (also called Vang) binds and stabilizes Nemo asymmetrically within the ommatidial precluster; Nemo and ?-catenin then act synergistically to promote rotation, which is mediated in vivo by Nemo's phosphorylation of ?-catenin. Our data suggest that Nemo serves as a conserved molecular link between core PCP factors and E-cadherin-?-catenin complexes, promoting cell motility.

21316583
A new piece to the unsolved planar cell polarity puzzle.
Wnt-Frizzled/Planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling is a conserved mechanism establishing cellular orientation across animal species. Many aspects of PCP-signaling regulation remain, however, poorly understood. A new paper establishes a potential link from Wnt5a to asymmetric PCP-factor localization via their phosphorylation.

21285373
Primary cilia dynamics instruct tissue patterning and repair of corneal endothelium.
Primary cilia are required for several signaling pathways, but their function in cellular morphogenesis is poorly understood. Here we show that emergence of an hexagonal cellular pattern during development of the corneal endothelium (CE), a monolayer of neural crest-derived cells that maintains corneal transparency, depends on a precise temporal control of assembly of primary cilia that subsequently disassemble in adult corneal endothelial cells (CECs). However, cilia reassembly occurs rapidly in response to an in vivo mechanical injury and precedes basal body polarization and cellular elongation in mature CECs neighboring the wound. In contrast, CE from hypomorphic IFT88 mutants (Tg737(orpk)) or following in vivo lentiviral-mediated IFT88 knockdown display dysfunctional cilia and show disorganized patterning, mislocalization of junctional markers, and accumulation of cytoplasmic acetylated tubulin. Our results indicate an active role of cilia in orchestrating coordinated morphogenesis of CECs during development and repair and define the murine CE as a powerful in vivo system to study ciliary-based cellular dynamics.

21276726
Intertissue mechanical stress affects Frizzled-mediated planar cell polarity in the Drosophila notum epidermis.
Frizzled/planar cell polarity (Fz/PCP) signaling controls the orientation of sensory bristles and cellular hairs (trichomes) along the anteroposterior axis of the Drosophila thorax (notum). A subset of the trichome-producing notum cells differentiate as "tendon cells," serving as attachment sites for the indirect flight muscles (IFMs) to the exoskeleton. Through the analysis of chascon (chas), a gene identified by its ability to disrupt Fz/PCP signaling under overexpression conditions, and jitterbug (jbug)/filamin, we show that maintenance of anteroposterior planar polarization requires the notum epithelia to balance mechanical stress generated by the attachment of the IFMs. chas is expressed in notum tendon cells, and its loss of function disturbs cellular orientation at and near the regions where IFMs attach to the epidermis. This effect is independent of the Fz/PCP and fat/dachsous systems. The chas phenotype arises during normal shortening of the IFMs and is suppressed by genetic ablation of the IFMs. chas acts through jbug/filamin and cooperates with MyosinII to modulate the mechanoresponse of notum tendon cells. These observations support the notion that the ability of epithelia to respond to mechanical stress generated by one or more interactions with other tissues during development and organogenesis influences the maintenance of its shape and PCP features.

20837657
Abelson family kinases regulate Frizzled planar cell polarity signaling via Dsh phosphorylation.
Abelson (Abl) family tyrosine kinases have been implicated in cell morphogenesis, adhesion, motility, and oncogenesis. Using a candidate approach for genes involved in planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling, we identified Drosophila Abl (dAbl) as a modulator of Frizzled(Fz)/PCP signaling. We demonstrate that dAbl positively regulates the Fz/Dishevelled (Dsh) PCP pathway without affecting canonical Wnt/Wg-Fz signaling. Genetic dissection suggests that Abl functions via Fz/Dsh signaling in photoreceptor R3 specification, a well-established Fz-PCP signaling readout. Molecular analysis shows that dAbl binds and phosphorylates Dsh on Tyr473 within the DEP domain. This phosphorylation event on Dsh is functionally critical, as the equivalent DshY473F mutant is nonfunctional in PCP signaling and stable membrane association, although it rescues canonical Wnt signaling. Strikingly, mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) deficient for Abl1 and Abl2/Arg genes also show reduced Dvl2 phosphorylation as compared with control MEFs, and this correlates with a change in subcellular localization of endogenous Dvl2. As in Drosophila, such Abl-deficient MEFs show no change in canonical Wnt signaling. Taken together, our results argue for a conserved role of Abl family members in the positive regulation of Dsh activity toward Fz-Dsh/PCP signaling by Dsh phosphorylation.

20813254
A new spin on planar cell polarity.
The generation of planar cell polarity (PCP) and tissue shape during morphogenesis is tightly linked, but it is not clear how. Aigouy et al. (2010) now show in the developing Drosophila wing that PCP initially has a radial orientation that becomes realigned to the proximal-distal axis of organ shape by mechanical forces and cell rearrangements mediated by Dachsous.

19789178
Centrosomal localization of Diversin and its relevance to Wnt signaling.
Wnt pathways regulate many developmental processes, including cell-fate specification, cell polarity, and cell movements during morphogenesis. The subcellular distribution of pathway mediators in specific cellular compartments might be crucial for the selection of pathway targets and signaling specificity. We find that the ankyrin-repeat protein Diversin, which functions in different Wnt signaling branches, localizes to the centrosome in Xenopus ectoderm and mammalian cells. Upon stimulation with Wnt ligands, the centrosomal distribution of Diversin is transformed into punctate cortical localization. Also, Diversin was recruited by Frizzled receptors to non-homogeneous Dishevelled-containing cortical patches. Importantly, Diversin deletion constructs, which did not localize to the centrosome, failed to efficiently antagonize Wnt signaling. Furthermore, a C-terminal construct that interfered with Diversin localization inhibited Diversin-mediated beta-catenin degradation. These observations suggest that the centrosomal localization of Diversin is crucial for its function in Wnt signaling.

19563796
The apical/basal-polarity determinant Scribble cooperates with the PCP core factor Stbm/Vang and functions as one of its effectors.
Most tissues display several features of cellular polarization. Besides the ubiquitous epithelial polarization in the Apical-Basal (A/B) axis, many epithelia (and associated organs) display a Planar Cell Polarization (PCP). Recently, a crosstalk between the PCP and A/B polarity determinants has been suggested, i.e. the activity or stability of the PCP factor Frizzled is regulated by the A/B determinants aPKC and Bazooka in the Drosophila eye. We have systematically investigated genetic and physical interactions between the Drosophila A/B factors and the core PCP component Strabismus (Stbm)/Van Gogh (Vang). The A/B determinant Scribble was found to interact both genetically and physically with Stbm/Vang. We demonstrate that Scribble binds Stbm/Vang through its PDZ domain 3 and that it cooperates with Stbm/Vang in PCP establishment. Our data indicate that Scribble, in addition to its role in A/B polarity, has a distinct requirement in PCP establishment in the Drosophila eye and wing. We define a scribble allele that is largely PCP specific. Our data show that Scribble is part of the Stbm/Vang PCP complex and further suggest that it might act as an effector of Stbm/Vang during PCP establishment.

19560358
A quest for the mechanism regulating global planar cell polarity of tissues.
Most epithelial cells, besides their ubiquitous apical-basal polarity, are polarized within the plane of the epithelium, which is called planar cell polarity (PCP). Using Drosophila as a model, meaningful progress has been made in the identification of key PCP factors and the dissection of their intracellular molecular interactions. The long-range, global aspects of coordinated polarization and the overlying regulatory mechanisms that create the initial polarity direction have, however, remained elusive. Several recent publications have outlined potential mechanisms of how the global regulation of PCP might be controlled and how the distinct core factor groups might interact via frizzled, Van Gogh or flamingo. This review focuses on these exciting features and attempts to provide an integrated picture of these recent and novel insights.

19379687
Ubiquitin connects with planar cell polarity.
Planar cell polarity (PCP) regulates the orientation of cells in epithelia and of mesenchymal cells during gastrulation. In this issue, Narimatsu et al. (2009) report that the Smurf E3 ubiquitin ligases are required for localized protein degradation of a core PCP factor to generate cellular asymmetry.

19234454
Electrochemical cues regulate assembly of the Frizzled/Dishevelled complex at the plasma membrane during planar epithelial polarization.
Dishevelled (Dsh) is a cytoplasmic multidomain protein that is required for all known branches of the Wnt signalling pathway. The Frizzled/planar cell polarity (Fz/PCP) signalling branch requires an asymmetric cortical localization of Dsh, but this process remains poorly understood. Using a genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screen in Drosophila melanogaster cells, we show that Dsh membrane localization is dependent on the Na(+)/H(+) exchange activity of the plasma membrane exchanger Nhe2. Manipulating Nhe2 expression levels in the eye causes PCP defects, and Nhe2 interacts genetically with Fz. Our data show that the binding and surface recruitment of Dsh by Fz is pH- and charge-dependent. We identify a polybasic stretch within the Dsh DEP domain that binds to negatively charged phospholipids and appears to be mechanistically important. Dsh recruitment by Fz can be abolished by converting these basic amino-acid residues into acidic ones, as in the mutant, DshKR/E. In vivo, the DshKR/E(2x) mutant with two substituted residues fails to associate with the membrane during active PCP signalling but rescues canonical Wnt signalling defects in a dsh-background. These results suggest that direct interaction between Fz and Dsh is stabilized by a pH and charge-dependent interaction of the DEP domain with phospholipids. This stabilization is particularly important for the PCP signalling branch and, thus, promotes specific pathway selection in Wnt signalling.

18849586
Phosphatase-defective LEOPARD syndrome mutations in PTPN11 gene have gain-of-function effects during Drosophila development.
Missense mutations in the PTPN11 gene, which encodes the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, cause clinically similar but distinctive disorders, LEOPARD (LS) and Noonan (NS) syndromes. The LS is an autosomal dominant disorder with pleomorphic developmental abnormalities including lentigines, cardiac defects, short stature and deafness. Biochemical analyses indicated that LS alleles engender loss-of-function (LOF) effects, while NS mutations result in gain-of-function (GOF). These biochemical findings lead to an enigma that how PTPN11 mutations with opposite effects on function result in disorders that are so similar. To study the developmental effects of the commonest LS PTPN11 alleles (Y279C and T468M), we generated LS transgenic fruitflies using corkscrew (csw), the Drosophila orthologue of PTPN11. Ubiquitous expression of the LS csw mutant alleles resulted in ectopic wing veins and, for the Y279C allele, rough eyes with increased R7 photoreceptor numbers. These were GOF phenotypes mediated by increased RAS/MAPK signaling and requiring the LS mutant's residual phosphatase activity. Our findings provide the first evidence that LS mutant alleles have GOF developmental effects despite reduced phosphatase activity, providing a rationale for how PTPN11 mutations with GOF and LOF produce similar but distinctive syndromes.

18804440
The frizzled extracellular domain is a ligand for Van Gogh/Stbm during nonautonomous planar cell polarity signaling.
The Frizzled (Fz) receptor is required cell autonomously in Wnt/beta-catenin and planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling. In addition to these requirements, Fz acts nonautonomously during PCP establishment: wild-type cells surrounding fz(-) patches reorient toward the fz(-) cells. The molecular mechanism(s) of nonautonomous Fz signaling are unknown. Our in vivo studies identify the extracellular domain (ECD) of Fz, in particular its CRD (cysteine rich domain), as critical for nonautonomous Fz-PCP activity. Importantly, we demonstrate biochemical and physical interactions between the FzECD and the transmembrane protein Van Gogh/Strabismus (Vang/Stbm). We show that this function precedes cell-autonomous interactions and visible asymmetric PCP factor localization. Our data suggest that Vang/Stbm can act as a FzECD receptor, allowing cells to sense Fz activity/levels of their neighbors. Thus, direct Fz-Vang/Stbm interactions represent an intriguing mechanism that may account for the global orientation of cells within the plane of their epithelial field.

18710302
Planar cell polarity signaling: from fly development to human disease.
Most, if not all, cell types and tissues display several aspects of polarization. In addition to the ubiquitous epithelial cell polarity along the apical-basolateral axis, many epithelial tissues and organs are also polarized within the plane of the epithelium. This is generally referred to as planar cell polarity (PCP; or historically, tissue polarity). Genetic screens in Drosophila pioneered the discovery of core PCP factors, and subsequent work in vertebrates has established that the respective pathways are evolutionarily conserved. PCP is not restricted only to epithelial tissues but is also found in mesenchymal cells, where it can regulate cell migration and cell intercalation. Moreover, particularly in vertebrates, the conserved core PCP signaling factors have recently been found to be associated with the orientation or formation of cilia. This review discusses new developments in the molecular understanding of PCP establishment in Drosophila and vertebrates; these developments are integrated with new evidence that links PCP signaling to human disease.

18653560
Self-modulation of Notch signaling during ommatidial development via the Roughened eye transcriptional repressor.
The Notch (N) signaling pathway is involved in a vast number of patterning processes in all metazoans. The regulation of the core N pathway is largely understood, but little is known about fine-tuning modulatory effects. Here, we address the role of Drosophila Krüppel-family Zn-finger transcription factor roughened eye (roe) in the context of N signaling. We demonstrate that during eye patterning, N signaling regulates the expression of roe. In turn, Roe negatively modulates the expression of target genes of N-signaling activation. In the absence of roe function, expression of N target genes is elevated and the resulting phenotypes during patterning of the retina are similar to those of N gain-of-function scenarios. Importantly, our data show that Roe binds regulatory DNA sequences of N target genes of the E(spl)-complex both in vitro and in vivo, independently of Su(H)-DNA interaction. Thus, our data suggest that Roe acts as a transcriptional repressor in a negative-feedback loop of the N pathway.

18641954
Microscopic analysis of the adult Drosophila retina using semithin plastic sections.
The regular appearance and the repetitive nature of the Drosophila eye, consisting of several hundred identical multicellular units, the ommatidia, has long served as an invaluable experimental system to study cell-cell interactions, inductive signaling events, cell proliferation, programmed cell death, cell differentiation, cell organization, and planar cell polarity among others. Importantly, the eye is dispensable for viability and fertility of the fly and thus, it can easily be manipulated, making it an ideal target for genetic screens. This chapter described an essential technique in the analysis of different genotypes in the adult fly eye, and allows detailed analyses with single cell resolution.

17493605
distal antenna and distal antenna-related function in the retinal determination network during eye development in Drosophila.
Drosophila eye specification occurs through the activity of the retinal determination (RD) network, which includes the Eyeless (Ey), Eyes absent (Eya), Sine oculis (So) and Dachshund (Dac) transcription factors. Based on their abilities to transform antennal precursors towards an eye fate, the distal antenna (dan) and distal antenna-related (danr) genes encode two new RD factors. Dan and Danr are probable transcription factors localized in nuclei of eye precursors and differentiating eye tissue. Loss-of-function single and double dan/danr mutants have small, rough eyes, indicating a requirement for wild-type eye development. In addition, dan and danr participate in the transcriptional hierarchy that controls expression of RD genes, and Dan and Danr interact physically and genetically with Ey and Dac. Eye specification culminates in differentiation of ommatidia through the activities of the proneural gene atonal (ato) in the founding R8 photoreceptor and Egfr signaling in additional photoreceptors. Danr expression overlaps with Ato during R8 specification, and Dan and Danr regulate Ato expression and are required for normal R8 induction and differentiation. These data demonstrate a role for Dan and Danr in eye development and provide a link between eye specification and differentiation.

17230199
Frizzled/PCP signalling: a conserved mechanism regulating cell polarity and directed motility.
Signalling through Frizzled (Fz)/planar cell polarity (PCP) is a conserved mechanism that polarizes cells along specific axes in a tissue. Genetic screens in Drosophila melanogaster pioneered the discovery of core PCP factors, which regulate the orientation of hairs on wings and facets in eyes. Recent genetic evidence shows that the Fz/PCP pathway is conserved in vertebrates and is crucial for disparate processes as gastrulation and sensory cell orientation. Fz/PCP signalling depends on complex interactions between core components, leading to their asymmetric distribution and ultimately polarized activity in a cell. Whereas several mechanistic aspects of PCP have been uncovered, the global coordination of this polarization remains debated.

17218788
TGF-beta activated kinase-1: new insights into the diverse roles of TAK1 in development and immunity.
A number of recent publications have examined the role of TAK1 in model systems ranging from fly to mouse. Rather than fit into a clearly defined linear molecular pathway, TAK1 seems to act in a signaling nexus that responds to a variety of upstream signals, including inflammatory molecules and developmental cues. TAK1 then influences a number of downstream processes ranging from innate immune responses to patterning and differentiation via JNK, NFkappaB and TCFbeta-catenin signaling. These differences in function are not simply a matter of cell type. For example, NFkappaB signaling in a particular cell may or may not require TAK1 depending on the nature of the activating signal. Interestingly, the multi-task functionality of TAK1 is conserved between vertebrate and invertebrate species. Studies of TAK1 in multiple experimental systems is likely to reveal more roles for this kinase and also elucidate mechanisms by which other signaling molecules fulfill diverse signaling roles. Here we provide an overview of the data concerning TAK1 from its discovery to more recent findings and provide a synthesis of the conclusions that have arisen from the multiple model systems and experimental approaches.

20453880
Drosophila Abelson kinase mediates cell invasion and proliferation through two distinct MAPK pathways.
The Abelson (Abl) family of non-receptor tyrosine kinases has an important role in cell morphogenesis, motility, and proliferation. Although the function of Abl has been extensively studied in leukemia, its role in epithelial cell invasion remains obscure. Using the Drosophila wing epithelium as an in vivo model system, we show that overexpression (activation) of Drosophila Abl (dAbl) causes loss of epithelial apical/basal cell polarity and secretion of matrix metalloproteinases, resulting in a cellular invasion and apoptosis. Our in vivo data indicate that dAbl acts downstream of the Src kinases, which are known regulators of cell adhesion and invasion. Downstream of dAbl, Rac GTPases activate two distinct MAPK pathways: c-Jun N-terminal kinase signaling (required for cell invasion and apoptosis) and ERK signaling (inducing cell proliferation). Activated Abl also increases the activity of Src members through a positive feedback loop leading to signal amplification. Thus, targeting Src-Abl, using available dual inhibitors, could be of therapeutic importance in tumor cell metastasis.

