21345953
Effects of receptor binding specificity of avian influenza virus on the human innate immune response.
Humans infected by the highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza viruses (HPAIV) present unusually high concentrations in serum of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, which are believed to contribute to the high pathogenicity of these viruses. The hemagglutinins (HAs) of avian influenza viruses preferentially bind to sialic acids attached through ?2,3 linkages (SA?2,3) to the terminal galactose of carbohydrates on the host cell surface, while the HAs from human strains bind to ?2,6-linked SA (SA?2,6). To evaluate the role of the viral receptor specificity in promoting innate immune responses in humans, we generated recombinant influenza viruses, one bearing the HA and neuraminidase (NA) genes from the A/Vietnam/1203/2004 H5N1 HPAIV in an influenza A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (A/PR/8/34) backbone with specificity for SA?2,3 and the other a mutant virus (with Q226L and G228S in the HA) with preferential receptor specificity for SA?2,6. Viruses with preferential affinity for SA?2,3 induced higher levels of proinflammatory cytokines and interferon (IFN)-inducible genes in primary human dendritic cells (DCs) than viruses with SA?2,6 binding specificity, and these differences were independent of viral replication, as shown by infections with UV-inactivated viruses. Moreover, human primary macrophages and respiratory epithelial cells showed higher expression of proinflammatory genes after infection with the virus with SA?2,3 affinity than after infection with the virus with SA?2,6 affinity. These data indicate that binding to SA?2,3 by H5N1 HPAIV may be sensed by human cells differently than binding to SA?2,6, inducing an exacerbated innate proinflammatory response in infected individuals.

21075352
Mouse STAT2 restricts early dengue virus replication.
Dengue virus encodes several interferon antagonists. Among these the NS5 protein binds STAT2, a necessary component of the type I interferon signaling pathway, and targets it for degradation. We now demonstrate that the ability of dengue NS5 to associate with and degrade STAT2 is species specific. Thus, NS5 is able to bind and degrade human STAT2, but not mouse STAT2. This difference was exploited to demonstrate, absent manipulation of the viral genome, that NS5-mediated IFN antagonism is essential for efficient virus replication. Moreover, we demonstrate that differences in NS5 mediated binding and degradation between human and mouse STAT2 maps to a region within the STAT2 coiled-coil domain. By using STAT2(-/-) mice, we also demonstrate that mouse STAT2 restricts early dengue virus replication in vivo. These results suggest that overcoming this restriction through transgenic mouse technology may help in the development of a long-sought immune-competent mouse model of dengue virus infection.

20660196
Inhibition of the type I interferon response in human dendritic cells by dengue virus infection requires a catalytically active NS2B3 complex.
Dengue virus (DENV) is the most prevalent arthropod-borne human virus, able to infect and replicate in human dendritic cells (DCs), inducing their activation and the production of proinflammatory cytokines. However, DENV can successfully evade the immune response in order to produce disease in humans. Several mechanisms of immune evasion have been suggested for DENV, most of them involving interference with type I interferon (IFN) signaling. We recently reported that DENV infection of human DCs does not induce type I IFN production by those infected DCs, impairing their ability to prime naive T cells toward Th1 immunity. In this article, we report that DENV also reduces the ability of DCs to produce type I IFN in response to several inducers, such as infection with other viruses or exposure to Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands, indicating that DENV antagonizes the type I IFN production pathway in human DCs. DENV-infected human DCs showed a reduced type I IFN response to Newcastle disease virus (NDV), Sendai virus (SeV), and Semliki Forest virus (SFV) infection and to the TLR3 agonist poly(I:C). This inhibitory effect is DENV dose dependent, requires DENV replication, and takes place in DENV-infected DCs as early as 2 h after infection. Expressing individual proteins of DENV in the presence of an IFN-alpha/beta production inducer reveals that a catalytically active viral protease complex is required to reduce type I IFN production significantly. These results provide a new mechanism by which DENV evades the immune system in humans.

20164230
Dengue virus inhibits the production of type I interferon in primary human dendritic cells.
Dengue virus (DENV) infects human immune cells in vitro and likely infects dendritic cells (DCs) in vivo. DENV-2 productive infection induces activation and release of high levels of chemokines and proinflammatory cytokines in monocyte-derived DCs (moDCs), with the notable exception of alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta). Interestingly, DENV-2-infected moDCs fail to prime T cells, most likely due to the lack of IFN-alpha/beta released by moDCs, since this effect was reversed by addition of exogenous IFN-beta. Together, our data show that inhibition of IFN-alpha/beta production by DENV in primary human moDCs is a novel mechanism of immune evasion.

19403682
The NS1 protein of a human influenza virus inhibits type I interferon production and the induction of antiviral responses in primary human dendritic and respiratory epithelial cells.
The NS1 protein of the influenza A virus is a potent virulence factor that inhibits type I interferon (IFN) synthesis, allowing the virus to overcome host defenses and replicate efficiently. However, limited studies have been conducted on NS1 function using human virus strains and primary human cells. We used NS1 truncated mutant influenza viruses derived from the human isolate influenza A/TX/91 (TX WT, where WT is wild type) to study the functions of NS1 in infected primary cells. Infection of primary differentiated human tracheo-bronchial epithelial cells with an NS1 truncated mutant demonstrated limited viral replication and enhanced type I IFN induction. Additionally, human dendritic cells (DCs) infected with human NS1 mutant viruses showed higher levels of activation and stimulated naïve T-cells better than TX WT virus-infected DCs. We also compared infections of DCs with TX WT and our previously characterized laboratory strain A/PR/8/34 (PR8) and its NS1 knockout strain, deltaNS1. TX WT-infected DCs displayed higher viral replication than PR8 but had decreased antiviral gene expression at late time points and reduced naïve T-cell stimulation compared to PR8 infections, suggesting an augmented inhibition of IFN production and human DC activation. Our findings show that human-derived influenza A viruses have a high capacity to inhibit the antiviral state in a human system, and here we have evaluated the possible mechanism of this inhibition. Lastly, C-terminal truncations in the NS1 protein of human influenza virus are sufficient to make the virus attenuated and more immunogenic, supporting its use as a live attenuated influenza vaccine in humans.

18981106
Antiviral-activated dendritic cells: a paracrine-induced response state.
Infection of immature dendritic cells (DCs) by virus stimulates their maturation into APC. Infected DCs can also expose uninfected DCs to a panoply of cytokines/chemokines via paracrine signaling. Mathematical modeling suggests that a high rate of paracrine signaling is likely to occur among DCs located in three-dimensional space. Relatively little is known about how secreted factors modify the early response to virus infection. We used a transwell experimental system that allows passage of secreted factors, but not direct contact, between virus-infected DCs and uninfected DCs to investigate paracrine signaling responses. Paracrine signaling from infected DCs induced an antiviral-primed DC state distinct from that of mature virus-infected DCs that we refer to as antiviral-activated DCs (AVDCs). AVDCs had increased surface MHC class II and CD86 levels, but in contrast to virus-infected DCs, their MHC class I levels were unchanged. Imaging flow cytometry showed that AVDCs had an increased rate of phagocytosis compared with naive DCs. Experiments with IFN-beta cytokine indicated that it may be responsible for CD86, but not MHC class II regulation in AVDCs. Both IFN-inducible and IFN-independent genes are up-regulated in AVDCs. Notably, AVDCs are relatively resistant to virus infection in comparison to naive DCs and achieve accelerated and augmented levels of costimulatory molecule expression with virus infection. AVDCs show a distinct antiviral-primed state of DC maturation mediated by DC paracrine signaling. Although further in vivo study is needed, the characteristics of the AVDC suggest that it is well suited to play a role in the early innate-adaptive transition of the immune system.

18974865
Interferon-beta pretreatment of conventional and plasmacytoid human dendritic cells enhances their activation by influenza virus.
Influenza virus produces a protein, NS1, that inhibits infected cells from releasing type I interferon (IFN) and blocks maturation of conventional dendritic cells (DCs). As a result, influenza virus is a poor activator of both mouse and human DCs in vitro. However, in vivo a strong immune response to virus infection is generated in both species, suggesting that other factors may contribute to the maturation of DCs in vivo. It is likely that the environment in which a DC encounters a virus would contain multiple pro-inflammatory molecules, including type I IFN. Type I IFN is a critical component of the viral immune response that initiates an antiviral state in cells, primarily by triggering a broad transcriptional program that interferes with the ability of virus to establish infection in the cell. In this study, we have examined the activation profiles of both conventional and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (cDCs and pDCs) in response to an influenza virus infection in the context of a type I IFN-containing environment. We found that both cDCs and pDCs demonstrate a greater activation response to influenza virus when pre-exposed to IFN-beta (IFN priming); although, the priming kinetics are different in these two cell types. This strongly suggests that type I IFN functions not only to reduce viral replication in these immune cells, but also to promote greater DC activation during influenza virus infections.

18802009
Estrogen inhibits dendritic cell maturation to RNA viruses.
Dendritic cells (DCs) play a central role in initiating and polarizing the immune response. Therefore, DC maturation represents a key control point in the shift from innate to adaptive immunity. It is suspected that during pregnancy, hormones are critical factors that modulate changes reported to occur in maternal immunity. Here we examined the effect of 17-beta-estradiol (E2) on the maturational response triggered by virus in human DCs and its influence on their ability to activate naive T cells. We developed an in vitro system to measure the response of DCs to virus infection with Newcastle disease virus (NDV) after a 24-hour E2 treatment. Using this system, we demonstrated that E2 pretreatment down-regulated the antiviral response to RNA viruses in DCs by profoundly suppressing type I interferon (IFN) synthesis and other important inflammatory products. In addition, the DCs capacity to stimulate naive CD4 T cells was also reduced. These results suggest an important role for E2 in suppressing the antiviral response and provide a mechanism for the reduced immunity to virus infection observed during pregnancy.

18230041
A prospective, comparative study of the immune response to inactivated influenza vaccine in pediatric liver transplant recipients and their healthy siblings.
Annual influenza vaccination is routinely recommended for pediatric solid organ transplant recipients. However, there are limited data defining the immune response to the inactivated vaccine in this population. This prospective study compared the humoral and cell-mediated immune responses to the trivalent subvirion influenza vaccine in pediatric liver transplant recipients with those in their healthy siblings. All subjects received inactivated influenza vaccine. Hemagglutination inhibition and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot assays for New Caledonia and Shanghai strains were performed at baseline, after each vaccine dose, and 3 months after the series. Seroconversion was defined as a 4-fold increase in antibody titers; seroprotection was defined as an antibody titer > or =1:40. An increase in the number of T cells secreting IFN-gamma was considered to be a positive enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot response. After 1 dose of vaccine, transplant recipients achieved rates of antibody seroprotection and seroconversion that were similar to those achieved by their healthy siblings. However, for both influenza strains, IFN-gamma responses by enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot were significantly attenuated in transplant recipients after 2 doses of vaccine. No cases of influenza or vaccine-related serious adverse events were documented in the study. The diminished cell-mediated immune response to influenza vaccination that was observed in pediatric liver transplant recipients suggests that the current vaccine strategy may not provide optimal protection. Because of concerns regarding potential emergence of more virulent influenza strains, further studies are warranted to determine if IFN-gamma responses are predictive of efficacy and to identify the optimal vaccination strategy to protect populations with a high risk of infection.

17675303
Chromosome-specific and noisy IFNB1 transcription in individual virus-infected human primary dendritic cells.
The induction of interferon beta (IFNB1) is a key event in the antiviral immune response. We studied the role of transcriptional noise in the regulation of the IFNB1 locus in primary cultures of human dendritic cells (DCs), which are important 'first responders' to viral infection. In single cell assays, IFNB1 mRNA expression in virus-infected DCs showed much greater cell-to-cell variation than that of a housekeeping gene, another induced transcript and viral RNA. We determined the contribution of intrinsic noise by measuring the allelic origin of transcripts in each cell and found that intrinsic noise is a very significant part of total noise. We developed a stochastic model to investigate the underlying mechanisms. We propose that the surprisingly high levels of IFNB1 transcript noise originate from the complexity of IFNB1 enhanceosome formation, which leads to a range up to many minutes in the differences within each cell in the time of activation of each allele.

