20393108
TGF-?-stimulated CTGF production enhanced by collagen and associated with biogenesis of a novel 31-kDa CTGF form in human corneal fibroblasts.
Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) is induced by transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-?) after corneal wounding. This study addressed the role of the extracellular matrix in the induction of CTGF by TGF-?. Human corneal fibroblasts (HCFs) were grown on fibronectin (FN), vitronectin (VN), or collagen (CL) in supplemented serum-free media alone or with TGF-?1 or fibroblast growth factor plus heparin. CTGF mRNA was analyzed by qPCR and protein expression by Western blot analysis of Triton X-100 (TX-100)-soluble and TX-100-insoluble cell lysates using antibodies to N-terminal, mid, and C-terminal CTGF regions. Immunocytochemistry was performed on nonconfluent or scrape-wounded confluent HCFs. TGF-?-treated HCFs grown on CL produced five times more 38-kDa CTGF than untreated controls (72 hours). TGF-?-treated HCFs on CL secreted twofold more CTGF than those on FN or VN. Furthermore, a 31-kDa CTGF form, lacking the N-terminal domain, was detected in Triton X-100 insoluble fractions in Western blot analysis. Immunodetectable extracellular CTGF formed linear arrays parallel to, but not colocalized with, CL or FN. It also did not colocalize with FAK, vinculin, or integrins ?(v)?(3) and ?(5)?(1). Intracellular CTGF was detected in the Golgi apparatus and vesicles, including endosomes. Enhanced CTGF secretion induced by TGF-? in CL-grown cells may contribute to positive feedback in which CL is overexpressed in CTGF-induced fibrosis. N-terminal CTGF fragments in the plasma of patients with severe fibrotic disease may be a product of CTGF proteolysis that also produces the newly identified 31-kDa CTGF that remains cell associated and may have its impact by non-integrin signaling pathways.

17507651
Urokinase receptor cleavage: a crucial step in fibroblast-to-myofibroblast differentiation.
Fibroblasts migrate into and repopulate connective tissue wounds. At the wound edge, fibroblasts differentiate into myofibroblasts, and they promote wound closure. Regulated fibroblast-to-myofibroblast differentiation is critical for regenerative healing. Previous studies have focused on the role in fibroblasts of urokinase plasmingen activator/urokinase plasmingen activator receptor (uPA/uPAR), an extracellular protease system that promotes matrix remodeling, growth factor activation, and cell migration. Whereas fibroblasts have substantial uPA activity and uPAR expression, we discovered that cultured myofibroblasts eventually lost cell surface uPA/uPAR. This led us to investigate the relevance of uPA/uPAR activity to myofibroblast differentiation. We found that fibroblasts expressed increased amounts of full-length cell surface uPAR (D1D2D3) compared with myofibroblasts, which had reduced expression of D1D2D3 but increased expression of the truncated form of uPAR (D2D3) on their cell surface. Retaining full-length uPAR was found to be essential for regulating myofibroblast differentiation, because 1) protease inhibitors that prevented uPAR cleavage also prevented myofibroblast differentiation, and 2) overexpression of cDNA for a noncleavable form of uPAR inhibited myofibroblast differentiation. These data support a novel hypothesis that maintaining full-length uPAR on the cell surface regulates the fibroblast to myofibroblast transition and that down-regulation of uPAR is necessary for myofibroblast differentiation.

17460259
Localization of ZO-1 in the nucleolus of corneal fibroblasts.
Within the multidomain structure of ZO-1 are motifs responsible for ZO-1's localization to intercellular junctions and its newly demonstrated localization to the leading edge of lamellipodia in corneal fibroblasts. Since ZO-1 also has two nuclear localization signals, this study was undertaken to determine whether stimuli associated with wounding would induce nuclear translocation of ZO-1 Immunocytochemistry and immunoblot analysis were used to localize endogenous and exogenous ZO-1 in nuclear and cytoplasmic sites in corneal fibroblasts and 293T fibroblasts, with and without myc-ZO-1 transfection. Cells were serum starved by growth for 48 hours in DMEM/F12 with 0.2% FBS and subsequently were either scrape wounded or treated with 10% FBS, PDGF, or FGF-2 for 6 hours. For immunoblot analysis, after lysis, the nuclear and cytosolic fractions were separated and analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Cells on companion coverslips were fixed with 3% p-formaldehyde and permeabilized with 1% Triton before immunocytochemical detection of ZO-1 and nuclear proteins. ZO-1 was rarely detected in the nucleus of serum-starved corneal fibroblasts. In contrast, it colocalized with nucleolin in the nucleoli of corneal fibroblasts after serum-starved cells were treated with 10% FBS, PDGF, or FGF-2. Immunoblot analysis confirmed the immunocytochemical results: Little ZO-1 was detected in the nuclear fraction of lysates of serum-starved cells, but ZO-1 was found in the nuclear fractions of rabbit corneal and 293T fibroblasts treated with 10% FBS, PDGF, or FGF-2. Furthermore in scrape-wounded corneal fibroblasts, ZO-1 was localized to nucleoli of both serum-starved and serum-treated cells. Localization of ZO-1 to nucleoli of corneal and 293T fibroblasts under proliferative and promigratory conditions suggests a physiologically significant interaction of ZO-1 with proteins in nucleoli during the healing process.

