19555419
Blood salvage use in gynecologic oncology.
Blood salvage allows for collection and processing of surgical blood loss with the eventual reinfusion of washed red blood cells (RBCs) back to the patient. The use of blood salvage in patients undergoing surgery for malignancy is off-label. Controversy exists as to the risk of potential cancer dissemination resulting from the reinfusion of the processed blood, but no data are available to confirm this risk. Recent studies have demonstrated that filtering the salvaged blood using a leukoreduction filter (LRF) significantly decreases the number of cancer cells in the recovered RBC aliquot in a variety of cancer types. Patients on the gynecologic oncology service as part of the bloodless surgery program at Englewood Hospital and Medical Center from April 1998 to April 2007 were identified. Three patients that had reinfusion of cell salvage blood (all reinfusions were performed after filtration with a LRF) were studied further with emphasis placed on long-term outcomes. Two of the three patients did not show any evidence of metastases after surgery. The only patient that developed evidence of hematogenous progression had known liver metastases at the time of her initial diagnosis and therefore had hematogenous dissemination before her index surgery. In this series of patients undergoing surgery for malignancies on the gynecologic oncology service, blood salvage with LRF was not definitively associated with hematogenous dissemination. Further large controlled studies are needed to demonstrate the clinical safety of the use of blood salvage in this setting.

18713914
Successful placement of a right ventricular assist device for treatment of a presumed amniotic fluid embolism.
Amniotic fluid embolism is a rare and often fatal complication of pregnancy. We report the successful multidisciplinary management of a woman who developed a coagulopathy from a presumed amniotic fluid embolism after forceps-assisted vaginal delivery requiring recombinant factor VIIa, and pulmonary arterial hypertension requiring a right ventricular assist device.

17574178
Complete surgical resection of a 40-cm leiomyosarcoma of the large bowel mesentery.
Leiomyosarcoma of the large bowel mesentery is a rare entity and characteristically behaves in an aggressive fashion. Surgical resection is the mainstay of treatment and offers both symptomatic and therapeutic benefit. We describe the case of a 55-year-old woman who presented with weight loss, increasing abdominal girth and a large solid inhomogenous mass within the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated on a computed tomography (CT) scan. The patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy and extensive tumor debulking procedure with complete resection of her tumor. Final pathology revealed leiomyosarcoma of the large bowel mesentery. The patient has chosen not to receive adjuvant therapy. Leiomyosarcoma of the large bowel mesentery often presents as an advanced lesion making surgical resection a challenging and potentially morbid procedure. Although surgical resection may be faced with significant morbidity, maximum surgical effort with complete resection offers the best overall outcome for patients with this disease.

17292454
Renal artery thrombosis following secondary cytoreduction in a patient with ovarian cancer.
In order to successfully perform aggressive cytoreductive surgery for patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer, resection of retroperitoneal disease in close proximity to major vessels is often required. We describe a case of a 44-year-old female patient with a history of Stage IV carcinoma of the ovary, who underwent a successful secondary debulking procedure. To remove the left para-aortic tumor implant she required complete mobilization of the left kidney, with skeletonization of the left renal artery and vein. Postoperatively, the patient developed left renal artery thrombosis necessitating a unilateral nephrectomy. This is, to our knowledge, the first reported case of renal artery thrombosis following a debulking procedure. Gynecologic oncologists should be aware of this possibility and be familiar with the diagnosis and management of this condition.

17386041
A case-controlled study of total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy versus radical abdominal hysterectomy in a fellowship training program.
To determine whether total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy (TLRH) is a feasible alternative to an abdominal radical hysterectomy (ARH) in a gynecologic oncology fellowship training program. We prospectively collected cases of all of the patients with cervical cancer treated with TLRH and pelvic lymphadenectomy by our division from 2000 to 2006. All of the patients from the TLRH group were matched 1:1 with the patients who had ARH during the same period based on stage, age, histological subtype, and nodal status. Thirty patients were treated with TLRH with a mean age of 48.3 years (range, 29-78 years). The mean pelvic lymph node count was 31 (range, 10-61) in the TLRH group versus 21.8 (range, 8-42) (P < 0.01) in the ARH group. Mean estimated blood loss was 200 cc (range, 100-600 cc) in the TLRH with no transfusions compared to 520 cc in the ARH group (P < 0.01), in which five patients required transfusions. Mean operating time was 318.5 min (range, 200-464 min) compared to 242.5 min in the ARH group (P < 0.01), and mean hospital stay was 3.8 days (range, 2-11 days) compared to 5.6 days in the ARH group (P < 0.01). All TLRH cases were completed laparoscopically. All patients in the TLRH group are disease free at the time of this report. In conclusion, it is feasible to incorporate TLRH training into the surgical curriculum of gynecologic oncology fellows without increasing perioperative morbidity. Standardization of TLRH technique and consistent guidance by experienced faculty is imperative.

