21459162
Management of Hemopericardium related to Percutaneous Epicardial Access, Mapping and Ablation.


21270104
Long-term outcomes of combined epicardial and endocardial ablation of monomorphic ventricular tachycardia related to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Background- Monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (MMVT) is rare in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). There are limited data on the utility of catheter ablation for the treatment of MMVT in this population. This study details a series of case reports from multiple centers where combined epicardial-endocardial ablation was performed in a highly selected group of patients with HCM-related MMVT. Methods and Results- The cohort consisted of 10 patients with HCM-related MMVT. Pericardial access was achieved using the percutaneous subxyphoid approach. Epicardial and endocardial ventricular 3D bipolar voltage maps were generated. Ablation sites were identified using a combination of entrainment, activation, late/fractionated potential, and pace mapping. Electrophysiological-identified epicardial scar was present in 8 (80%) patients, endocardial scar in 6 (60%), and no scar in 1 (10%). In the 5 patients with inducible, stable MMVT, 3 cases were successfully terminated with ablation from the epicardium and 1 from the endocardium. The case that failed catheter ablation required surgical cryoablation to abolish the incessant VT. In the remaining 5 patients, 4 underwent epicardial and endocardial ablation of sites with good pace maps and late/fractionated potentials. No ablation was performed in the remaining patient because of noninducibility and lack of identifiable scar. After 37±17 months (limits, 2 to 62 months; median, 37 months), the freedom from recurrent implantable cardioverter-defibrillator shocks was 78% (7/9 patients) in those who underwent ablation. Conclusions- In highly selected patients with HCM, combined epicardial and endocardial mapping and ablation is a feasible and reasonably efficacious option for MMVT if refractory to aggressive trials of antiarrhythmic drugs and antitachycardia pacing.

21156778
Simultaneous, but dissociated left atrial fibrillation and pulmonary vein tachycardia: a case of occult pulmonary vein isolation.


20637313
Catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation without the use of fluoroscopy.
In performing catheter ablation of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (PAF), the advent of electroanatomical mapping (EAM) has significantly reduced fluoroscopy time. Recent advances in the ability of EAM systems to simultaneously visualize multiple catheters have allowed some operators to perform certain procedures, such as catheter ablation of supraventricular tachycardias, with zero fluoroscopy use. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the feasibility and safety of pulmonary vein (PV) isolation with zero fluoroscopy use, using a combination of three-dimensional EAM and intracardiac echocardiography (ICE). Using the NavX EAM system, the right atrial (RA) and coronary sinus (CS) geometries were created without fluoroscopy. Fluoroless transseptal puncture was performed under ICE guidance. Using a deflectable sheath and a multipolar catheter, the left atrial (LA) and PV anatomies were rendered and, in select cases, integrated with a three-dimensional computed tomography (CT) image. Irrigated radiofrequency ablation was performed to encircle each pair of ipsilateral PVs. This series included 20 consecutive PAF patients. RA/CS mapping required 5.5 ± 2.6 minutes. In all patients, single (n = 18) or dual (n = 2) transseptal access was successfully achieved. The LA-PV anatomy was rendered using either a circular (14 patients) or penta-array (six patients) catheter in 22 ± 10 minutes; CT image integration was used in 11 patients. Using 49 ± 18 ablation lesions/patient, electrical isolation was achieved in 38/39 ipsilateral PV isolating lesion sets (97%). The procedure time was 244 ± 75 minutes. There were no complications. Completely fluoroless catheter ablation of paroxysmal AF is safely feasible using a combination of ICE and EAM.

20504945
Visual balloon-guided point-by-point ablation: reliable, reproducible, and persistent pulmonary vein isolation.
While conceptually straightforward, placing point-to-point contiguous radiofrequency lesions to achieve pulmonary vein isolation (PVI) is technically challenging in patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Furthermore, chronic efficacy is limited by late PV reconnections. A novel compliant balloon ablation catheter able to deliver visually guided short arcs/spots of laser energy was tested in initial preclinical and clinical cases to determine if visual guidance could predict reliable and persistent PVI. This study consisted of (1) an experimental porcine phase with both acute (n=15 pigs) and 4-week chronic (n=10) data and (2) a single-center clinical feasibility phase (n=27 patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation), again with acute and 3-month chronic data. Under endoscopic guidance, point-by-point perivenous ablation was performed in a contiguous and overlapping manner. Each porcine PV was longitudinally sectioned for detailed histological analysis. At 3 months after ablation, patients underwent a prespecified remapping procedure regardless of symptomotology. In the acute and chronic animals, 29 of 30 (97%) PVs were electrically isolated after placing the initial circumferential lesion set. For the 4-week chronic animals, 80% of PVs remained isolated; lesions were histologically circumferential in 120 of 120 (100%) PV sections and transmural in 116 of 120 (96.7%) PV sections (average transmurality=99.0+/-5.5%). In patients, 100% of the PVs were isolated after 1.3 attempts per PV-84% of them (85 of 101) isolated after the initial visually guided lesion set. At 3 months, 61 of 68 (90%) PVs continued to be electrically isolated. Using a visually guided, compliant balloon ablation catheter with point-by-point ablative capability, PV isolation can be achieved in a reliable, reproducible, and persistent manner.

20122876
Percutaneous left atrial appendage closure with an epicardial suture ligation approach: a prospective randomized pre-clinical feasibility study.
Percutaneous approaches to left atrial appendage (LAA) closure are being developed for stroke prophylaxis in atrial fibrillation (AF) patients as an alternative to warfarin. A pericardial suture ligation approach has the advantage of ultimately leaving no permanent implant within the blood pool, but the potential disadvantage of inadequate placement, thereby not excluding the entire LAA from the circulation. This study sought to investigate the ability of a novel percutaneous pericardial snare and suture ligation device to achieve complete LAA exclusion. Ten animals underwent LAA exclusion with a pericardial snare and suture ligation in this prospective randomized feasibility study. Animals were randomized to concomitant use of a transseptally placed endoluminal balloon within the LAA to aid in proximal positioning and stabilization of the pericardial snare and suture. The level of LAA appendage exclusion was determined at necropsy. Nine animals completed the study, 5 with and 4 without the use of the endoluminal LAA balloon. In all animals, LAA closure was complete without a leak. The level of LAA closure was at the base without a proximal residual LAA remnant in 5 of 5 (100%) animals when the endoluminal balloon was used, but in only 1 of 4 (25%) of animals when it was not used. No acute procedural complications occurred. Percutaneous epicardial suture ligation of the LAA is feasible with this novel device. The concomitant use of an endoluminal balloon catheter placed in the LAA significantly increases the likelihood of excluding the entire LAA from the circulation.

