21209114
Budding capability of the influenza virus neuraminidase can be modulated by tetherin.
We have determined that, in addition to its receptor-destroying activity, the influenza virus neuraminidase is capable of efficiently forming virus-like particles (VLPs) when expressed individually from plasmid DNA. This observation applies to both human subtypes of neuraminidase, N1 and N2. However, it is not found with every strain of influenza virus. Through gain-of-function and loss-of-function analyses, a critical determinant within the neuraminidase ectodomain was identified that contributes to VLP formation but is not sufficient to accomplish release of plasmid-derived VLPs. This sequence lies on the plasma membrane-proximal side of the neuraminidase globular head. Most importantly, we demonstrate that the antiviral restriction factor tetherin plays a role in determining the strain-specific limitations of release competency. If tetherin is counteracted by small interfering RNA knockdown or expression of the HIV anti-tetherin factor vpu, budding and release capability is bestowed upon an otherwise budding-deficient neuraminidase. These data suggest that budding-competent neuraminidase proteins possess an as-yet-unidentified means of counteracting the antiviral restriction factor tetherin and identify a novel way in which the influenza virus neuraminidase can contribute to virus release.

21159873
Newcastle disease virus expressing a dendritic cell-targeted HIV gag protein induces a potent gag-specific immune response in mice.
Viral vaccine vectors have emerged as an attractive strategy for the development of a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) vaccine. Recombinant Newcastle disease virus (rNDV) stands out as a vaccine vector since it has a proven safety profile in humans, it is a potent inducer of both alpha interferon (IFN-?) and IFN-?) production, and it is a potent inducer of dendritic cell (DC) maturation. Our group has previously generated an rNDV vector expressing a codon-optimized HIV Gag protein and demonstrated its ability to induce a Gag-specific CD8(+) T cell response in mice. In this report we demonstrate that the Gag-specific immune response can be further enhanced by the targeting of the rNDV-encoded HIV Gag antigen to DCs. Targeting of the HIV Gag antigen was achieved by the addition of a single-chain Fv (scFv) antibody specific for the DC-restricted antigen uptake receptor DEC205 such that the DEC205 scFv-Gag molecule was encoded for expression as a fusion protein. The vaccination of mice with rNDV coding for the DC-targeted Gag antigen induced an enhanced Gag-specific CD8(+) T cell response and enhanced numbers of CD4(+) T cells and CD8(+) T cells in the spleen relative to vaccination with rNDV coding for a nontargeted Gag antigen. Importantly, mice vaccinated with the DEC205-targeted vaccine were better protected from challenge with a recombinant vaccinia virus expressing the HIV Gag protein. Here we demonstrate that the targeting of the HIV Gag antigen to DCs via the DEC205 receptor enhances the ability of an rNDV vector to induce a potent antigen-specific immune response.

20689752
Influenza virus vaccine based on the conserved hemagglutinin stalk domain.
Although highly effective in the general population when well matched to circulating influenza virus strains, current influenza vaccines are limited in their utility due to the narrow breadth of protection they provide. The strain specificity of vaccines presently in use mirrors the exquisite specificity of the neutralizing antibodies that they induce, that is, antibodies which bind to the highly variable globular head domain of hemagglutinin (HA). Herein, we describe the construction of a novel immunogen comprising the conserved influenza HA stalk domain and lacking the globular head. Vaccination of mice with this headless HA construct elicited immune sera with broader reactivity than those obtained from mice immunized with a full-length HA. Furthermore, the headless HA vaccine provided full protection against death and partial protection against disease following lethal viral challenge. Our results suggest that the response induced by headless HA vaccines is sufficiently potent to warrant their further development toward a universal influenza virus vaccine.

20519387
A nine-segment influenza a virus carrying subtype H1 and H3 hemagglutinins.
Influenza virus genomic RNAs possess segment-specific packaging signals that include both noncoding regions (NCRs) and adjacent terminal coding region sequences. Using reverse genetics, an A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (A/PR/8/34) virus was rescued that contained a modified PB1 gene such that the PB1 packaging sequences were exchanged for those of the neuraminidase (NA) gene segment. To accomplish this, the PB1 open reading frame, in which the terminal packaging signals were inactivated by serial synonymous mutations, was flanked by the NA segment-specific packaging sequences including the NCRs and the coding region packaging signals. Next, the ATGs located on the 3' end of the NA packaging sequences of the resulting PB1 chimeric segment were mutated to allow for correct translation of the full-length PB1 protein. The virus containing this chimeric PB1 segment was viable and able to stably carry a ninth, green fluorescent protein (GFP), segment flanked by PB1 packaging signals. Utilizing this method, we successfully generated an influenza virus that contained the genes coding for both the H1 hemagglutinin (HA) from A/PR/8/34 and the H3 HA from A/Hong Kong/1/68 (A/HK/1/68); both subtypes of HA protein were also incorporated into the viral envelope. Immunization of mice with this recombinant virus conferred complete protection from lethal challenge with recombinant A/PR/8/34 virus and with X31 virus that expresses the A/HK/1/68 HA and NA. Using the described methodology, we show that a ninth segment can also be incorporated by manipulation of the PB2 or PA segment-specific packaging signals. This approach offers a means of generating a bivalent influenza virus vaccine.

19805230
Rewiring the RNAs of influenza virus to prevent reassortment.
Influenza viruses contain segmented, negative-strand RNA genomes. Genome segmentation facilitates reassortment between different influenza virus strains infecting the same cell. This phenomenon results in the rapid exchange of RNA segments. In this study, we have developed a method to prevent the free reassortment of influenza A virus RNAs by rewiring their packaging signals. Specific packaging signals for individual influenza virus RNA segments are located in the 5' and 3' noncoding regions as well as in the terminal regions of the ORF of an RNA segment. By putting the nonstructural protein (NS)-specific packaging sequences onto the ORF of the hemagglutinin (HA) gene and mutating the packaging regions in the ORF of the HA, we created a chimeric HA segment with the packaging identity of an NS gene. By the same strategy, we made an NS gene with the packaging identity of an HA segment. This rewired virus had the packaging signals for all eight influenza virus RNAs, but it lost the ability to independently reassort its HA or NS gene. A similar approach can be applied to the other influenza A virus segments to diminish their ability to form reassortant viruses.

18448539
A seven-segmented influenza A virus expressing the influenza C virus glycoprotein HEF.
Influenza viruses are classified into three types: A, B, and C. The genomes of A- and B-type influenza viruses consist of eight RNA segments, whereas influenza C viruses only have seven RNAs. Both A and B influenza viruses contain two major surface glycoproteins: the hemagglutinin (HA) and the neuraminidase (NA). Influenza C viruses have only one major surface glycoprotein, HEF (hemagglutinin-esterase fusion). By using reverse genetics, we generated two seven-segmented chimeric influenza viruses. Each possesses six RNA segments from influenza virus A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (PB2, PB1, PA, NP, M, and NS); the seventh RNA segment encodes either the influenza virus C/Johannesburg/1/66 HEF full-length protein or a chimeric protein HEF-Ecto, which consists of the HEF ectodomain and the HA transmembrane and cytoplasmic regions. To facilitate packaging of the heterologous segment, both the HEF and HEF-Ecto coding regions are flanked by HA packaging sequences. When introduced as an eighth segment with the NA packaging sequences, both viruses are able to stably express a green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene, indicating a potential use for these viruses as vaccine vectors to carry foreign antigens. Finally, we show that incorporation of a GFP RNA segment enhances the growth of seven-segmented viruses, indicating that efficient influenza A viral RNA packaging requires the presence of eight RNA segments. These results support a selective mechanism of viral RNA recruitment to the budding site.

18199643
Expression of transgenes from newcastle disease virus with a segmented genome.
Paramyxoviruses belong to the Paramyxoviridae family of the order Mononegavirales. They have a nonsegmented negative-stranded RNA genome and can cause a number of diseases in humans and animals. We generated a recombinant Newcastle disease virus (NDV) possessing a two-segmented genome. Each genomic segment is flanked by authentic NDV 3' and 5' noncoding termini allowing for efficient replication and transcription. A reporter gene encoding green fluorescent protein (GFP) was inserted into one segment, and a red fluorescent protein dsRed gene was inserted into the other segment in order to easily detect the replication and transcription of segments in infected cells. The rescued viruses grew well and were stable in embryonated chicken eggs over multiple passages. We were able to detect the expression of both reporter genes in the same cell infected with the virus possessing a segmented genome, and viral particles can contain either one or two types of RNA segments. We also rescued a two-segmented virus expressing GFP and the severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus spike S protein, which is about 200 kDa. The chimeric virus extends the coding capacity of NDV by 30%, suggesting that the two-segmented NDV can be used for development of vaccines or gene therapy vectors carrying long and multiple transgenes.

