21103444
Improving lesion detection during colonoscopy.
Colonoscopy has changed since it was first introduced 50 years ago, with glass fibers being replaced by video electronics, the addition of water jets, better illumination, and the use of filters to enhance visual identification of polyps. In spite of these improvements, polyps and tumors of the colon are still overlooked even by the most meticulous examiner. Because missed lesions can develop into cancer, better imaging methods are required. The Third Eye Retroscope is a device that, in conjunction with the video colonoscope, may be able to find virtually all lesions in the colon. This novel device is described here and presents a new way to look into the colon.

21093761
Wide view and retroview during colonoscopy.
Colonoscopy is the best imaging device currently available for the detection of lesions in the large bowel, but may be an imperfect tool against colon cancer. Because recent guidelines for colorectal cancer screening and surveillance depend on whether polyps are found on colonoscopy and on their size, the need to identify all the neoplasia in the colon has assumed greater importance. This article reviews and assesses the latest developments in colonoscopy including wide-angle optics, endoscope caps and hoods, retroflexion and the use of the third eye retroscope.

20978843
Computer-assisted brush-biopsy analysis for the detection of dysplasia in a high-risk Barrett's esophagus surveillance population.
Barrett's epithelial dysplasia, the direct precursor to esophageal adenocarcinoma, is often unapparent and frequently missed during surveillance of Barrett's esophagus with four-quadrant forceps biopsy protocol. To determine whether the detection of dysplasia is improved by adding computer-assisted brush biopsy (EndoCDx©) to four-quadrant biopsy protocol. Patients with a history of Barrett's esophagus with dysplasia scheduled for endoscopic surveillance were recruited from four academic medical centers. Patients underwent brush biopsy followed by four-quadrant biopsy every 1-2 cm. The results from brush and forceps biopsy were reviewed independently by pathologists blinded to the other's results. Among 151 patients enrolled (124 men, 27 women; mean age: 65), 117 (77.5%) had forceps and brush-biopsy specimens adequate for interpretation. The mean number of forceps biopsies was 11.9 (median 10, range 2-40) and brush biopsies was 2.0 (median 2, range 1-4). The overall yield of forceps alone was 25.2% (n = 38). Brush biopsy added an additional 16 positive cases increasing the yield of dysplasia detection by 42% (95% CI: 20.7-72.7). The number needed to test (NNT) to detect one additional case of dysplasia was 9.4 (95% CI: 6.4-17.7). There were no significant differences in results among different centers, between standard versus jumbo forceps, or between forceps biopsies taken every 1 cm versus every 2 cm. These data suggest that computer-assisted brush biopsy is a useful adjunct to standard endoscopic surveillance regimens for the identification of dysplasia in Barrett's esophagus.

20451818
Finding polyps at colonoscopy previously noted on CT colonography.
Colon screening examinations have been shown to discover neoplastic lesions at an early stage. Even the most careful studies by colonoscopy and by computed tomographic colonography (CTC) can overlook tumors with a diameter greater than 5 mm. Advances in technology have continually improved the ability to find polyps, which will lead to a real decrease in colorectal cancer incidence.

20018280
A retrograde-viewing device improves detection of adenomas in the colon: a prospective efficacy evaluation (with videos).
Colonoscopy may fail to detect neoplasia located on the proximal sides of haustral folds and flexures. The Third Eye Retroscope (TER) provides a simultaneous retrograde view that complements the forward view of a standard colonoscope. To evaluate the added benefit for polyp detection during colonoscopy of a retrograde-viewing device. Open-label, prospective, multicenter study evaluating colonoscopy by using a TER in combination with a standard colonoscope. Eight U.S. sites, including university medical centers, ambulatory surgery centers, a community hospital, and a physician's office. A total of 249 patients (age range 55-80 years) presenting for screening or surveillance colonoscopy. After cecal intubation, the disposable TER was inserted through the instrument channel of the colonoscope. During withdrawal, the forward and retrograde video images were observed simultaneously on a wide-screen monitor. The number and sizes of lesions (adenomas and all polyps) detected with the standard colonoscope and the number and sizes of lesions found only because they were first detected with the TER. In the 249 subjects, 257 polyps (including 136 adenomas) were identified with the colonoscope alone. The TER allowed detection of 34 additional polyps (a 13.2% increase; P < .0001) including 15 additional adenomas (an 11.0% increase; P < .0001). For lesions 6 mm or larger, the additional detection rates with the TER for all polyps and for adenomas were 18.2% and 25.0%, respectively. For lesions 10 mm or larger, the additional detection rates with the TER for all polyps and for adenomas were 30.8% and 33.3%, respectively. In 28 (11.2%) individuals, at least 1 additional polyp was found with the TER. In 8 (3.2%) patients, the polyp detected with the TER was the only one found. Every polyp that was detected with the TER was subsequently located with the colonoscope and removed. For all polyps and for adenomas, the additional detection rates for the TER were 9.7%/4.1% in the left colon (the splenic flexure to the rectum) and 16.5%/14.9% in the right colon (the cecum to the transverse colon), respectively. There was no randomization or comparison with a separate control group. A retrograde-viewing device revealed areas that were hidden from the forward-viewing colonoscope and allowed detection of 13.2% additional polyps, including 11.0% additional adenomas. Additional detection rates with the TER for adenomas 6 mm or larger and 10 mm or larger were 25.0% and 33.3%, respectively. (Clinical trial registration number: NCT00657371.).

19190605
A balancing view: should large colon polyps be removed colonoscopically or surgically?


18844620
Chromoendoscopy-targeted biopsies are superior to standard colonoscopic surveillance for detecting dysplasia in inflammatory bowel disease patients: a prospective endoscopic trial.
Patients with extensive, longstanding chronic ulcerative or Crohn's colitis face greater risks of developing colorectal cancer. Current standard surveillance relies on detecting dysplasia using random sampling at colonoscopy but may fail to detect dysplasia in many patients. Dye spraying techniques have been reported to aid in detecting otherwise subtle mucosal abnormalities in the setting of colitis. We prospectively compared dye-spray technique using methylene blue to standard colonoscopic surveillance in detecting dysplasia. One hundred fifteen patients were referred to the Chromoendoscopy Study Group and prospectively screened for the study. One hundred two (64 M, 38 F) (79 UC 23 CC) patients meeting the inclusion criteria were enrolled. Following a standard bowel preparation, each patient was examined using standard office endoscopic equipment by three methods: (a) standard surveillance colonoscopy with four random biopsies every 10 cm (for a total of at least 32 samples); (b) a targeted biopsy protocol; and finally (c) methylene blue (0.01%) dye spray was segmentally applied throughout the colon and any pit-pattern abnormality or lesion rendered visible by the dye spray was targeted and biopsied. Each patient had a single examination, which included two passes of the colonoscope. Specimens were reviewed in a blinded fashion by a single gastrointestinal pathologist. The three methods were then compared with each patient serving as his or her own control. Targeted biopsies with dye spray revealed significantly more dysplasia (16 patients with low grade and 1 patient with high grade) than random biopsies (3 patients with low-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.001) and more than targeted nondye spray (8 patients with low-grade and 1 patient with high-grade dysplasia) (P= 0.057). Targeted biopsies with and without dye spray detected dysplasia in 20 patients compared with 3 using Method (a) (P= 0.0002, two-tailed exact McNemar's Test). There were no adverse events. Colonoscopic surveillance of chronic colitis patients using methylene blue dye-spray targeted biopsies results in improved dysplasia yield compared to conventional random and targeted biopsy methods. Accordingly, this technique warrants incorporation into clinical practice in this setting and consideration as a standard of care for these patients. The value of multiple random biopsies as a surveillance technique should be revisited.

17534284
Should all colonoscopies be performed in the morning?


18493514
Colonoscopic polypectomy.
Colonoscopic polypectomy is a major advance in the therapy of colon neoplasms. The techniques for safe and efficient polyp removal are described. The uses of a variety of ancillary devices are discussed, including clips, loops, submucosal injection of fluid, and several thermal probes, including the argon plasma coagulator. The location of a lesion may be difficult to ascertain by intracolonic landmarks, but can be more precisely determined by X-ray, magnetic imaging, or intraoperative colonoscopy. Alternatively, it is possible to permanently mark the site of polyp removal with a carbon particle submucosal injection to facilitate subsequent localization either by surgery or interval colonoscopy.

