21518384
Lupus-like lesions in a 28-month-old boy with chronic granulomatous disease on long-term voriconazole prophylaxis.


21496949
A randomized controlled trial of oral phosphate binders in the treatment of pseudoxanthoma elasticum.
BACKGROUND: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a rare connective tissue disorder involving fragmentation and mineralization of elastic fibers predominantly in the skin, eyes, and cardiovascular system. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to assess the efficacy of sevelamer hydrochloride on the reversal of elastic fiber calcification and clinical lesions of PXE. METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, two-part prospective study. In the first year, 40 patients with PXE were randomized to receive either sevelamer hydrochloride (800 mg by mouth three times daily) or placebo in a 1:1 ratio. In the second year, all patients received sevelamer hydrochloride (800 mg by mouth three times daily). RESULTS: In the first year, the placebo and treatment groups' mean calcium scores decreased from 29.52 to 15.97 (41.93% mean improvement) and 27.48 to 16.75 (38.37% mean improvement), respectively. In the second year, the mean calcium scores decreased to 13.36 (53.94%) and 14.03 (51.35%) in these groups. The mean clinical score in the placebo group decreased from 6.25 to 6.05 at year 1 (2% improvement) whereas the mean clinical score in the sevelamer hydrochloride group decreased from 7.10 to 6.55 (7% improvement). In year 2, the scores in the original placebo and sevelamer hydrochloride groups decreased to 5.33 (14% improvement) and 5.72 (19% improvement), respectively. LIMITATIONS: Magnesium stearate in our placebo and active drugs may have played a confounding role in this study, contributing to the small differences observed in these two groups. CONCLUSION: Sevelamer hydrochloride produced a reduction in both calcification levels and clinical scores; however, this difference was not statistically significant compared with placebo. Future clinical studies should examine the inhibitory role and potential therapeutic effect of magnesium in PXE.

18360126
Complete regression of primary malignant melanoma.
Over the years, histopathologic studies to determine the nature and significance of regression in malignant melanoma have yielded different results. At least in part, this most likely reflects differences in the definition of what constitutes regression. Although partial regression is relatively common, complete regression is rare. It has been said that complete regression of a primary lesion is associated with metastatic disease, but the evidence for this is largely anecdotal-the literature contains only case reports and small series. We found 2 cases of complete regression in our dermatopathology database. Metastatic disease was identified in both cases; in 1 case, the suspicion of melanoma was raised on the initial biopsy and subsequent workup revealed lymph node metastasis. These cases illustrate the histologic features of a completely regressed primary melanoma and add credence to the theory that completely regressed melanoma is associated with a poor outcome.

18261113
Metastatic Crohn's disease: a histopathologic study of 12 cases.
Perhaps, the most intriguing cutaneous sequela of Crohn's disease (CD) is 'metastatic' CD, defined as sterile granulomatous skin lesions arising at sites discontinuous from the gastrointestinal tract. Though various histopathologic patterns have been described, a lack of a large series has precluded a comprehensive characterization and distinction from the pathologic differential diagnoses. The histopathology features of 12 new cases of metastatic CD were reviewed. Non-suppurative granulomata with a slight cuff of lymphocytes in a nodular or diffuse pattern with an associated superficial and deep perivascular mixed inflammatory infiltrate was the most common pattern. Other common features included an accompanying infiltrate which was often rich in eosinophils, and ulceration of the overlying epidermis. These features are emphasized as potentially useful in distinguishing this entity from its greatest mimicker, cutaneous sarcoidosis.

18251743
Immunohistochemical detection of XIAP in melanoma.
The X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) is the most potent of the inhibitor of apoptosis family of eight proteins. High levels of XIAP have been found in melanoma cell lines and are believed to play a role in therapeutic resistance in a number of malignancies. XIAP expression has not been investigated in clinically obtained melanoma tissue samples, nor have studies attempted to correlate XIAP expression with prognostic variables or clinical aggressiveness of melanomas. Sixty-seven patients with primary cutaneous malignant melanoma for whom clinical follow up was available were identified from the records of the Mount Sinai Hospital, comprising 37 thin melanomas (Breslow thickness < 1.0 mm) and 30 thick melanomas (Breslow thickness > 1.0 mm). Archival paraffin sections from primary lesions and corresponding metastases were stained with monoclonal anti-XIAP antibody using routine immunohistochemical methods. Six benign intradermal nevi and four in situ melanomas were XIAP negative. 9 of 37 thin melanomas (24%) were XIAP positive. In contrast, 21 of 30 (73%) thick melanomas were XIAP positive, including 3 of 4 ulcerated melanomas that were strongly positive. Over a follow-up period ranging from 6 months to 6 years, 23 melanomas metastasized (22 thick, 1 thin). In total, XIAP was immunohistochemically detected in 17 of 23 metastases (74%). Metastasis occurred in 1 of 9 XIAP-positive thin melanomas; 0 of 28 XIAP-negative thin melanomas; 17 of 22 XIAP-positive thick melanomas, and 5 of 8 XIAP-negative thick melanomas (63%). XIAP is immunohistochemically detectable nearly three times more frequently in thick compared with thin melanomas. These results suggest that XIAP elevation may be correlated with increasing melanoma thickness and tumor progression.

18095998
Dabska tumor arising in lymphangioma circumscriptum.
We describe a case of Dabska tumor (DT) occurring within a large congenital lymphangioma circumscriptum on the thigh of a 14-year-old female. Diagnostic biopsy showed numerous intravascular papillary projections lined by atypical endothelial cells within the anastomosing vascular channels of a lymphangioma circumscriptum. DT is regarded as a vascular tumor of intermediate malignant potential, most probably of lymphatic origin. Although it has been described in pre-existing lymphangiomas, to the best of our knowledge this is the first case to be described in a pre-existing lymphangioma circumscriptum. During a follow-up of 9 years, the lymphangioma circumscriptum has recurred, but there has been no evidence of DT recurrence or metastasis.

18001416
Poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with osteoclastic giant-cell-like proliferation.
Although osteoclast giant-cell-like proliferations have been reported in a diverse range of human malignancies, to the best of our knowledge, they have never been described in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Histologically, osteoclastic giant cell tumors within extraosseous malignancy resemble their bony and soft tissue counterparts, with round to spindle-shaped cells admixed with osteoclast-like multinucleate cells. These cells should be distinguished from sarcomatoid differentiation within a carcinoma; they have a benign morphology with a low nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, minimal pleomorphism/mitoses and negative immunohistochemistry for cytokeratin. The authors report the rare occurrence of osteoclast-like giant cells (OGCs) and accompanying epithelioid histiocytes lacking overtly malignant features in association with a poorly differentiated SCC occurring on sun-damaged skin. Immunohistochemically, the area rich in OGCs was strongly positive for CD68 and completely negative for cytokeratin, whereas the poorly differentiated infiltrative area had the reverse immunophenotype and nuclear positivity for p63. The histological differential diagnosis and the origin of the proliferation are discussed in this article.

17483661
Griscelli syndrome.
The dermatology staff was called to evaluate abnormal hair on a 22-month-old Hispanic girl whose parents were first cousins. Her medical history was significant for leptomeningitis with subsequent neurologic devastation, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and recurrent respiratory infections. Her hospital course was complicated by sepsis, liver dysfunction, pan-cytopenia, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. She had developed normally for the first year of life. At 13 months she became progressively lethargic and developed floppy muscle tone; a delay in mental and motor milestones was recognized. Results of a metabolic workup were negative. On examination she was noted to have generalized excessively fair skin when compared with her parents. She had silver-gray hair (Figure 1) and white eyebrows and body hair. Her maternal grandfather and granduncles had silver hair since childhood, but were without health problems. A maternal family member was said to have light skin. The presumed diagnosis before pathologic examination was Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Hematoxylin and eosin stain tests revealed prominent melanocytes in the basal layer of the epidermis. The melanocytes were large and distended with a large volume of melanin (Figure 2). The adjacent keratinocytes were completely devoid of melanin. Application of Masson-Fontana ammoniac silver stain highlighted prominent melanocytic melanin and a relative paucity of melanin in the adjacent keratinocytes (Figure 3). Microscopic examination of her hair revealed clumps of melanin of various sizes and shapes irregularly distributed throughout the hair shaft. Ultrastructural examination of the epidermis showed the melanocytes were distended by an accumulation of large stage IV mature melanosomes. Peripheral blood smear failed to show abnormal granules, even after repeated examination. Based on the clinical features and the pathologic findings, a diagnosis of Griscelli syndrome type 2 was made.

17483659
Diagnostic dilemma: crusted scabies superimposed on psoriatic erythroderma in a patient with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
A 45-year-old man with AIDS presented with extensive erythema and scaling involving the face, trunk, and upper and lower extremities, and mild nail dystrophy. The patient had been diagnosed with psoriasis 2 years previously, and at the time of presentation was using emollients and topical corticosteroid creams with little improvement. He was receiving zidovudine, lamivudine, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, acyclovir, rifabutin, and hydroxyzine. Pertinent laboratory data included CD4 lymphocytes (10 cells/mm(3)), viral load (32,000 copies per mL) white blood cell count (3.4 x 10(3)/microL), hemoglobin (13.5 g/dL), and platelets (204 x 10(3)/microL). Because of the extensive eruption and lack of response to topical agents, the patient was started on acitretin 25 mg daily. The patient had shown no signs of improvement 4 weeks later and was noted to have brownish gray crusted plaques involving the beard area, neck, upper part of the back, arms, trunk, genitals, and thighs in addition to his erythroderma (Figure 1 and Figure 2). Microscopic examination of scales from the upper part of the back revealed numerous scabies mites and eggs. He was then treated with lindane shampoo on the scalp and beard area and permethrin 5% cream to the body. The patient returned 2 weeks later with some improvement after thrice-weekly applications of this regimen; however, scrapings from the trunk once again revealed live scabies mites. Microscopic examination of scales that had fallen on the examination table revealed multiple mites and eggs. The patient was then given permethrin 5% cream, which he applied 3 times a week for 2 weeks, and 1 dose of oral ivermectin, 200 micro/kg. This resulted in a marked decrease in crusting and scaling. With resolution of the scabies lesions, the patient displayed marked erythema and scaling of the trunk and extremities consistent with generalized psoriasis (Figure 3). Treatment with acitretin resulted in gradual resolution of the erythroderma. A few months later, the patient presented with nodules on the upper part of the back, which on biopsy revealed a scabies mite (Figure 4).

17448200
Aggressive osteogenic desmoplastic melanoma: a case report.
A case of an osteogenic desmoplastic melanoma occurring on the sole of the foot of a 60-year-old African American man is described. The tumor measured 4.8 cm in greatest dimension, invaded to a thickness of 2.2 cm and metastasized to four of ten inguinal lymph nodes. The majority of the tumor had a classic desmoplastic phenotype with malignant spindle cells set in a sclerotic and myxoid matrix and foci of lymphocyte aggregation. In other areas, there were thick trabeculae of bone rimmed by malignant epithelioid melanocytes. There was a markedly atypical lentiginous hyperplasia in the overlying epidermis. Imaging showed no continuity with the underlying calcaneus. The tumor was characterized immunohistochemically by S100 positivity. Pathologists should be aware of this diagnosis and should differentiate it from osteosarcoma.

21116031
A diffuse painful desquamating rash.


19078127
Protracted vasculitis in adults with henoch-schönlein purpura.
Although Henoch-Schönlein Purpura (HSP) is widely believed to be a benign, self-limited form of vasculitis, this generalization, when applied to adults, may not be valid.We describe five patients with prolonged severe vasculitis, all of whom met American College of Rheumatology criteria and carried a clinical arid tissue diagnosis of HSP. In each case, the vasculitic manifestations necessitated treatment with steroids and/or immunosuppressant therapy. This experience suggests that the benign histopathology of HSP in adults does not guarantee a benign clinical course.

19078015
Erythema Nodosum versus Erythema Induratum: A Crucial Distinction Enabling Recognition of Occult Tuberculosis.
Erythema induratum, previously uncommon, is appearing more frequently coincident with the recrudescence of tuberculosis. It is a type of panniculitis often confused clinically with erythema nodosum. We report two patients who were both initially believed to have erythema nodosum and a multisystem disorder. However, in each case, the lesions appeared atypical due to suppuration or distribution of the lesions. This led to skin biopsies, which showed the presence of erythema induratum and excluded the panniculitis of erythema nodosum or leukocytoclastic vasculitis. This lesion heightened our suspicion of the presence of tuberculosis, which was subsequently confirmed by culture and/or clinical response.This experience suggests that patients with an atypical presentation of erythema nodosum should have a skin biopsy to exclude a diagnosis of erythema induratum.

