20410819
Food allergy and eosinophilic esophagitis.
Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic allergic disease of the esophagus. A mix of immediate, IgE-mediated and delayed, non-IgE-mediated immunological reactions to foods is thought to play a role in EoE. Our purpose is to review available clinical and research evidence for this link between food allergy and EoE. Various food elimination trials resulted in various rates of disease remission. Exclusive amino acid formula-based dietary trials resulted in more than 90% remission in children with EoE. Empiric elimination diets consisting of avoidance of foods commonly known to cause hypersensitivity reactions resulted in 50-74% disease remission. When diets were tailored based on results from skin prick and atopy patch tests, remission rates were comparable. Translational research studies performed on esophageal tissues and peripheral blood of patients with EoE demonstrated an allergic T-helper type 2 phenotype, though mechanisms linking the disease to food allergens are not fully addressed. Foods appear to be important allergic triggers in EoE. Identification of these triggers, however, remains a challenge. Research is needed to elucidate at which point in the pathogenesis of EoE foods become important so that their role can be better understood, and develop better tests to identify these foods.

19141350
The role of lymphocytes in eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders.
Eosinophilic gastrointestinal diseases (EGIDs) encompass a variety of disorders including eosinophilic esophagitis (EE), eosinophilic gastroenteritis (EG), and eosinophilic colitis. Although the pathogenesis of EGIDs is still poorly understood, dietary food antigens have been shown to cause EGIDs through several short-term clinical studies. The relationship of EGIDs with food allergy points to a potential breach of oral tolerance in EGIDs and to a potentially important role played by lymphocytes in responding to the oral food antigens. This article discusses the concept of oral tolerance, the available evidence for the role that lymphocytes play in the induction and pathogenesis of EGIDs, and the evidence for a potential breach in oral tolerance in EGIDs.

18061108
Translational research on the pathogenesis of eosinophilic esophagitis.
Eosinophilic esophagitis (EE) is an inflammatory disease of the esophagus characterized by eosinophilic infiltration of the esophageal epithelium. EE is a relatively new disease from clinical and research standpoints. A recent surge in basic and translational studies has emerged to understand its pathogenesis since its recognition as a separate entity from acid-induced gastroesophageal reflux disease in 1995. Our understanding of this disease is still limited, however. In this article, available evidence from translational studies on EE is discussed, focusing on the allergic nature of the disease and highlighting the role of various inflammatory cells found in the esophagus of patients who have EE. Esophageal remodeling in EE is also discussed.

18061100
Epidemiology and etiology of eosinophilic esophagitis.
Eosinophilic esophagitis (EE) is an inflammatory disease of the esophagus characterized by eosinophilic infiltration of the esophageal mucosa. Symptoms of EE are variable, and include gastroesophageal reflux symptoms, abdominal pain, growth failure, and dysphagia. Dysphagia is a more common presentation in adults and older children. Serious complications of EE consisting of esophageal food impactions necessitating urgent endoscopic removal of the food and esophageal strictures requiring endoscopic balloon dilatations are also seen. The potential severity of these symptoms points to the importance of proper recognition and management of the disease, especially given that EE has become more prevalent over the past decade. In this article, available evidence on the epidemiology and etiology of EE is discussed.

18054562
Allergen-IgE complexes trigger CD23-dependent CCL20 release from human intestinal epithelial cells.
In food allergic individuals, exposure to food allergens by the oral route can trigger immediate (within minutes) local hypersensitivity reactions in the intestine followed by a late-phase inflammatory response. Previous work has shown that CD23 is constitutively expressed by human intestinal epithelial cells and mediates the uptake of allergen-IgE complexes. We hypothesized that allergen-IgE complexes could also signal via CD23 to trigger an inflammatory cascade in the local environment. Caco-2 monolayers were stimulated with human IgE-antigen (Ag) complexes. IL-8 and CCL20 mRNA and protein were determined by RT-PCR and ELISA, respectively. Signaling pathways were assessed by immunoblotting. Endogenous CD23 expression was knocked down by stable transfection with CD23 shRNA retroviral plasmid. Migration assays were performed using human monocyte-derived dendritic cells. Stimulation of Caco-2 cells with IgE-Ag complexes triggered upregulation of IL-8 and CCL20 at the mRNA and protein level. Allergen complexes induced phosphorylation of ERK and JNK, but not p38 MAP kinase or NK-kappaB, and resulted in AP-1 activation. Cross-linking of CD23 replicated the findings with IgE-Ag complexes, and silencing of CD23 expression abrogated the response to allergen-IgE complexes. Supernatant from IgE-Ag-stimulated epithelial cells induced migration of dendritic cells in a CCL20-dependent manner. Finally, immunostaining of duodenal biopsies demonstrated that CCL20 was constitutively expressed by epithelial cells in vivo. Signaling via epithelial CD23 may participate in the late-phase inflammatory response by the release of chemokines capable of recruiting antigen presenting cells and effector cells of allergic inflammation.

17873749
Multiple exudative ulcers and pseudopolyps in allergic eosinophilic gastroenteritis that responded to dietary therapy.


17873744
Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis in children with eosinophilic esophagitis.
Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis has been reported in adults with eosinophilic esophagitis (EE). Our goal was to determine the prevalence of esophageal fibrosis in children with EE, to determine whether it is specific for EE, and to correlate it with clinical and pathological features. Twenty-one children with EE, 7 with eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 6 with gastroesophageal reflux disease, and 17 control children were studied. Distal esophageal biopsy specimens containing lamina propria were evaluated for extent of subepithelial collagen deposition by use of trichrome staining. Fibrosis was defined as abnormally increased collagen deposition, determined after the establishment of normal patterns on sections of esophagus from pediatric autopsies. Maximum numbers of intraepithelial and lamina propria eosinophils per high-power field by hematoxylin and eosin staining and mast cells per high-power field by immunohistochemical staining for tryptase were determined. Eosinophil and mast cell degranulation in epithelium and lamina propria was determined by use of immunohistochemical staining for major basic protein and tryptase, respectively. The patients' records were reviewed. Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis was present in 12 (57%) patients with EE, 1 with eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 0 with gastroesophageal reflux disease, and 1 control patient. Forty-two percent of those with fibrosis had dysphagia, 80% of whom had food impactions; these symptoms were present only in patients with fibrosis. Within the EE group, fibrosis was not associated with duration of symptoms or with increasing numbers of infiltrating eosinophils/mast cells, but it was associated with eosinophil degranulation. Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis is prevalent in EE and is specific for the disease in children. It is associated with dysphagia, and it may explain and predict future esophageal dysmotility. Fibrosis is related to the extent of esophageal eosinophil activation, as evidenced by eosinophil degranulation.

17489046
IgE and non-IgE-mediated food allergy: treatment in 2007.
Our understanding of the mechanism of food allergy has substantially increased over the past decade. Food allergies can be classified into those that are IgE mediated and those that are non-IgE mediated. Various advances have been made in treating IgE-mediated food allergies. A phase II clinical trial of a second anti-IgE antibody, omalizumab, was recently initiated in subjects with peanut allergy, but was stopped as a result of safety concerns after severe reactions occurred during initial oral challenges. Oral immunotherapy is showing promise in various studies on patients with IgE-mediated food allergies. Gastrointestinal food allergic disorders involving non-IgE-mediated food allergies have recently received attention, particularly eosinophilic esophagitis. Although amino acid-based formula therapy remains the most successful in controlling inflammation and symptoms in these disorders, other therapeutic options including various dietary elimination protocols and swallowed fluticasone are showing success. Anti-IL-5 therapy may prove to be a promising future therapeutic option for refractory patients. Although there are no specific therapeutic recommendations for many IgE-mediated and non-IgE-mediated food allergic disorders besides allergen avoidance, various novel approaches are currently being investigated and may influence treatment approaches in the future.

