21115066
Dorso- and ventro-lateral prefrontal volume and spatial working memory in schizotypal personality disorder.
Schizotypal personality disorder (SPD) individuals and borderline personality disorder (BPD) individuals have been reported to show neuropsychological impairments and abnormalities in brain structure. However, relationships between neuropsychological function and brain structure in these groups are not well understood. This study compared visual-spatial working memory (SWM) and its associations with dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) gray matter volume in 18 unmedicated SPD patients with no BPD traits, 18 unmedicated BPD patients with no SPD traits, and 16 healthy controls (HC). Results showed impaired SWM in SPD but not BPD, compared with HC. Moreover, among the HC group, but not SPD patients, better SWM performance was associated with larger VLPFC (BA44/45) gray matter volume (Fisher's Z p-values <0.05). Findings suggest spatial working memory impairments may be a core neuropsychological deficit specific to SPD patients and highlight the role of VLPFC subcomponents in normal and dysfunctional memory performance.

19715400
Statistical parametric mapping and cluster counting analysis of [18F] FDG-PET imaging in traumatic brain injury.
In this study we investigated regional cerebral glucose metabolism abnormalities of [(18)F] fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) imaging in traumatic brain injury (TBI). PET images of 81 TBI patients and 68 normal controls were acquired and a word list learning task was administered during the uptake period. The TBI group included 35 patients with positive structural imaging (CT or MRI) findings soon after injury, 40 patients with negative findings, and 6 cases without structural imaging. Statistical parametric mapping (SPM) analysis was applied with several levels of spatial smoothing. Cluster counting analysis was performed for each subject to identify abnormal clusters with contiguous voxel values that deviated by two standard deviations or more from the mean of the normal controls, and to count the number of clusters in 10 size categories. SPM maps demonstrated that the 81 patients had significantly lower FDG uptake than normal controls, widely across the cortex (including bilateral frontal and temporal regions), and in the thalamus. Cluster counting results indicated that TBI patients had a higher proportion of larger clusters than controls. These large low-FDG-uptake clusters of the TBI patients were closer to the brain edge than those of controls. These results suggest that deficits of cerebral metabolism in TBI are spread over multiple brain areas, that they are closer to the cortical surface than clusters in controls, and that group spatial patterns of abnormal cerebral metabolism may be similar in TBI patients with cognitive deficits with and without obvious acute abnormalities identified on structural imaging.

19697298
Evaluating cognition in an elderly cohort via telephone assessment.
Longitudinal neuropsychological assessment provides the opportunity to observe the earliest transition to cognitive impairment in healthy, elderly individuals. We examined the feasibility, and its comparability to in-person assessment, of a telephone administered battery of established neuropsychological measures of cognitive functioning in healthy, elderly women. Fifty-four women (age = 79 +/- 7.7; education = 15.4 +/- 3.3) who were in self-reported good health were recruited from senior centers and other community sources. A two-way cross-over design was used in which participants were randomly assigned to receive either (1) in-person neuropsychological assessment followed by telephone assessment and (2) telephone assessment followed by in-person assessment, separated by approximately 4 weeks. Linear regression models were used to determine whether there were performance differences by method (in-person vs. telephone), and equivalence testing assessed comparability of the two methods. There were no statistically significant differences in performance between in-person and telephone assessments on most neuropsychological tests, with the exception of digit span backward, Oral Trail Making Test Part A, and delayed recall on the SRT, the latter likely related to non-comparable exposure (6-trials in-person vs. 3-trials telephone). Equivalence testing differences fell in the pre-specified clinical equivalence zones, providing evidence of comparability of the two methods. These pilot data support telephone administration of a neuropsychological battery that yields comparable performance to in-person assessment with respect to most instruments. Significant differences in scores on some measures suggest care should be taken in selecting specific measures used in a neuropsychological battery administered by telephone.

19027195
Effects of sex and normal aging on regional brain activation during verbal memory performance.
This study examined the main and interactive effects of age and sex on relative glucose metabolic rate (rGMR) within gray matter of 39 cortical Brodmann areas (BAs) and the cingulate gyrus using (18)FDG-PET during a verbal memory task in 70 healthy normal adults, aged 20-87 years. Women showed significantly greater age-related rGMR decline in left cingulate gyrus than men (BAs 25, 24, 23, 31, 29). Both groups showed a decline in the anterior cingulate--a neuroanatomical structure that mediates effective cognitive-emotional interactions (BAs 32, 24, 25), while the other frontal regions did not show substantial decline. No sex differences in rGMR were identified within temporal, parietal and occipital lobes. Sex differences were observed for rGMR within subcomponents of the cingulate gyrus with men higher in BA25 and BA29, but lower in BA24 and BA 23 compared to women. For men, better memory performance was associated with greater rGMR in BA24, whereas in women better performance was associated with orbitofrontal-BA12. These results suggest that both age-related metabolic decline and sex differences within frontal regions are more marked in medial frontal and cingulate areas, consistent with some age-related patterns of affective and cognitive change.

