20833855
FDG PET with contrast-enhanced CT: a critical imaging tool for laryngeal carcinoma.
Fluorine 18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) has evolved to be an essential imaging modality in the evaluation of laryngeal carcinoma. Although the modality has limited utility in assessing the extent of the primary tumor, FDG PET has proved to be superior to anatomic modalities in the detection of lymph node and distant metastases. The role of FDG PET in the evaluation of patients with laryngeal tumors that are clinically classified as N0 has not shown consistent usefulness because of the innate resolution limitations of the camera. In the posttherapy setting, however, FDG PET has consistently demonstrated a high negative predictive value in the identification of recurrent disease, both during the course of therapy and during long-term follow-up. In addition, contrast material-enhanced computed tomography (CT) in conjunction with FDG PET has demonstrated a complementary role by allowing for superior anatomic coregistration and therefore more definitive diagnosis. There is sufficient evidence that with further advances in PET technology, this modality will likely become more useful in the detection of small lesions and occult nodal disease, as well as in guiding the management of laryngeal carcinoma.

20830768
Phase 2 trial of concurrent 5-fluorouracil, hydroxyurea, cetuximab, and hyperfractionated intensity-modulated radiation therapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer.
The objective of this phase 2 study was to evaluate the tolerability and efficacy of incorporating cetuximab and simultaneous integrated-boost (SIB), intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) into a well described 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and hydroxyurea (HU)-based chemoradiation regimen. Patients with stage IVA and IVB or high-risk stage III squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck were enrolled on a phase 2 trial. Prior organ-conserving surgery or induction chemotherapy was allowed off protocol. SIB-IMRT was prescribed to low-risk volumes (43.2 gray [Gy] to 48 Gy) and intermediate-risk volumes (54-63 Gy). A separate IMRT cone-down plan was targeted to macroscopic disease (72 Gy). The median radiation dose was 72 Gy (range, 60-72 Gy) administered in 1.5 Gy fractions twice daily during Weeks 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9. Concurrent systemic therapy consisted of 5-FU (600 mg/m²), HU (500 mg twice daily), and cetuximab (250 mg/m²). From January 2007 through April 2008, 33 patients were enrolled. At a median follow-up of 24 months, the 2-year rates of locoregional control, distant control, disease-free survival, and overall survival were 83%, 79%, 69%, and 86%, respectively. Grade 3 toxicity consisted of mucositis in 33% of patients, radiation dermatitis in 15%of patients, anemia in 18% of patients, leukopenia in 18% of patients, neutropenia in 12% of patients, and thrombocytopenia in 3% of patients. Most patients (64%) were able to tolerate treatment without a feeding tube, and there were no acute or late grade ?4 adverse events. The current results indicated that concurrent 5-FU, HU, and cetuximab plus SIB-IMRT is a promising and reasonably well tolerated approach to incorporating molecularly targeted therapy into curative therapy for patients with locally advanced head and neck cancer.

19544537
The diagnostic and prognostic utility of positron emission tomography/computed tomography-based follow-up after radiotherapy for head and neck cancer.
The detection of subclinical head and neck cancer recurrence or a second primary tumor may improve survival. In the current study, the authors investigated the clinical value of a follow-up program incorporating serial (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography integrated with computed tomography (PET/CT) in the detection of recurrent disease in patients with head and neck cancer. A total of 240 PET/CT scans were reviewed in 80 patients with head and neck cancer who were treated with radiotherapy (RT) from July, 2005 through August, 2007. All patients were followed with clinical examination, PET/CT, and correlative imaging for a minimum of 11 months (median follow-up, 21 months). The sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values of PET/CT-based follow-up for detecting locoregional recurrence were 92%, 82%, 42%, and 98%, respectively. Corresponding values for distant metastases or second primary tumors were 93%, 96%, 81%, and 98%, respectively. Eight patients (10%) developed disease recurrences or second primary tumors that were amenable to salvage surgery with negative surgical margins. The 2-year progression-free survival and 2-year overall survival rates were significantly different between patients who had a negative and those with a positive PET/CT result within 6 months of the completion of RT (93% vs 30% [P<.001] and 100% vs 32% [P<.001], respectively). Although post-therapy follow-up using PET/CT is reportedly associated with a high false-positive rate in the irradiated head and neck, PET/CT appears to be a highly sensitive technique for the detection of recurrent disease. Furthermore, negative PET/CT results within 6 months of the completion of RT offer significant prognostic value.

18951498
Imaging the paranasal sinuses: where we are and where we are going.
As has happened in all facets of neuroimaging, cross-sectional imaging has dramatically changed our approach and understanding of the anatomy and pathology of paranasal sinuses. We have moved away from plain film radiographs to modern high-resolution sinus computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that helps us better depict underlying normal anatomy and evaluate pathology. Recent advances in PET/CT imaging have introduced a physiologic aspect to anatomical imaging and holds promise to better stage and restage head and neck tumors. In this article, we describe the various imaging techniques, concerns, advantages and disadvantages of the individual techniques, and provide an overview of the various pathologies involving the paranasal sinuses.

18794447
A rare prevertebral ordinary lipoma presenting as obstructive sleep apnea: computed tomographic and magnetic resonance imaging findings.


18258379
Correlation of positron emission tomography standard uptake value and pathologic specimen size in cancer of the head and neck.
To correlate positron emission tomography (PET) standard uptake value (SUV) with pathologic specimen size in patients with head-and-neck cancers. Eighteen patients with Stage II-IVB head-and-neck cancer with 27 tumors who underwent PET and computed tomography (CT) imaging of the head and neck followed by surgical resection were selected for this study. Various SUV thresholds were examined, including the software default (SUV(def)), narrowing the window by 1 standard deviation (SD) of the maximum (SUV-1SD), and SUV cutoff values of 2.5 or greater (SUV2.5) and 40% or greater maximum (SUV40). Volumetric pathologic data were available for 12 patients. Tumor volumes based on pathologic examination (gold standard), CT, SUV(def), SUV-1SD, SUV2.5, and SUV40 were analyzed. PET identified five tumors not seen on CT. The sensitivity of PET for identifying primary tumors was 94% (17 of 18). The Sensitivity of PET for staging the neck was 90% (9 of 10), whereas the specificity was 78% (7 of 9). The SUV2.5 method was most likely to overestimate tumor volume, whereas SUV(def) and SUV-1SD were most likely to underestimate tumor volume. The PET scan provides more accurate staging of primary tumors and nodal metastases for patients with advanced head-and-neck cancer than CT alone. Compared with the gold standard, significant variability exists in volumes obtained by using various SUV thresholds. A combination of clinical, CT, and PET data should continue to be used for optimal treatment planning. The SUV40 method appears to offer the best compromise between accuracy and reducing the risk of underestimating tumor extent.

17696843
Goitrous Hashimoto's thyroiditis presenting as obstructive sleep apnea.


21454406
A Rare Case of Reidel Thyroiditis with Associated Vocal Cord Paralysis: CT and MR Imaging Features.
SUMMARY: Reidel thyroiditis is extremely rare and not only involves the thyroid gland but usually extends to neighboring structures in the neck. A rare complication of this disease is entrapment of the recurrent laryngeal nerve causing a vocal cord paralysis. In fact, to our knowledge, this is likely the only benign thyroid disease to cause such a paralysis. We present a case of a 57-year-old woman with Reidel thyroiditis and a recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis. The CT and MR imaging features are presented as well as a brief review of this disease.

19342543
The significance and management of incidental [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose-positron-emission tomography uptake in the thyroid gland in patients with cancer.
Incidental positron-emission tomography (PET) uptake in the thyroid bed represents a diagnostic dilemma. Currently, there is no consensus regarding the significance of this finding or the most appropriate approach to management. The purpose of this study was to determine the significance of incidental fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the thyroid gland on [(18)F]FDG-positron-emission tomography (FDG-PET/CT) in patients being initially staged for lymphomas and/or cancers other than of thyroid origin. A retrospective review was conducted on patients who were incidentally found to have focal FDG uptake in the thyroid bed on initial staging for cancer. Patient records were assessed for age, sex, clinical presentation, standard uptake values (SUV(max)), on FDG-PET/CT, and CT findings in those patients undergoing FDG-PET/CT, fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology, and surgical pathologic examination. Thirty patients were identified with incidental FDG-PET uptake in the thyroid bed from 630 studies performed for evaluation of cancer between March 2004 and June 2006. Complete records were available for 18 patients (6 men, 12 women). Five (27.8%) of 18 patients with incidental focal FDG-PET/CT uptake in the thyroid gland demonstrated papillary thyroid carcinoma on final pathologic findings. The mean and SD of SUV(max) was 3.0 +/- 1.8 (range, 1.1-7.4) overall, 2.9 +/- 1.6 (range, 1.1-6.8) in the patients without malignant growth, and 3.4 +/- 2.6 (range, 1.1-7.4) in the 5 patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma. No statistical difference in SUV(max) was noted between patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma and patients with benign pathologic findings (P = .63). Incidental FDG-PET uptake in the thyroid gland in patients with cancer of nonthyroidal origin is associated with a 27.8% risk for well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma; however, there seems to be no correlation between intensity of FDG uptake and the risk for a malignant process.

18768714
Crista galli pneumatization is an extension of the adjacent frontal sinuses.
The crista galli is part of the ethmoid bone and, as such, it could be expected that aeration of the crista would come from ethmoid cells. After observing crista pneumatization from the frontal sinuses in several cases, we undertook this study to establish how often crista galli pneumatization came from the frontal sinuses rather than from the ethmoid complex. Two hundred consecutive CT scans of the paranasal sinuses were studied in adult patients to obtain the incidence of crista galli pneumatization and the cell of origin for this phenomenon. A second group of 132 children, 0-7 years of age, was studied to see if any crista galli pneumatization occurred before frontal sinus development. A third group of 79 children, 7-12 years of age, was also studied to see when crista pneumatization occurred in children whose frontal sinuses had already extended into the squamosal portion of the frontal bone. Of the 200 adult cases, there were 26 patients (13%) with crista galli pneumatization, all from either the left or right frontal sinuses. In the second group of children 0-7 years of age, there were no cases of crista pneumatization. In the third group of children 7-12 years of age, there were 4 cases of crista galli pneumatization, all from well-developed frontal sinuses. Our study indicates that crista galli pneumatization is virtually exclusively from either the left or right frontal sinuses and not from displaced ethmoid complex cells in the frontal recess. This finding may have surgical implications when disease is present in the crista galli.

18467519
Interfrontal sinus septal cell: a cause of obstructing inflammation and mucoceles.
Recent interest in the origin and complications associated with frontal intersinus septal cells prompted us to review our material looking for cases of the uncommon occurrence of a mucocele developing within such a cell. The purpose of this article was to present the imaging findings on 4 cases of mucoceles arising within surgically proven frontal intersinus septal cells. A retrospective review of the case material in our department of otolaryngology since 2000 was made looking for cases of patients with surgically proven frontal intersinus septal cell mucoceles. Institutional review board approval for the review was obtained. Four cases were identified that also had CT and/or MR imaging studies. Examples of 4 additional classic frontal sinus mucoceles and 3 anterior ethmoid mucoceles were also identified for comparison. All 4 of the cases of frontal intersinus septal cell mucoceles had an expanded midline frontal sinus cell, which thinned the posterior and/or anterior frontal sinus tables. The classic frontal sinus mucoceles were either to the left or right side, and any table thinning was off midline. The ethmoid mucoceles were clearly centered below the frontal sinuses. The rare occurrence of a frontal intersinus septal mucocele can be diagnosed on CT and MR imaging studies, because its appearance in the midline is clearly distinct from the more common classic frontal sinus mucoceles that develop within the left or right frontal sinus proper. Distinction is also routinely made from large anterior ethmoid mucoceles.

18388213
The frontal intersinus septal air cell: a new hypothesis of its origin.
Air cells are often seen within the frontal intersinus septum. These cells have traditionally been thought to arise from displaced ethmoid cells from the frontal recess. This study explores the possibility that such cells may actually be diverticula from the frontal sinuses themselves and not of a direct ethmoid origin. A prospective study of 200 consecutive CT scans in the coronal and axial planes was performed on patients without a history of recent trauma. The images were interpreted independently by a radiologist and an otolaryngologist. The CT studies were evaluated for the presence of a central intersinus septal air cell. If such a cell was identified, it was further classified as either being completely isolated from both frontal sinuses by a bony rim or as a communicating diverticulum from one of the frontal sinuses. If a central cell was present, it was also assessed for how much of the height of the intersinus septum it involved (lower one-half or full height). There was a complete concordance of the results between the 2 observers. An intersinus septal air cell was seen in 61 (30.5%) of the 200 cases, and 85.3% of these cells were clearly seen to communicate anteromedially with either one of the frontal sinuses or both frontal sinuses (3 cases). In 9 (4.5%) of the 200 cases, the central cell had no demonstrable connection to either frontal sinus. Of the 61 cases with a central cell, 55 (90.16%) of the cells occupied the full height of the septum, and 6 (9.84%) only involved the lower half of the septum. Contrary to the present convention that frontal intersinus septal cells originate as displaced ethmoid cells from the frontal recess, we found that most such cells are actually diverticula from the frontal sinuses themselves.

17846211
Severe diffuse systemic amyloidosis with involvement of the pharynx, larynx, and trachea: CT and MR findings.
Amyloidosis is a term applied to a diverse group of disorders that share the deposition of amyloid protein in various extracellular tissues. Systemic amyloidosis may involve almost any organ system in the body including regions in the head and neck; however, pharyngeal involvement is rare, with only 12 cases having been previously reported. Ten of these cases were localized disease, and only 2 cases were systemic amyloidosis. We present the case of a patient with severe diffuse systemic amyloidosis with extensive involvement of the pharynx, larynx, trachea, lungs, eyelids, and breasts. We also review the imaging characteristics and pertinent literature.

17416805
Unique imaging findings in the facial bones of renal osteodystrophy.
Facial skeletal changes associated with hyperparathyroidism assume 3 radiographic patterns: osteitis fibrosa cystica, fibrous dysplasia, and leontiasis ossea. The 3rd pattern is unique to renal osteodystrophy. We report a case of uremic leontiasis ossea with CT images illustrating significant hypertrophy of the jaws with serpiginous tunneling within the bone and poor visualization of the cortical bone.

