21339428
Persistent noncompliance with the work-hour regulation.
To investigate the reason for noncompliance with the work-hour regulation by surgical residents. Nationwide anonymous survey (November 1, 2007, to March 1, 2008). Academic center. Surgical residents throughout the United States. Incidence of noncompliance remains high and reasons for noncompliance are multifactorial. The first 141 questionnaires returned were included in this analysis. Responders consisted of postgraduate year (PGY)-1 (32.6%), PGY-2 (19.1%), PGY-3 (17.7%), PGY-4 (13.5%), and PGY-5 (17.0%) surgical residents. Many residents were categorical (79.4%), male (61.7%), and married (53.2%). Ninety-eight percent of residents were aware of the work-hour regulation, with 72.1% of residents in favor of it. However, noncompliance with the work-hour regulation was 64.6%, with 21.1% of residents working more than 90 h/wk (average, 86.6 h/wk). The most problematic regulations to follow were "at least 10 hours of rest between duty hours" (36.9%), "24-hour limit of continuous care plus 6 additional hours for continuity of care and educational objectives" (26.1%), and "80-hour work limit over 4 weeks" (22.7%). Education and continuity in patient care were the main reasons associated with noncompliance. Noncompliance was highest in trauma (25.2%) and vascular surgery (16.3%) residents. In addition, 65.2% of the attending physicians do not agree with implementing work-hour regulation standards in the surgical faculty. The survey demonstrates that noncompliance with the work-hour regulation is prevalent. The reasons for noncompliance are multifactorial. These findings will help restructure training programs in the efforts to increase compliance with the work-hour regulation.

20010350
Prospective analysis of clinician accuracy in the diagnosis of benign anal pathology: comparison across specialties and years of experience.
The majority of patients referred to a colorectal surgeon with anal complaints are told they have "hemorrhoids"; however, many of these patients have other anal pathology causing their symptoms. Therefore, we prospectively evaluated the diagnostic accuracy of physicians for common anal pathology, stratified by specialty and experience. Seven common benign anal pathologic conditions were selected (prolapsed internal hemorrhoid, thrombosed external hemorrhoid, abscess, fissure, fistula, condyloma acuminata, and full-thickness rectal prolapse). Prospectively accrued subjects included attending physicians, fellows, residents, and medical students. Subjects were shown images and asked to provide a written diagnosis. We prospectively evaluated the overall diagnostic accuracy and stratified accuracy across specialties and years of clinical experience. Medical students were the control group. There were 198 physicians and 216 medical students. Overall diagnostic accuracy for physicians was 53.5% and for controls was 21.9% (P < .001). Surgeons had the highest overall accuracy at 70.4%, whereas all of the other groups had an accuracy of <50%. Physicians correctly identified condylomata and rectal prolapse most frequently and hemorrhoidal conditions least frequently. All 7 conditions were correctly identified by 4.1% of subjects and all of the conditions were incorrectly diagnosed by 20.2%. There was no correlation between years of experience and diagnostic accuracy (P = NS). Diagnostic accuracy for common benign anal pathologic conditions was suboptimal across all clinical specialties. Although many specialties had a diagnostic accuracy that was significantly better than the control group, there was no association between years of experience and accuracy. Improved programs for physician education for these common conditions should be developed.

20658162
Intraluminal migration of mesh following incisional hernia repair.
Incisional hernia is the most common long term complication of colon surgery. These hernias are often repaired with synthetic mesh. Mesh migration is an infrequent occurrence. There are reports of mesh migrating into the peritoneum and into viscous organs causing a variety of symptoms including recurrent hernia, infection, and obstruction. We present the case of transmural mesh migration from the abdominal wall into the small bowel presenting as small bowel obstruction.

