21035906
"Sign right here and you're good to go": a content analysis of audiotaped emergency department discharge instructions.
The goal of this study is to quantitatively and qualitatively assess the quality and content of verbal discharge instructions at 2 emergency departments (EDs). This was a secondary data analysis of 844 ED audiotapes collected during a study of patient-emergency provider communication at 1 urban and 1 suburban ED. ED visits of nonemergency adult female patients were recorded with a digital audiotape. Of 844 recorded ED visits, 477 (57%) audiotapes captured audible discharge instructions suitable for analysis. Audiotapes were double coded for the following discharge content: (1) explanation of illness, (2) expected course, (3) self-care, (4) medication instructions, (5) symptoms prompting return to the ED, (6) time-specified for follow-up visit, (7) follow-up care instructions, (8) opportunities for questions, and (9) patient confirmation of understanding. Analysis included descriptive statistics, ?(2) tests, 2-sample t tests, and logistic regression models. Four hundred seventy-seven of 871 (55%) patient tapes contained audible discharge instructions. The majority of discharges were conducted by the primary provider (emergency physician or nurse practitioner). Ninety-one percent of discharges included some opportunity to ask questions, although most of these were minimal. Only 22% of providers confirmed patients' understanding of instructions. Verbal ED discharge instructions are often incomplete, and most patients are given only minimal opportunities to ask questions or confirm understanding.

19840084
Review article: Convulsive and non-convulsive status epilepticus: an emergency medicine perspective.
Status epilepticus (SE) is divided into convulsive and non-convulsive types; both are associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Although convulsive SE is easily recognized, non-convulsive SE remains an elusive diagnosis as physical signs are varied and subtle. Successful management depends on a comprehensive approach that involves diagnostic testing and pharmacological interventions while ensuring cerebral oxygenation and perfusion at all times. There are a limited number of well-designed studies to support the development of evidence-based recommendations for the management of SE, especially for the management of non-convulsive status. Benzodiazepines, specifically lorazepam, continue to be the most commonly recommended first-line therapy; best treatment for refractory status cases depends on resources available and must be tailored to the individual institution. In order to facilitate care, it is recommended that each institution develop a management protocol for these patients.

