20195782
Validation of the group-based medical mistrust scale among urban black men.
Socioculturally relevant measures of medical mistrust are needed to better address health disparities, especially among Black men, a group with lower life expectancy and higher death rates compared to other race/gender groups. The study aim was to investigate the psychometric properties of the Group-Based Medical Mistrust Scale (GBMMS) in a Black male sample. Data were collected as part of a randomized controlled trial testing educational strategies to support Black men's decisions about prostate cancer screening. Participants included 201 Black men ages 40-75 years recruited in New York City during 2006-2007. The primary measures included: race-based medical mistrust, health care participation, avoidance of health care, perceived access to health care, health care satisfaction, racial identity, residential racial segregation, attitudes towards prostate cancer screening, and past prostate cancer screening behavior. An exploratory factor analysis suggested a three-factor structure. Confirmatory factor analysis supported the three-factor model. Internal consistency was high for the total GBMMS and the three sub-scales: Suspicion, Discrimination, and Lack of Support. Construct validity was supported by: significant positive correlations between GBMMS and avoidance of health care and racial identity as well as significant negative correlations with health care access, health care satisfaction, and attitudes about prostate cancer screening. ANOVA showed that the GBMMS was associated with greater residential racial segregation. Higher total GBMMS scores were associated with not visiting a physician in the last year and not having a regular physician. The present findings provide strong additional evidence that the GBMMS is a valid and reliable measure that may be used among urban Black men.

20151317
Interest and beliefs about BRCA genetic counseling among at-risk Latinas in New York City.
Latinas are less likely to use genetic services (counseling and testing) for hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer risk compared to other ethnic groups. Meanwhile, little is known about barriers to genetic counseling among Latinas at increased risk of inherited breast cancer. A two-phase pilot study was conducted to examine interest, barriers and beliefs about BRCA genetic counseling among at-risk Latinas in New York City and explore the potential for developing a culturally-tailored narrative educational tool for use in future studies. Phase 1 included quantitative telephone interviews (N = 15) with bilingual participants with a personal diagnosis at a young age and/or family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer. Quantitative results informed development of a narrative prototype educational presentation viewed by a subset of participants (N = 10) in Phase 2 focus groups. Despite barriers, including lack of awareness/knowledge, concerns related to learning cancer risks of family members, and concerns about cost/health insurance, participants reported positive attitudes, beliefs and interest in learning about BRCA genetic counseling. Further, significant increases in knowledge were demonstrated from pre-post presentation (p = 0.04). There is an unmet need to educate at-risk Latinas about BRCA genetic counseling. Culturally-tailored educational materials including narratives may increase knowledge about BRCA genetic counseling among this underserved group. The effectiveness of these approaches should be tested in future research with larger samples.

19090507
The influence of acculturation and breast cancer-specific distress on perceived barriers to genetic testing for breast cancer among women of African descent.
Rising health disparities are increasingly evident in relation to use of genetic services (including genetic counseling and testing) for breast cancer risk, with women of African descent less likely to use genetic services compared with Whites. Meanwhile, little is known regarding potential within-group acculturation and psychological differences underlying perceived barriers to genetic testing among women of African descent. Hypothesized contributions of acculturation factors and breast cancer-specific distress to perceived barriers to genetic testing were examined with a statistical analysis of baseline data from 146 women of African descent (56% US born and 44% foreign born) meeting genetic breast cancer risk criteria and participating in a larger longitudinal study that included the opportunity for free genetic counseling and testing. Perceived barriers assessed included: (1) anticipation of negative emotional reactions, (2) stigma, (3) confidentiality concerns, (4) family-related worry, and (5) family-related guilt associated with genetic testing. In multivariate analyses, being foreign born was a significant predictor of anticipated negative emotional reactions about genetic testing (beta=0.26; SE=0.11; p=0.01). Breast cancer-specific distress scores (avoidance symptoms) were positively related to anticipated negative emotional reactions (beta=0.02; SE=0.005; p=<0.0001), confidentiality concerns (beta=0.02; SE=0.01; p=0.02), and family-related guilt (beta=0.02; SE=0.01; p=0.0009) associated with genetic testing. Results suggest an influence of acculturation and breast cancer-specific distress on perceived barriers to genetic testing among women of African descent. The potential utility of culturally tailored genetic counseling services taking into account such influences and addressing emotional and psychological concerns of women considering genetic testing for breast cancer should be investigated.

18686019
Acculturation and familiarity with, attitudes towards and beliefs about genetic testing for cancer risk within Latinas in East Harlem, New York City.
Recent research underscores the need for increasing use of genetic testing for cancer risk in Latinos. This study examined the influence of acculturation on attitudes, beliefs about and familiarity with genetic testing for cancer risk in a community-based sample of Latinas in East Harlem, New York City (N = 103). Multivariate linear regression models analyzed the relationship of acculturation to: (1) familiarity (2) perceived benefits (3) perceived barriers and (4) concerns about abuses of genetic testing for cancer risk. Controlling for sociodemographic factors, results revealed that with increasing acculturation Latinas were more familiar with genetic testing (beta = 1.62, SE = 0.72, p = 0.03), more likely to cite perceived benefits (beta = 1.67, SE = 0.79, p = 0.04), and less likely to report perceived barriers related to genetic testing (beta = -2.76, SE = 1.64, p = 0.10). Study results may help inform the development of culturally-appropriate health education outreach materials and programs targeted to increase awareness, knowledge and understanding about genetic testing for cancer risk within Latinas.

18479882
Association between temporal orientation and attitudes about BRCA1/2 testing among women of African descent with family histories of breast cancer.
Previous studies have identified specific attitudes (pros and cons) about BRCA testing held by women of African descent that are associated with decisions to participate in testing. These testing attitudes may be determined, in part, by temporal orientation, or how one perceives the significance of events and the consequences of their actions in terms of past, present, and future. The current study explored the relationship between temporal orientation and pros and cons of BRCA testing among 140 women of African descent with a family history suggestive of a genetic mutation predisposing to breast cancer. Participants completed measures of temporal orientation and genetic testing attitudes. Multivariate analyses indicated that future orientation was positively associated with perceived pros of testing. Additional analyses revealed significant associations between temporal orientation and specific item subsets related to the negative and positive impact of testing on family and personal control over one's health. These results support an association between temporal orientation and attitudes about BRCA testing among women of African descent with family histories of breast cancer. Findings support exploration of temporal orientation in future research on BRCA testing decisions among women of African descent and this construct's importance in developing decision aids and tailoring genetic counseling.

21540561
Ethnic, Racial and Cultural Identity and Perceived Benefits and Barriers Related to Genetic Testing for Breast Cancer among At-Risk Women of African Descent in New York City.
Background: Due to disparities in the use of genetic services, there has been growing interest in examining beliefs and attitudes related to genetic testing for breast and/or ovarian cancer risk among women of African descent. However, to date, few studies have addressed critical cultural variations among this minority group and their influence on such beliefs and attitudes. Methods: We assessed ethnic, racial and cultural identity and examined their relationships with perceived benefits and barriers related to genetic testing for cancer risk in a sample of 160 women of African descent (49% self-identified African American, 39% Black-West Indian/Caribbean, 12% Black-Other) who met genetic risk criteria and were participating in a larger longitudinal study including the opportunity for free genetic counseling and testing in New York City. All participants completed the following previously validated measures: (a) the multi-group ethnic identity measure (including ethnic search and affirmation subscales) and other-group orientation for ethnic identity, (b) centrality to assess racial identity, and (c) Africentrism to measure cultural identity. Perceived benefits and barriers related to genetic testing included: (1) pros/advantages (including family-related pros), (2) cons/disadvantages (including family-related cons, stigma and confidentiality concerns), and (3) concerns about abuses of genetic testing. Results: In multivariate analyses, several ethnic identity elements showed significant, largely positive relationships to perceived benefits about genetic testing for breast and/or ovarian cancer risk, the exception being ethnic search, which was positively associated with cons/disadvantages, in general, and family-related cons/disadvantages. Racial identity (centrality) showed a significant association with confidentiality concerns. Cultural identity (Africentrism) was not related to perceived benefits and/or barriers. Conclusions: Ethnic and racial identity may influence perceived benefits and barriers related to genetic testing for breast and/or ovarian cancer risk among at-risk women of African descent. Genetic counseling services may want to take into account these factors in the creation of culturally-appropriate services which best meet the needs of this heterogenous population.

