21336499
Small bowel adenocarcinoma in Crohn's disease.
An association between small bowel adenocarcinoma and Crohn's disease (CD) is well-established. We present our recent experience with this entity in order to further elucidate its clinicopathological features and update our series from 1991. A retrospective review was undertaken of all surgical patients with small bowel adenocarcinoma and CD seen at our institution between 1993 and 2009. Follow-up was assessed until time of death or by interview with survivors. Survival was calculated based on TNM (tumor extent, lymph node status, metastases staging) staging and comparing between our current and previous series. Twenty-nine patients (ten females and 19 males) were identified and followed for a median of 2 years. The median age at onset of CD symptoms was 25, and the median age at cancer diagnosis was 55.4, for a mean interval of 25.3 years. Twenty-two cancers were ileal and five were jejunal. There were no cancers in excluded intestinal loops. Significant differences in 2-year survival were determined for: node-negative (79.3%, 95%CI 58.3-100%) versus node-positive cancers (49% %, 95%CI 20.0-78.0%), and for localized (92.3%, 95%CI 77.8-100%) versus metastatic disease (33.3%, 95%CI 6.6-60%). Overall 36-month survival was 69.3% (95%CI 51.5-87.1%) compared to 40% among those without excluded loops in our series from 1991. Sixteen patients had long periods of quiescent disease before diagnosis (7-45 years), and 16 required surgery for bowel obstruction that was refractory to medical management. Adequate information was not retrievable for three patients. A comparison to our previous series reveals similar clinical characteristics and a high rate of node-positive cancer at diagnosis. Our findings also confirm two important clinical indicators of malignancy: recrudescent symptoms after long periods of relative quiescence and small bowel obstruction that is refractory to medical therapy.

20068560
Ulcerative colitis practice guidelines in adults: American College Of Gastroenterology, Practice Parameters Committee.
Guidelines for clinical practice are aimed to indicate preferred approaches to medical problems as established by scientifically valid research. Double-blind placebo controlled studies are preferable, but compassionate-use reports and expert review articles are used in a thorough review of the literature conducted through Medline with the National Library of Medicine. When only data that will not withstand objective scrutiny are available, a recommendation is identified as a consensus of experts. Guidelines are applicable to all physicians who address the subject regardless of specialty training or interests and are aimed to indicate the preferable but not necessarily the only acceptable approach to a specific problem. Guidelines are intended to be flexible and must be distinguished from standards of care, which are inflexible and rarely violated. Given the wide range of specifics in any health-care problem, the physician must always choose the course best suited to the individual patient and the variables in existence at the moment of decision. Guidelines are developed under the auspices of the American College of Gastroenterology and its Practice Parameters Committee and approved by the board of trustees. Each has been intensely reviewed and revised by the Committee, other experts in the field, physicians who will use them, and specialists in the science of decision analysis. The recommendations of each guideline are therefore considered valid at the time of composition based on the data available. New developments in medical research and practice pertinent to each guideline will be reviewed at a time established and indicated at publication to assure continued validity. The recommendations made are based on the level of evidence found. Grade A recommendations imply that there is consistent level 1 evidence (randomized controlled trials), grade B indicates that the evidence would be level 2 or 3, which are cohort studies or case-control studies. Grade C recommendations are based on level 4 studies, meaning case series or poor-quality cohort studies, and grade D recommendations are based on level 5 evidence, meaning expert opinion.

19713865
Is there physician bias against eliciting affective qualities of pain?
The purpose of this study is to determine the weight given to each of 3 pain dimensions by physicians who assess patients' pain experiences. Pain is a subjective experience that has profound impact on the quality of life. The 101-Multidimensional Affect and Pain Survey (101-MAPS) is currently the only available instrument that takes into account all 3 validated dimensions of pain by classifying 101 items into "superclusters" of sensory pain, suffering, and well-being. Fourteen gastroenterologists, 11 internists, and 11 medicine residents from 2 teaching hospitals rated the items on the 101-MAPS based on their perception of the items' relevance to pain in gastrointestinal diseases, on a scale of 0 (least relevant) to 5 (most relevant). Of the 101 items in the MAPS rated by gastroenterologists, 25 items received a median rating of 4 or above. Of these, 23 were selected from the 57 items in the sensory pain supercluster (40%) and only 1 item each from the 26 in the suffering (3.8%), and the 18 in the well-being (5.5%) dimensions. These proportions were significantly lower for the suffering (P<0.01) and well-being (P<0.05) superclusters than for the sensory pain dimension. These findings suggest a bias among physicians toward sensory and against affective qualities when eliciting patients' pain experiences. The results also suggest that this bias is found as early as residency training and persists among specialists.

19476893
Relationship of the number of Crohn's strictures and strictureplasties to postoperative recurrence.
Strictureplasty is well established as a safe and effective surgical therapy for Crohn's disease (CD). Yet, postoperative recurrence after strictureplasty remains a problem for CD patients, and associated risk factors are still uncertain. The goal of this study was to examine the relationship between recurrence and the number of strictures (NSX) and strictureplasties (NSXP). The authors' prospectively created database was used to retrospectively identify patients who had undergone strictureplasty between 1984 and 2004. Recurrence was defined as reoperation, and rates were compared based on the NSX and NSXP using Kaplan-Meier curves. Cox regression analyses were used to evaluate the relationship between both NSX and NSXP and recurrence after adjusting for potential confounders. There were 339 strictureplasties performed in 88 patients at initial operation. The 5-year reoperation rates were 14% for patients with <or=8 strictures compared with 31% for those with>8 strictures (p=0.01). Five-year reoperation rates were 14% for patients with <or=4 strictureplasties compared with 33% for those with>4 strictureplasties (p < 0.01). In multivariate regression of NSX and NSXP as continuous variables, both were independently associated with recurrence (p <or= 0.02), with a 7% increase in recurrence for each additional stricture and 23% increase in recurrence for each additional strictureplasty. These data suggest that both the NSX and NSXP are associated with CD recurrence and may be used as prognostic indicators for CD.

19229992
Recurrence patterns after first resection for stricturing or penetrating Crohn's disease.
Crohn's disease (CD) usually recurs after resection, but the factors associated with this risk remain obscure. We set out to determine the role of stricturing (Montreal Classification B2) versus penetrating (Classification B3) disease behavior in predicting early (<3 years) versus late (>or=3 years) postoperative recurrence. We identified a cohort of 34 patients seen at The Mount Sinai Hospital who had undergone a first ileocolic resection prior to December 31, 2004, who had been clinically thought to have had stricturing (B2) disease, and for whom we could verify 1) the operative and surgical pathology findings; and 2) the time of onset of symptoms attributable to recurrent CD by endoscopy, radiology, or surgery. Cases were reclassified as either "stricturing" (B2) or "penetrating" (B3) on the basis of operative and surgical pathology reports. Recurrences were classified as either "early" (<3 years) or "late" (>or=3 years) depending on the first appearance of postoperative symptoms that were verified endoscopically and histologically, radiologically, or surgically as being attributable to anastomotic recurrence of the CD. Among these 34 patients clinically thought to have had B2 disease, 12 had B2 disease confirmed upon review of surgical and pathology reports and none of them had recurrence within 3 years. Among the 22 patients reclassified as B3 disease, 12 (55%) had early recurrence. This difference was significant at the 0.002 level by the Fisher Exact Test. There is a strong proclivity for early postoperative recurrence of penetrating CD compared to stricturing disease, which may not be evident by behavioral classification on clinical grounds alone. Patients with confirmed uncomplicated stricturing obstruction at their first resection seem unlikely to experience a clinical recurrence within the next 3 years.

19177428
Colorectal carcinoma in indeterminate colitis.
For all the interest in the natural history of colorectal cancer (CRC) in ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD), surprisingly few data have been published regarding CRC in indeterminate colitis (IC). We present our experience with 15 cases of IC-associated CRC in order to assess their clinicopathological features and to determine their survival rates. We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of patients with IC admitted to the Mount Sinai Hospital between 1994 and 2007 and who developed CRC. All patients were operated on and follow-up was complete for all patients to the closing date of study or to the time of death. A total of 19 adenocarcinomas were present in this series. There were 3 patients with multiple cancers; all cancers occurred in segments of colitis. The mean age at onset of IC was 28 years and the average time progression from the IC diagnosis to CRC was 19 years. Dysplasia was detected in 10 of the cases; 3 patients had mucinous tumors. Five patients had stage I tumors; 5 stage II; 4 stage III; 1 stage IV. There were 4 deaths due to CRC. The overall 5-year survival was 42%. CRC in IC shares most of the clinical and pathologic features as well as survival outcomes with CRC that occurs in the most prevalent forms of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), UC and CD. Surveillance regimens currently used in the other forms of IBD seem applicable to IC patients as well.

19067409
Adenocarcinoma following ileal pouch-anal anastomosis for ulcerative colitis: review of 26 cases.
The occurrence of adenocarcinoma following ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA) for ulcerative colitis (UC) is an infrequent and but potentially lethal complication. We have seen 1 such case among 520 IPAAs performed in our group practice between 1978 and February 2008. We have added this case to a review of 25 previously reported cases of adenocarcinoma of the pouch or outflow tract following IPAA for UC. Our conclusions are 1) that post-IPAA cancer can occur following either mucosectomy or stapled anastomosis; 2) that this malignancy can occur after IPAA performed for UC either with or without neoplasia; and 3) that this complication is seen whether or not the initial cancer or dysplasia had involved the rectum.

18936657
Diverticulitis in immunosuppressed patients.
The differential diagnosis of abdominal pain should not rank diverticulitis any differently in immunosuppressed transplant or AIDS patients than in other patients of the same sex and age and with the same clinical presentation. Immunocompromised patients have increased postoperative infectious risks in direct proportion to the degree of their immune deficiency.

18816763
Are there different types of Crohn's disease?


18816731
Does the phenotype of Crohn's disease in an individual remain stable over time?


18662238
Adenocarcinoma complicating restorative proctocolectomy for ulcerative colitis with mucosectomy performed by Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator.
This is a report of adenocarcinoma arising in an ileal pouch after restorative proctocolectomy (RPC) with rectal mucosal stripping performed by Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator (CUSA) for ulcerative colitis. The CUSA was introduced to simplify and optimize ileal pouch-anal anastomosis with mucosectomy and has been shown to shorten the operative time and reduce blood loss. Its use however, may increase the number of pathology specimens made uninterpretable on account of tissue ablation. In the present case, even though preoperative colonoscopy had clearly shown dysplasia, the surgical pathology report could not detect any neoplasia in the specimen; hence, the patient was not surveyed for pouch cancer. Six years later, the patient presented with intestinal obstruction caused by cancer. While protocols for universal pouch surveillance remain somewhat controversial, we conclude on the basis of this case and a review of the literature that in RPC with mucosectomy performed by CUSA, pouch cancer surveillance is particularly important because remnants of rectal epithelium may have been left behind and tissue ablation may have made the surgical pathology report uninterpretable.

