19707473
Acute cholecystitis caused by ceftriaxone stones in an adult.
Acute cholecystitis is a major health problem. There are multiple etiologies to be considered and early recognition of the condition is important to optimize management and outcome. We report the first case in the medical literature of symptomatic acute cholecystitis triggered by ceftriaxone-associated gallbladder sludge formation and, importantly, solid ceftriaxone gallstone formation in an adult patient with underlying mineral and pigment cholecystolithiasis, necessitating cholecystectomy. This case serves as a reminder for physicians to keep this uncommon cause of cholecystolithiasis and cholecystitis in mind in patients who receive prolonged ceftriaxone therapy. These patients should be cautioned to promptly report to their physicians any signs or symptoms of cholecystitis in order to ensure timely and appropriate evaluation.

18408658
Idiopathic pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis: an unrecognized or misdiagnosed entity?
Idiopathic pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis is a rare recently described entity likely to be under- and misdiagnosed, as awareness of this entity is not yet widespread. We report two cases that show the need to include this disease in the differential diagnosis of patients with predominantly pleural and subpleural fibrotic processes. The condition is a fibrotic thickening of the pleura and subpleural parenchyma due to elastic fiber proliferation predominantly in the upper lobes. Performing elastic fiber stains routinely in patients with fibrosis of this distribution may, therefore, aid in establishing the diagnosis and differentiating it from usual interstitial pneumonia/idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. These patients may be prone to the development of secondary spontaneous pneumothoraces and persistent postoperative bronchopleural fistulae. Continued study of newly diagnosed cases may uncover shared characteristics or features helpful in generating an etiologic hypothesis. Only with better understanding of this disease can we hope in the future to be able to offer treatments other than supportive care and ultimately lung transplantation, which are the only therapeutic options available today.

