21498023
Effect of gender on long-term survival after abdominal aortic aneurysm repair based on results from the Medicare national database.
OBJECTIVES: Historically, women have higher procedurally related mortality rates than men for abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) repair. Although endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) has improved these rates for men and women, effects of gender on long-term survival with different types of AAA repair, such as EVAR vs open aneurysm repair (OAR), need further investigation. To address this issue, we analyzed survival in matched cohorts who received EVAR or OAR for both elective (eAAA) and ruptured AAA (rAAA). METHODS: Using the Medicare Beneficiary Database (1995-2006), we compiled a cohort of patients who underwent OAR or EVAR for eAAA (n = 322,892) or rAAA (n = 48,865). Men and women were matched by propensity scores, accounting for baseline demographics, comorbid conditions, treating institution, and surgeon experience. Frailty models were used to compare long-term survival of the matched groups. RESULTS: Perioperative mortality for eAAAs was significantly lower among EVAR vs OAR recipients for both men (1.84% vs 4.80%) and women (3.19% vs 6.37%, P < .0001). One difference, however, was that the survival benefit of EVAR was sustained for the 6 years of follow-up in women but disappeared in 2 years in men. Similarly, the survival benefit of men vs women after elective EVAR disappeared after 1.5 to 2 years. For rAAAs, 30-day mortality was significantly lower for EVAR recipients compared with OAR recipients, for both men (33.43% vs 43.70% P < .0001) and women (41.01% vs 48.28%, P = .0201). Six-year survival was significantly higher for men who received EVAR vs those who received OAR (P = .001). However, the survival benefit for women who received EVAR compared with OAR disappeared in 6 months. Survival was also substantially higher for men than women after emergent EVAR (P = .0007). CONCLUSIONS: Gender disparity is evident from long-term outcomes after AAA repair. In the case for rAAA, where the long-term outcome for women was significantly worse than for men, the less invasive EVAR treatment did not appear to benefit women to the same extent that it did for men. Although the long-term outcome after open repair for elective AAA was also worse for women, EVAR benefit for women was sustained longer than for men. These associations require further study to isolate specific risk factors that would be potential targets for improving AAA management.

21423002
National trend in prevalence, cost, and discharge disposition after subdural hematoma from 1998-2007.
OBJECTIVES:: Subdural hematoma is a common type of intracranial hemorrhage, particularly among the elderly, yet, despite the aging US population, little has been published in the last 10 yrs. This study aimed to determine national trends in prevalence, discharge disposition, length of stay, and cost of subdural hematoma over time. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS:: Retrospective cohort study of 720,297 adult patients hospitalized in the United States with subdural hematoma between 1998 and 2007 identified in the Nationwide Inpatient Sample. INTERVENTIONS:: None. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS:: Discharge disposition, hospital length of stay, and national cost (adjusted to 2007 dollars) were examined. Hospitalizations for subdural hematoma increased from 59,373 (30 per 100,000 hospitalizations) in 1998 to 91,935 (42 per 100,000) in 2007, constituting a 39% per-capita increase. The prevalence of subdural hematoma increased with age (p < .001), particularly among those >80 yrs of age (36% of subdural hematoma cohort), in lower income patients, in patients with acquired abnormalities of the coagulation cascade, and in patients with trauma. Inhospital mortality decreased from 15% to 12% (p = .001), but unsatisfactory discharge disposition increased from 17% to 20% (p < .001). National cost increased from $1.0 to $1.6 billion (p < .001). Unsatisfactory discharge disposition and cost were both independently predicted by higher comorbidity index, alcohol abuse, history of trauma, and acquired abnormal coagulation or platelet factors (p < .05). Neurosurgical intervention for subdural hematoma decreased from 41% in 1998 to 31% in 2007 (p < .001). Subdural hematoma evacuation was associated with decreased mortality but did not significantly protect against poor discharge disposition and was associated with significantly higher cost. CONCLUSIONS:: The prevalence and total cost for subdural hematoma has increased significantly in the last decade nationwide. Health resource consumption for subdural hematoma is increasing without clear evidence that management practices are leading to improved outcomes.

20881774
Development of a novel scoring tool for the identification of large ?5 cm abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Current screening recommendations for abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) target >3-cm diameter aneurysms in ever-smoking 65- to 75-year-old males. However, more than 50% of AAA ruptures occur in individuals outside this patient cohort, and only a subset of AAAs detected are large enough to warrant surgery. In this analysis, we evaluated more than 3 million screened individuals and developed a scoring tool to identify ?5-cm diameter AAAs in the entire population at risk. Between 2003 and 2008, demographics and risk factors were collected from 3.1 million people undergoing ultrasound screening for AAA by Life Line Screening, Inc. Using multivariable logistic regression analysis, we identified risk factors and developed a scoring system to predict the presence of ?5-cm diameter AAAs. Smoking had a profound influence on the risk of AAA, which increased with number of cigarettes smoked and years of smoking, and decreased following smoking cessation. Novel findings included a protective effect of exercise, normal weight, and Black/Hispanic race/ethnicity. Using these and other factors, the scoring system provided good predictive accuracy (C-statistic = 0.82), when tested against the validation subset of the study cohort. The model predicts the presence of 121,000 ?5 cm AAA in the US population (prevalence: 0.14%). Demonstrating the inadequacy of the current screening recommendations, only 35% of these aneurysms were among males aged 65 to 75 years. Based on the largest cohort of patients ever screened for AAA, we developed a screening strategy that can identify large AAAs in a broad population of individuals at risk.

19632560
Assessing technological change in cardiothoracic surgery.
Technological innovation--broadly defined as the development and introduction of new drugs, devices, and procedures--has played a major role in advancing the field of cardiothoracic surgery. It has generated new forms of care for patients and improved treatment options. Innovation, however, comes at a price. Total national health care expenditures now exceed $2 trillion per year in the United States and all current estimates indicate that this number will continue to rise. As we continue to seek the most innovative medical treatments for cardiovascular disease, the spiraling cost of these technologies comes to the forefront. In this article, we address 3 challenges in managing the health and economic impact of new and emerging technologies in cardiothoracic surgery: (1) challenges associated with the dynamics of technological growth itself; (2) challenges associated with methods of analysis; and (3) the ways in which value judgments and political factors shape the translation of evidence into policy. We conclude by discussing changes in the analytical, financial, and institutional realms that can improve evidence-based decision-making in cardiac surgery.

19486755
Randomized trials in surgery.


20840476
Process of care events in transplantation: effects on the cost of hospitalization.
Deviations in the processes of healthcare delivery that affect patient outcomes are recognized to have an impact on the cost of hospitalization. Whether deviations that do not affect patient outcome affects cost has not been studied. We have analyzed process of care (POC) events that were reported in a large transplantation service (n = 3,012) in 2005, delineating whether or not there was a health consequence of the event and assessing the impact on hospital resource utilization. Propensity score matching was used to adjust for patient differences. The rate of POC events varied by transplanted organ: from 10.8 per 1000 patient days (kidney) to 17.3 (liver). The probability of a POC event increased with severity of illness. The majority (81.5%) of the POC events had no apparent effect on patients' health (63.6% no effect and 17.9% unknown). POC events were associated with longer length of stay (LOS) and higher costs independent of whether there was a patient health impact. Multiple events during the same hospitalization were associated with the highest impact on LOS and cost. POC events in transplantation occur frequently, more often in sicker patients and, although the majority of POC events do not harm the patient, their effect on resource utilization is significant.

