21063112
Acid sphingomyelinase deficiency attenuates bleomycin-induced lung inflammation and fibrosis in mice.
The sphingomyelin/ceramide signaling pathway is an important component of many cellular processes implicated in the pathogenesis of lung disease. Acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) is a key mediator of this pathway, but its specific role in pulmonary fibrosis has not been previously investigated. Here we used the bleomycin model of pulmonary fibrosis to investigate fibrotic responses in normal and ASM knockout (ASM(-/-)) mice, and in NIH3T3 fibroblasts with and without ASM siRNA treatment. Mice and cells with and without ASM activity were treated with bleomycin, and the effects on lung inflammation, formation of collagen producing myofibroblasts, and apoptosis were assessed. The development of bleomycin-induced inflammation and fibrosis in wildtype mice correlated with the rapid activation of ASM, and was markedly attenuated in the absence of ASM activity. Along with the elevated ASM activity, there also was an elevation of acid ceramidase (AC) activity, which was sustained for up to 14 days post-bleomycin treatment. Studies in NIH3T3 fibroblasts confirmed these findings, and revealed a direct effect of ASM/AC activation on the formation of myofibroblasts. Cell studies also showed that a downstream effect of bleomycin treatment was the production of sphingosine-1-phosphate. These data demonstrate that the sphingomyelin/ceramide signaling pathway is involved in the pathogenesis of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis, and suggest that inhibition of ASM may potentially slow the fibrotic process in the lung.

20386867
Identification and characterization of eight novel SMPD1 mutations causing types A and B Niemann-Pick disease.
Types A and B Niemann-Pick disease (NPD) result from the deficient activity of acid sphingomyelinase (ASM), due to mutations in the sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase 1 (SMPD1) gene. Here we report the identification, characterization and genotype/phenotype correlations of eight novel mutations in six unrelated NPD patients. These mutations included seven missense mutations: c.631T>C (p.W211R), c.757G>C (p.D253H), c.940G>A (p.V314M), c.1280A>G (p.H427R), c.1564A>G (p.N522S), c.1575G>C (p.Q525H) and c.1729A>G (p.H577R), and a novel frameshift mutation, c.1657delACCGCCT (fsT553). Each missense mutation was expressed in 293T or COS-7 cells; mutant enzymes p.W211R, p.D253H, p.H427R and p.H577R had <1% of expressed wild-type activity, whereas p.V314M, p.N522S and p.Q525H had 21.7%, 10.1% and 64% of expressed wild-type activity, respectively. The c.1564A>G mutation obliterated a known N-glycosylation site and its p.N522S mutant enzyme had ~10% of expressed wild-type activity. Western blot analysis revealed that each mutant protein was expressed at near wild-type amounts, despite their differences in residual activity. The novel seven-base deletion occurred at codon 553, leading to a premature truncation after residue 609. The expression studies predicted the clinical phenotypes of the six patients: two type A patients had genotypes with only type A alleles [c.631T>C (p.W211R), c.757G>C (p.D253H) and c.1729A>G (p.H577R)], and the other four type B disease patients had at least one neuroprotective mutant type B allele [c.940G>A (p.V314M), c.1280A>G (p.H427R), c.1564A>G (p.N522S) and c.1575G>C (p.Q525H)] that expressed >5% residual ASM activity. Thus, these new mutations provide novel genotype/phenotype correlations and further document the genetic heterogeneity in types A and B NPD.

20018674
Involvement of the Toll-like receptor 4 pathway and use of TNF-alpha antagonists for treatment of the mucopolysaccharidoses.
Enzyme replacement therapy is currently available for three of the mucopolysaccharidoses (MPSs) but has limited effects on the skeletal lesions. We investigated the involvement of the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling pathway in the pathogenesis of MPS bone and joint disease, and the use of the anti-TNF-alpha drug, Remicade (Centocor, Inc.), for treatment. TLR4 KO (TLR4(lps-/-)) mice were interbred with MPS VII mice to produce double-KO (DKO) animals. The DKO mice had longer and thinner faces and longer femora as revealed by micro-computed tomography analysis compared with MPS VII mice. Histological analyses also revealed more organized and thinner growth plates. The serum levels of TNF-alpha were normalized in the DKO animals, and the levels of phosphorylated STAT1 and STAT3 in articular chondrocytes were corrected. These findings led us to evaluate the effects of Remicade in MPS VI rats. When initiated at 1 month of age, i.v. treatment prevented the elevation of TNF-alpha, receptor activator of NF-kappaB, and other inflammatory molecules not only in the blood but in articular chondrocytes and fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs). Treatment of 6-month-old animals also reduced the levels of these molecules to normal. The number of apoptotic articular chondrocytes in MPS VI rats was similarly reduced, with less infiltration of synovial tissue into the underlying bone. These studies revealed the important role of TLR4 signaling in MPS bone and joint disease and suggest that targeting TNF-alpha may have positive therapeutic effects.

19285924
Quantitative analysis of sphingosine-1-phosphate by HPLC after napthalene-2,3-dicarboxaldehyde (NDA) derivatization.
Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) is an important sphingolipid signaling molecule that regulates numerous cellular processes. In this paper we report a new method to quantify the levels of S1P in biological samples that relies on derivatization with naphthalene-2,3-dicarboxaldehyde (NDA) and quantification by reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The limit of detection (LOD) using S1P standards was 20.9fmol (12.6nM), and the limit of quantification (LOQ) was 69.6fmol (41.7nM). The recovery of S1P standards was up to 97.5%. The mean relative standard deviations (RSD) for the intra- and inter-day assay were 4.1% and 7.7%, respectively. To validate this procedure, we quantified the S1P levels in plasma from human, horse, and mouse (mean values of 0.45, 0.25, and 1.23microM, respectively). We also used this technique to evaluate the S1P content in mouse tissues, as well as in rat neuronal cell cultures before and after sphingosine treatment. The results demonstrate that this new procedure can provide fast, sensitive, and reproducible S1P quantification, and offers several advantages over existing methods. The technique also may be used for determining the activity, as well as the inhibition, of sphingosine kinase. In the future it could be an important tool for investigators studying the role of S1P in signal transduction, cell growth and differentiation, and disease pathogenesis and treatment.

18815062
Characterization of common SMPD1 mutations causing types A and B Niemann-Pick disease and generation of mutation-specific mouse models.
Herein we describe detailed characterization of four common mutations (L302P, H421Y, R496L and DeltaR608) within the acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) gene causing types A and B Niemann-Pick disease (NPD). In vitro and in situ enzyme assays revealed marked deficiencies of ASM activity in NPD cell lines homoallelic for each mutation, although Western blotting and fluorescent microscopy showed that the mutant ASM polypeptides were expressed at normal levels and trafficked to lysosomes. Co-immunoprecipitation of the polypeptides with the ER chaperone, BiP, confirmed these findings, as did in vitro expression of the mutant cDNAs in reticulocyte lysates. We further developed a computer assisted, three-dimensional model of human ASM based on homologies to known proteins, and used this model to map each NPD mutation in relation to putative substrate binding, hydrolysis and zinc-binding domains. Lastly, we generated transgenic mice expressing the R496L and DeltaR608 mutations on the complete ASM knock-out background (ASMKO), and established breeding colonies for the future evaluation of enzyme enhancement therapies. Analysis of these mice demonstrated that the mutant ASM transgenes were expressed at high levels in the brain, and in the case of the DeltaR608 mutation, produced residual ASM activity that was significantly above the ASMKO background.

18547682
Deregulation of sphingolipid metabolism in Alzheimer's disease.
Abnormal sphingolipid metabolism has been previously reported in Alzheimer's disease (AD). To extend these findings, several sphingolipids and sphingolipid hydrolases were analyzed in brain samples from AD patients and age-matched normal individuals. We found a pattern of elevated acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) and acid ceramidase (AC) expression in AD, leading to a reduction in sphingomyelin and elevation of ceramide. More sphingosine also was found in the AD brains, although sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) levels were reduced. Notably, significant correlations were observed between the brain ASM and S1P levels and the levels of amyloid beta (Abeta) peptide and hyperphosphorylated tau protein. Based on these findings, neuronal cell cultures were treated with Abeta oligomers, which were found to activate ASM, increase ceramide, and induce apoptosis. Pre-treatment of the neurons with purified, recombinant AC prevented the cells from undergoing Abeta-induced apoptosis. We propose that ASM activation is an important pathological event leading to AD, perhaps due to Abeta deposition. The downstream consequences of ASM activation are elevated ceramide, activation of ceramidases, and production of sphingosine. The reduced levels of S1P in the AD brain, together with elevated ceramide, likely contribute to the disease pathogenesis.

18281275
Autoproteolytic cleavage and activation of human acid ceramidase.
Herein we report the mechanism of human acid ceramidase (AC; N-acylsphingosine deacylase) cleavage and activation. A highly purified, recombinant human AC precursor underwent self-cleavage into alpha and beta subunits, similar to other members of the N-terminal nucleophile hydrolase superfamily. This reaction proceeded with first order kinetics, characteristic of self-cleavage. AC self-cleavage occurred most rapidly at acidic pH, but also at neutral pH. Site-directed mutagenesis and expression studies demonstrated that Cys-143 was an essential nucleophile that was required at the cleavage site. Other amino acids participating in AC cleavage included Arg-159 and Asp-162. Mutations at these three amino acids prevented AC cleavage and activity, the latter assessed using BODIPY-conjugated ceramide. We propose the following mechanism for AC self-cleavage and activation. Asp-162 likely forms a hydrogen bond with Cys-143, initiating a conformational change that allows Arg-159 to act as a proton acceptor. This, in turn, facilitates an intermediate thioether bond between Cys-143 and Ile-142, the site of AC cleavage. Hydrolysis of this bond is catalyzed by water. Treatment of recombinant AC with the cysteine protease inhibitor, methyl methanethiosulfonate, inhibited both cleavage and enzymatic activity, further indicating that cysteine-mediated self-cleavage is required for ceramide hydrolysis.

18079441
Mechanism of glycosaminoglycan-mediated bone and joint disease: implications for the mucopolysaccharidoses and other connective tissue diseases.
We have previously shown that glycosaminoglycan (GAG) storage in animal models of the mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) leads to inflammation and apoptosis within cartilage. We have now extended these findings to synovial tissue and further explored the mechanism underlying GAG-mediated disease. Analysis of MPS rats, cats, and/or dogs revealed that MPS synovial fibroblasts and fluid displayed elevated expression of numerous inflammatory molecules, including several proteins important for lipopolysaccharide signaling (eg, Toll-like receptor 4 and lipoprotein-binding protein). The expression of tumor necrosis factor, in particular, was elevated up to 50-fold, leading to up-regulation of the osteoclast survival factor, receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand, and the appearance of multinucleated osteoclast-like cells in the MPS bone marrow. Treatment of normal synovial fibroblasts with GAGs also led to production of the prosurvival lipid sphingosine-1-phosphate, resulting in enhanced cell proliferation, consistent with the hyperplastic synovial tissue observed in MPS patients. In contrast, GAG treatment of normal chondrocytes led to production of the proapoptotic lipid ceramide, confirming the enhanced cell death we had previously observed in MPS cartilage. These findings have important implications for the pathogenesis and treatment of MPS and have further defined the mechanism of GAG-stimulated disease.

18037890
The sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 1 causes tissue retention by inhibiting the entry of peripheral tissue T lymphocytes into afferent lymphatics.
Although much is known about the migration of T cells from blood to lymph nodes, less is known about the mechanisms regulating the migration of T cells from tissues into lymph nodes through afferent lymphatics. Here we investigated T cell egress from nonlymphoid tissues into afferent lymph in vivo and developed an experimental model to recapitulate this process in vitro. Agonism of sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 1 inhibited the entry of tissue T cells into afferent lymphatics in homeostatic and inflammatory conditions and caused the arrest, mediated at least partially by interactions of the integrin LFA-1 with its ligand ICAM-1 and of the integrin VLA-4 with its ligand VCAM-1, of polarized T cells at the basal surface of lymphatic but not blood vessel endothelium. Thus, the increased sphingosine 1-phosphate present in inflamed peripheral tissues may induce T cell retention and suppress T cell egress.

