17699301
Medical risks in living kidney donors: absence of proof is not proof of absence.
Living-kidney donation has become increasingly widespread, yet there has been little critical analysis of existing studies of long-term medical outcomes in living donors. This review analyzes issues in study design that affect the quality of the evidence and summarizes possible risk factors in living donors. Virtually all studies of long-term outcomes in donors are retrospective, many with large losses to follow-up, and therefore are subject to selection bias. Most studies have small sample sizes and are underpowered to detect clinically meaningful differences between donors and comparison groups. Many studies compare donors with the general population, but donors are screened to be healthier than the general population and this may not be a valid comparison group. Difficulties in measurement of BP and renal function may underestimate the impact of donation on these outcomes. Several studies have identified possible risk factors for development of hypertension, proteinuria, and ESRD, but potential vulnerability factors in donors have not been well explored and there is a paucity of data on cardiovascular risk factors in donors. Prospective registration of living kidney donors and prospective studies of diverse populations of donors are essential to protect living donors and preserve living-kidney donation.

17702722
Routine use of ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in potential living kidney donors.
Most transplant centers exclude prospective living kidney donors with hypertension from donation. Centers routinely identify hypertension using BP measured in the clinic, but it is not clear that clinic BP accurately detects the presence or absence of hypertension in potential donors. We therefore conducted a prospective study to determine the impact of routine ambulatory BP monitoring on diagnosis of hypertension in potential donors and the value of other baseline characteristics in predicting ambulatory BP results. We compared classification of hypertension status by clinic BP and by ambulatory BP monitoring in 178 potential living kidney donors. Of 63 individuals with hypertension by clinic BP, 62% had white-coat hypertension by ambulatory BP and were therefore eligible to donate. Of 115 individuals who were normotensive by clinic BP, 17% had masked hypertension by ambulatory BP and were excluded from donation. Individuals with masked hypertension were older, were more likely to be male, and had a somewhat higher clinic BP than individuals with sustained normotension. Individuals with white-coat hypertension had a somewhat lower clinic diastolic BP than individuals with sustained hypertension. Routine ambulatory BP monitoring may identify a large number of individuals with white-coat hypertension and a smaller but significant number of individuals with masked hypertension, ensuring adequate protection of potential donors and accurate assessment of donor risk. Differences in baseline characteristics are small and are not clinically useful in distinguishing individuals with masked hypertension from individuals with sustained normotension or individuals with white-coat hypertension from individuals with sustained hypertension, demonstrating the importance of ambulatory BP monitoring in this population.

17668959
The role of ambulatory BP monitoring in clinical care.
Hypertension (HTN) is a powerful predictor of cardiovascular disease and death, with treatment reducing these risks. Ambulatory BP is a better predictor of target-organ damage and cardiovascular events than office BP (OBP). Clinically, ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM) can be used to detect white-coat hypertension (WCH) and masked HTN and to more accurately determine whether BP is appropriately controlled in patients with established HTN. This is particularly valuable in the elderly, in whom BP is more variable. ABPM can also identify abnormal circadian rhythm of BP, which is more common in the elderly and is associated with worsened cardiovascular outcomes. ABPM provides diagnostic and prognostic information that is superior to that of casual OBP readings and should be considered in the measurement and management of BP in the elderly.

20121732
The system of health insurance for living donors is a disincentive for live donation.
The health insurance system for living donors is derived from insurance policies designed to cover accidental death or dismemberment. The system covers only the direct consequences of organ removal, and recoups the costs of related medical services from the transplant recipient's health insurance provider. The system forces transplant programs to differentiate between health services that are, or are not directly attributable to donation and may compromise the pretransplant evaluation, postoperative care and long-term care of living donors. The system is particularly problematic in the United States, where a significant proportion of donors do not have medical insurance. The requirement to assign donor costs to a particular recipient is poorly suited to facilitate advances in living donation such as the use of nondirected donors and living-donor paired exchange programs. We argue that given the current understanding regarding the long-term risks of living donation, the provision of basic medical insurance is a necessity for living donation and that the system of attributing donor costs to the recipient's insurance is inefficient, has the potential to undermine the care of living donors and is a disincentive to the expansion of living donation.

