20550536
MRI assessment of lean and adipose tissue distribution in female patients with Cushing's disease.
Chronic hypercortisolemia due to Cushing's disease (CD) results in abnormal adipose tissue (AT) distribution. Whole-body magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was used to examine lean and AT distribution in female patients with CD to further understand the role of glucocorticoid excess in the development of abnormal AT distribution and obesity. Cross-sectional and case-control study. Fifteen women with CD and 12 healthy controls. Mass of skeletal muscle (SM) and AT in the visceral (VAT), subcutaneous (SAT), and intermuscular (IMAT) compartments from whole-body MRI and serum levels of insulin, glucose, and leptin were measured. CD patients had leptin values that correlated to total AT (TAT) and SAT (P < 0.05) but not to VAT. CD patients had higher VAT/TAT ratios (P < 0.01) and lower SAT/TAT ratios (P < 0.05) compared to controls. TAT, VAT, and trunk SAT (TrSAT) were greater in CD patients (P < 0.01). SM was less in CD (P < 0.001) but IMAT was not different. TAT, VAT, trSAT, and the proportion of AT in the visceral depot were greater in CD although the proportion in the subcutaneous depot was less. SM was less but IMAT was not different. These findings have implications for understanding the role of cortisol in the abnormal AT distribution and metabolic risk seen in patients exposed to chronic excess glucocorticoids.

18796519
Selective use of bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling in patients with adrenocorticotropin-dependent Cushing's syndrome prior to transsphenoidal surgery.
Few data are available on the selective use of bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling (BIPSS) in the presurgical evaluation of patients with ACTH-dependent Cushing's syndrome, so we investigated whether its use only in patients without a clear adenoma on magnetic resonance imaging and/or inconsistent biochemical testing affected remission and long-term outcome after surgery in patients with Cushing's disease (CD). This was a retrospective review of patients treated for CD by one pituitary neurosurgeon at tertiary medical centers in New York City. A total of 193 consecutive adult patients who underwent initial transsphenoidal surgery (TS) for presumed CD between 1987 and 2005 were included. We examined preoperative pituitary imaging and biochemical data, results of BIPSS and surgical pathology, and outcome based on biochemical tests after initial TS and long term after subsequent therapies. Remission rate after the first TS was 80.8% overall, 79.1% in the BIPSS group (n = 105), and 83.0% in the No-BIPSS group (n = 88). Recurrences occurred in 13.5% after the first TS at a mean of 4.8 +/- 3.5 yr (range, 0.7-12.4 yr) with no difference between BIPSS and No-BIPSS groups. Long-term remission was achieved after surgeries and radiotherapy in 85% (86.7% of BIPSS group, 83.0% of No-BIPSS group). CD was ultimately confirmed in all but one patient in each group. Selective use of BIPSS in the preoperative evaluation of patients with presumed CD did not lead to misdiagnosis in the No-BIPSS group or adversely affect remission rates or long-term outcome.

18238844
Neurologic complications of inferior petrosal sinus sampling.
Inferior petrosal sinus sampling (IPSS) is a useful diagnostic technique in adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-dependent hypercortisolism with normal or equivocal MR imaging. The procedure is believed to be safe, with mostly minor complications. However, there are rare, but severe, neurologic complications that need to be considered. We performed an institutional review board-approved retrospective review of our institutional IPSS experience from July 2001 to January 2007. IPSS was performed for the evaluation of Cushing disease. The end points of particular interest were the indications for IPSS and the incidence of associated complications. During the study period of 5(1/2) years, 44 patients underwent IPSS for evaluation of Cushing disease. There were 33 women and 11 men with a mean age of 43.1 years. Because of equivocal imaging and endocrine testing, 36 of 44 patients underwent IPSS, and 8 of 44 underwent IPSS after failed transsphenoidal exploration. The only complication was injury to the brain stem that occurred after an unremarkable procedure in a 42-year-old woman. She developed clinical evidence of pontomedullary dysfunction with MR imaging consistent with brain stem infarction. The cause of this injury is unclear, but a venous variant leading to transient venous hypertension or thrombosis is suspected. Neurologic injury is a rare but serious complication associated with IPSS. Despite this, if performed under a strict paradigm, IPSS is both accurate and safe and can be very useful in the management of Cushing disease.

