21593582
Implications of RNA virus-produced miRNAs.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that fine-tune protein expression through post-transcriptional regulation. Extensive deep sequencing efforts have identified hundreds of miRNAs from diverse eukaryotic lineages, in addition to a number of DNA virus-produced miRNAs. The absence of RNA virus-encoded miRNAs has led to the assumption that miRNA processing is deleterious to genomic integrity and therefore restricted to DNA-based organisms. However, we recently generated both cytoplasmic and nuclear RNA virus capable of producing a functional miRNA without loss of viral fitness. By exploiting the splicing activity of influenza A virus, we engineered the endogenous miR-124-2 locus into an intron of a viral gene product. Processing of viral-derived miR-124 followed canonical processing events and was comparable to its endogenous counterpart, while virus replication was unaffected. Furthermore, grafting the same locus into a duplicated non-essential subgenomic area of Sindbis virus, we can observe non-canonical cytoplasmic-based processing that is independent of any nuclear events. Although it remains unknown as to why there is little natural evidence of RNA virus-encoded miRNAs, successful generation of these vectors provide important insights into the relationship between miRNAs and RNA viruses and introduces a new delivery vehicle for the rapidly expanding therapeutic use of RNA interference (RNAi).

20943654
Transcription factor redundancy ensures induction of the antiviral state.
The transcriptional response to virus infection is thought to be predominantly induced by interferon (IFN) signaling. Here we demonstrate that, in the absence of IFN signaling, an IFN-like transcriptome is still maintained. This transcriptional activity is mediated from IFN-stimulated response elements (ISREs) that bind to both the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) as well as to IFN response factor 7 (IRF7). Through a combination of both in vitro biochemistry and in vivo transcriptional profiling, we have dissected what constitutes IRF-specific, ISGF3-specific, or universal ISREs. Taken together, the data presented here suggest that IRF7 can induce an IFN-like transcriptome in the absence of type-I or -III signaling and therefore provides a level of redundancy to cells to ensure the induction of the antiviral state.

20841420
Noncanonical cytoplasmic processing of viral microRNAs.
Cellular utilization of RNA interference (RNAi) as a mechanism to combat virus infection is thought to be restricted to plants and invertebrates. In vertebrates, antiviral defenses are largely dependent on interferons (IFNs), with the use of small RNAs restricted to microRNA (miRNA)-mediated targeting of host transcripts. Here we demonstrate that incorporation of a primary miRNA into a cytoplasmic virus results in the formation of a Dicer-dependent, DGCR8-independent, mature miRNA capable of conferring RNAi-like activity. Processing of the viral mirtron-like product (virtron) is indistinguishable from endogenous miRNA maturation and elicits post-transcriptional gene silencing, albeit at a reduced level. Furthermore, virtrons impose Dicer-dependent, microprocessor-independent, and IFN-independent interference on virus replication in a sequence-specific manner. Taken together, these results suggest the existence of a noncanonical, small-RNA-based activity capable of processing cytoplasmic hairpins and perhaps contributing to the cell's antiviral arsenal.

20534531
Engineered RNA viral synthesis of microRNAs.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short noncoding RNAs that exert posttranscriptional gene silencing and regulate gene expression. In addition to the hundreds of conserved cellular miRNAs that have been identified, miRNAs of viral origin have been isolated and found to modulate both the viral life cycle and the cellular transcriptome. Thus far, detection of virus-derived miRNAs has been largely limited to DNA viruses, suggesting that RNA viruses may be unable to exploit this aspect of transcriptional regulation. Lack of RNA virus-produced miRNAs has been attributed to the replicative constraints that would incur following RNase III processing of a genomic hairpin. To ascertain whether the generation of viral miRNAs is limited to DNA viruses, we investigated whether influenza virus could be designed to deliver functional miRNAs without affecting replication. Here, we describe a modified influenza A virus that expresses cellular microRNA-124 (miR-124). Insertion of the miR-124 hairpin into an intron of the nuclear export protein transcript resulted in endogenous processing and functional miR-124. We demonstrate that a viral RNA genome incorporating a hairpin does not result in segment instability or miRNA-mediated genomic targeting, thereby permitting the virus to produce a miRNA without having a negative impact on viral replication. This work demonstrates that RNA viruses can produce functional miRNAs and suggests that this level of transcriptional regulation may extend beyond DNA viruses.

20534471
Influenza A virus-generated small RNAs regulate the switch from transcription to replication.
The discovery of regulatory small RNAs continues to reshape paradigms in both molecular biology and virology. Here we describe examples of influenza A virus-derived small viral RNAs (svRNAs). svRNAs are 22-27 nt in length and correspond to the 5' end of each of the viral genomic RNA (vRNA) segments. Expression of svRNA correlates with the accumulation of vRNA and a bias in RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) activity from transcription toward genome replication. Synthesis of svRNA requires the RdRp, nucleoprotein and the nuclear export protein NS2. In addition, svRNA is detectable during replication of various influenza A virus subtypes across multiple host species and associates physically with the RdRp. We demonstrate that depletion of svRNA has a minimal impact on mRNA and complementary vRNA (cRNA) but results in a dramatic loss of vRNA in a segment-specific manner. We propose that svRNA triggers the viral switch from transcription to replication through interactions with the viral polymerase machinery. Taken together, the discovery of svRNA redefines the mechanistic switch of influenza virus transcription/replication and provides a potential target for broad-range, anti-influenza virus-based therapeutics.

20164420
Antiviral response dictated by choreographed cascade of transcription factors.
The dendritic cell (DC) is a master regulator of immune responses. Pathogenic viruses subvert normal immune function in DCs through the expression of immune antagonists. Understanding how these antagonists interact with the host immune system requires knowledge of the underlying genetic regulatory network that operates during an uninhibited antiviral response. To isolate and identify this network, we studied DCs infected with Newcastle disease virus, which is able to stimulate innate immunity and DC maturation through activation of RIG-I signaling, but lacks the ability to evade the human IFN response. To analyze this experimental model, we developed a new approach integrating genome-wide expression kinetics and time-dependent promoter analysis. We found that the genetic program underlying the antiviral cell-state transition during the first 18 h postinfection could be explained by a single convergent regulatory network. Gene expression changes were driven by a stepwise multifactor cascading control mechanism, where the specific transcription factors controlling expression changed over time. Within this network, most individual genes were regulated by multiple factors, indicating robustness against virus-encoded immune evasion genes. In addition to effectively recapitulating current biological knowledge, we predicted, and validated experimentally, antiviral roles for several novel transcription factors. More generally, our results show how a genetic program can be temporally controlled through a single regulatory network to achieve the large-scale genetic reprogramming characteristic of cell-state transitions.

19483680
MicroRNA-mediated species-specific attenuation of influenza A virus.
Influenza A virus leads to yearly epidemics and sporadic pandemics. Present prophylactic strategies focus on egg-grown, live, attenuated influenza vaccines (LAIVs), in which attenuation is generated by conferring temperature sensitivity onto the virus. Here we describe an alternative approach to attenuating influenza A virus based on microRNA-mediated gene silencing. By incorporating nonavian microRNA response elements (MREs) into the open-reading frame of the viral nucleoprotein, we generate reassortant LAIVs for H1N1 and H5N1 that are attenuated in mice but not in eggs. MRE-based LAIVs show a greater than two-log reduction in mortality compared with control viruses lacking MREs and elicit a diverse antibody response. This approach might be combined with existing LAIVs to increase attenuation and improve vaccine safety.

