21481334
Reply to: Dose- and Exposure-Response to Ketamine in Depression.


21246315
The pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic pipeline: translating anticancer drug pharmacology to the clinic.
Progress in an understanding of the genetic basis of cancer coupled to molecular pharmacology of potential new anticancer drugs calls for new approaches that are able to address key issues in the drug development process, including pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) relationships. The incorporation of predictive preclinical PK/PD models into rationally designed early-stage clinical trials offers a promising way to relieve a significant bottleneck in the drug discovery pipeline. The aim of the current review is to discuss some considerations for how quantitative PK and PD analyses for anticancer drugs may be conducted and integrated into a global translational effort, and the importance of examining drug disposition and dynamics in target tissues to support the development of preclinical PK/PD models that can be subsequently extrapolated to predict pharmacologic characteristics in patients. In this article, we describe three different physiologically based (PB) PK modeling approaches, i.e., the whole-body PBPK model, the hybrid PBPK model, and the two-pore model for macromolecules, as well as their applications. General conclusions are that greater effort should be made to generate more clinical data that could validate scaled preclinical PB-PK/PD tumor-based models and, thus, stimulate a framework for preclinical to clinical translation. Finally, given the innovative techniques to measure tissue drug concentrations and associated biomarkers of drug responses, development of predictive PK/PD models will become a standard approach for drug discovery and development.

20687184
Pharmacokinetic/ pharmacodynamic-driven drug development.
The drug discovery and development enterprise, traditionally an industrial juggernaut, has spanned into the academic arena that is partially motivated by the National Institutes of Health Roadmap highlighting translational science and medicine. Because drug discovery and development represents a pipeline of basic to clinical investigations, it meshes well with the "bench to the bedside" prime directive of translational medicine. The renewed interest in drug discovery and development in academia provides an opportunity to rethink the hiearchary of studies with the hope of improving the staid approaches that have been criticized for lacking innovation. One area that has received limited attention concerns the use of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies in the drug-development process. Using anticancer drug development as a focus, this review will address past and current deficencies in how pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic studies are conducted and offer new strategies that might bridge the gap between preclinical and clinical trials.

