20825264
The pharmacological treatment of bipolar disorder: the question of modern advances.
Lithium has been the mainstay of treatment for patients with bipolar disorder in the United States since 1970. Major treatment guidelines recommend lithium as a first-line treatment for mania and maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder, yet lithium has fallen out of favor while other agents have grown in popularity. The purpose of this review is to examine the evidence for treatments that were available in 1970 and to determine if the field has made any significant advance in the treatment of mania, bipolar depression, and maintenance. We conducted a MEDLINE search through 2009, and examined only English-language, randomized/controlled, placebo, or comparison studies. Tolerability as a factor was not considered for this review. Lithium, valproate, benzodiazepines, and antipsychotics have been reported effective for mania-which was essentially the state of the field in 1970. Despite an FDA indication for the use of lamotrigine for depression and depression maintenance, the supporting evidence is conflicting. For bipolar maintenance, the evidence is overwhelming in support of lithium and very thin for valproate and carbamazepine. There is emerging evidence that several atypical antipsychotics may have efficacy in prevention. The gold standard for treating bipolar disorder in 1970 was lithium, and the gold standard in 2009 remains lithium. Newer agents may increase our armamentarium to some extent, but it is not clear if they represent a major advance in treatment. They still need to be tested against the gold standard.

18703936
A randomized, double-blind, and placebo-controlled trial of quetiapine augmentation of fluoxetine in major depressive disorder.
The objective of this study was to investigate whether quetiapine, when compared with placebo, can speed the onset of action and improve the quality of response to fluoxetine treatment in patients suffering from major depressive disorder. A total of 114 patients with major depressive disorder were enrolled in an 8-week treatment study. Patients were initiated on a course of fluoxetine treatment and randomized to quetiapine or placebo. Quetiapine was flexibly dosed starting at 25 mg to a maximum of 100 mg daily. Mixed-effects regression showed that quetiapine plus fluoxetine did not achieve 50% reduction in the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale score or improvement in Hamilton Anxiety Scale, Clinical Global Improvement (CGI)-Severity, and CGI-Improvement scores sooner than the fluoxetine plus placebo group; however both groups improved in all scores over time. Mixed-effects linear regression of insomnia scores showed that the quetiapine plus fluoxetine group improved significantly more rapidly compared with the fluoxetine plus placebo group. The study indicates that quetiapine plus fluoxetine did not achieve a reduction in the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale score or improvement in Hamilton Anxiety Scale or CGI scores from baseline sooner than the fluoxetine plus placebo group. The combination of quetiapine and fluoxetine, however, improved sleep over fluoxetine alone over the first few weeks of treatment.

