21095424
Medical implications of erectile dysfunction.
Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a common condition in aging men, with a prevalence of 52% in men aged 40 to 70 years. It is frequently associated with several comorbid conditions, including cardiovascular disease, lower urinary tract symptoms, and testosterone deficiency. These conditions often have major consequences on the quality of life of patients and require adequate evaluation by the primary care practitioner. Complaints of ED, therefore, serve as a marker for these conditions and give the practitioner an opportunity to prevent the consequences of a delay in treatment. In this article, the evidence behind these associations is described.

20152966
Sex chromosome micromosaicism in infertile men with normal karyotypes.
To define the prevalence of low-level sex chromosome mosaicism in a cohort of infertile men. Prospective cohort study of infertile men. Tertiary university infertility center. One hundred one consecutive men who presented with primary infertility for evaluation. Fluorescent in situ hybridization for X and Y was performed on 200 cells, and if an aberrant sex chromosome complement was noted, 400 cells were counted. For this study, any abnormality in sex chromosome complement was defined as micromosaicism. Low-level sex chromosome mosaicism. Sixty-seven of these men (67%) had no mosaicism, and 34 men (34%) had micromosaicism. The median percentage of abnormal chromosomes in these men was 2%. The mean age of the men without micromosaicism was lower than for men with micromosaicism (31.1 years vs. 35.2 years). A trend toward higher FSH levels in men with low-level mosaicism was seen. Median sperm density and percent motility were higher in normal men. Percent normal morphology was identical between groups. We found low-level sex chromosome mosaicism in 34% of infertile men who presented for evaluation. Men with low-level mosaicism were significantly older. Low-level mosaicism may emerge with advancing age and may therefore help to explain the decline in fertility potential seen in older men.

19539905
Paternal age and assisted reproductive technology outcome in ovum recipients.
This study suggests that paternal age may be inversely associated with reproductive outcome, as demonstrated by a decline in fertilization, blastocyst formation, implantation and cryopreservation rates with advancing age.

17543721
Medical and surgical management male infertility.
Male infertility is the result of a variety of highly treatable conditions. The critical step in treating male infertility is to evaluate properly every male partner of an infertile couple and to generate the proper treatment strategy. There are many medical and surgical options that can help most couples overcome male factor infertility. Male infertility can most easily be broken down into problems of sperm production (testicular dysfunction) and problems of sperm transport (obstruction). When applicable, medical therapies are used as an initial strategy to improve sperm production or as a preliminary therapy to boost production transiently in anticipation of a surgical sperm retrieval attempt. A range of surgical options is available to correct varicoceles, reconstruct the obstructed system, or retrieve sperm for assisted reproduction.

21371200
Sexual evaluation and treatment of ageing males with haemophilia.
Summary.? Sexual dysfunction is common in ageing men and may be exacerbated by the special medical issues and psychological problems associated with haemophilia. Sexual healthcare for men with haemophilia (MWH) requires a background understanding of common patterns of sexual function and dysfunction in the ageing male, expectable sexual complications of haemophilia and related comorbidities, and of sexually related psychological issues. Healthcare providers who treat MWH must be able to elicit a sexual history sufficient to differentiate problems involving a loss of sexual desire from ejaculatory difficulties and erectile dysfunction (ED). Other necessary skills include evaluating patients with ED for treatable causes, distinguishing organic from psychogenic ED, using phosphodieterase-5 inhibitors as first-line treatment for ED, and referring to specialized sexual urology and mental health professionals when appropriate.

18463666
Assessment of endothelial function in the patient with erectile dysfunction: an opportunity for the urologist.
Although there is now ample evidence that men with manifest coronary, cerebral and peripheral vascular disease and their risk factors are at highest risk for suffering from erectile dysfunction, recent findings demonstrate a strong connection between erectile dysfunction and endothelial dysfunction. This review explores how urologists and other providers may utilize the link between these conditions in clinical practice, compares methods of assessing endothelial dysfunction and finally speculates on how this additional information might impact treatment plans.

