20019169
Tubular expression of KIM-1 does not predict delayed function after transplantation.
Injured epithelial cells of the proximal tubule upregulate the glycoprotein kidney injury molecule 1 (KIM-1), suggesting its potential as a biomarker of incipient kidney allograft injury. It is unknown whether KIM-1 expression changes in kidney allografts with delayed graft function (DGF), which often follows ischemia-reperfusion injury. Here, we prospectively measured KIM-1 RNA and protein expression in preperfusion biopsies of 30 living- and 85 deceased-donor kidneys and correlated the results with histologic and clinical outcomes after transplantation. We detected KIM-1 expression in 62% of deceased-donor kidneys and only 13% of living-donor kidneys (P < 0.0001). The level of KIM-1 expression before reperfusion correlated inversely with renal function at the time of procurement and correlated directly with the degree of interstitial fibrosis. Surprising, however, we did not detect a significant correlation between KIM-1 staining intensity and the occurrence of DGF. Our findings are consistent with a role for KIM-1 as an early indicator of tubular injury but do not support tissue KIM-1 measurement before transplantation to identify kidneys at risk for DGF.

19218437
Donor Toll-like receptor 4 contributes to ischemia and reperfusion injury following human kidney transplantation.
While studies in animal models have linked Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 signaling to kidney injury induced by ischemia and reperfusion, the relevance of TLR4 activation to allograft injury in human kidney transplants is unknown. Here we show that TLR4 is constitutively expressed within all donor kidneys but is significantly higher in deceased-, compared with living-donor organs. Tubules from deceased- but not living-donor kidneys also stained positively for high-mobility group box-1 (HMGB1), a known endogenous TLR4 ligand. In vitro stimulation of human tubular cells with HMGB1, in a TLR4-dependent system, confirmed that HMGB1 can stimulate proinflammatory responses through TLR4. To assess the functional significance of TLR4 in human kidney transplantation, we determined whether TLR4 mutations that confer diminished affinity for HMGB1 influence intragraft gene-expression profiles and immediate graft function. Compared with kidneys expressing WT alleles, kidneys with a TLR4 loss-of-function allele contained less TNFalpha, MCP-1, and more heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1), and exhibited a higher rate of immediate graft function. These results represent previously undetected evidence that donor TLR4 contributes to graft inflammation and sterile injury following cold preservation and transplantation in humans. Targeting TLR4 signaling may have value in preventing or treating postischemic acute kidney injury after transplantation.

18729156
Kidney and pancreas transplantation in type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Type 1 diabetes mellitus is characterized by autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta cells, leading to a state of absolute insulin deficiency. Glycemic control via the use of exogenous insulin injections is often imperfect, resulting in multiple long-term complications, such as retinopathy, neuropathy, vasculopathy, and nephropathy. The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial has provided conclusive evidence that better glycemic control by intensive insulin treatment effectively delays the onset and slows the progression of diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy in patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. At this moment, the only reliable option for achieving long-term insulin independence is whole-pancreas transplantation. The proposed benefits of pancreas transplantation are clear: improved quality of life, prevention of recurrent diabetic nephropathy, freedom from exogenous insulin with euglycemia and normalization of glycosylated hemoglobin, less stringent dietary restrictions, less frequent blood glucose monitoring, and stabilization of or improvement in secondary complications. The trade-offs to the patient are the operative risk, the need for chronic immunosuppression, and the inherent side effects of chronic immunosuppression.

18513379
Review article: the abdominal compartment syndrome.
The term abdominal compartment syndrome refers to hypoperfusion and ischaemia of intra-abdominal viscera and structures caused by raised intra-abdominal pressure. It occurs most commonly following major trauma and complex surgical procedures, but can also occur in their absence. Definitive treatment is decompression at laparotomy. Prevention and recognition of abdominal compartment syndrome are crucial to avoid additional morbidity and mortality. Postinjury abdominal compartment syndrome continues to complicate current resuscitation methods and new strategies for resuscitating critically ill patients need to be explored in addition to more accurate monitoring of intra-abdominal pressure. To examine the published literature regarding the pathogenesis, diagnosis and management of the abdominal compartment syndrome. A comprehensive review of the literature was undertaken. This syndrome is an important complication of major trauma and surgery as well as being recognized in critically-ill medical patients. It requires prompt recognition with a view to decompression at laparotomy. The abdominal compartment syndrome is an important complication of trauma, surgery and resuscitation. Key to its management are its prompt recognition and abdominal decompression.

