21477851
Wdr5 Mediates Self-Renewal and Reprogramming via the Embryonic Stem Cell Core Transcriptional Network.
The embryonic stem (ES) cell transcriptional and chromatin-modifying networks are critical for self-renewal maintenance. However, it remains unclear whether these networks functionally interact and, if so, what factors mediate such interactions. Here, we show that WD repeat domain 5 (Wdr5), a core member of the mammalian Trithorax (trxG) complex, positively correlates with the undifferentiated state and is a regulator of ES cell self-renewal. We demonstrate that Wdr5, an "effector" of H3K4 methylation, interacts with the pluripotency transcription factor Oct4. Genome-wide protein localization and transcriptome analyses demonstrate overlapping gene regulatory functions between Oct4 and Wdr5. The Oct4-Sox2-Nanog circuitry and trxG cooperate in activating transcription of key self-renewal regulators, and furthermore, Wdr5 expression is required for the efficient formation of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. We propose an integrated model of transcriptional and epigenetic control, mediated by select trxG members, for the maintenance of ES cell self-renewal and somatic cell reprogramming.

21358635
Generation of anterior foregut endoderm from human embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells.
Directed differentiation of human embryonic stem (hES) cells and human induced pluripotent stem (hiPS) cells captures in vivo developmental pathways for specifying lineages in vitro, thus avoiding perturbation of the genome with exogenous genetic material. Thus far, derivation of endodermal lineages has focused predominantly on hepatocytes, pancreatic endocrine cells and intestinal cells. The ability to differentiate pluripotent cells into anterior foregut endoderm (AFE) derivatives would expand their utility for cell therapy and basic research to tissues important for immune function, such as the thymus; for metabolism, such as thyroid and parathyroid; and for respiratory function, such as trachea and lung. We find that dual inhibition of transforming growth factor (TGF)-? and bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signaling after specification of definitive endoderm from pluripotent cells results in a highly enriched AFE population that is competent to be patterned along dorsoventral and anteroposterior axes. These findings provide an approach for the generation of AFE derivatives.

20890967
Toward a complete in silico, multi-layered embryonic stem cell regulatory network.
Recent efforts in systematically profiling embryonic stem (ES) cells have yielded a wealth of high-throughput data. Complementarily, emerging databases and computational tools facilitate ES cell studies and further pave the way toward the in silico reconstruction of regulatory networks encompassing multiple molecular layers. Here, we briefly survey databases, algorithms, and software tools used to organize and analyze high-throughput experimental data collected to study mammalian cellular systems with a focus on ES cells. The vision of using heterogeneous data to reconstruct a complete multi-layered ES cell regulatory network is discussed. This review also provides an accompanying manually extracted dataset of different types of regulatory interactions from low-throughput experimental ES cell studies available at http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/iscmid/literature.

20699150
Exploration of self-renewal and pluripotency in ES cells using RNAi.
Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) have the ability to expand indefinitely in vitro and give rise to cells of all three germ layers as well as germ cells. For these reasons, ESCs hold great promise for biomedicine. In order to harness the potential of pluripotent cells, it is necessary to first understand the molecular mechanisms that control the pluripotent state. The discovery of RNA interference has made such functional analysis, even at high(er) throughput, possible. Here, we describe the methods used for high-throughput siRNA screening by high-content microscopy to identify gene products that regulate mouse ESC fate decision. In addition, we will describe the application of lentivirus-based shRNA knockdown to explore or validate the role of candidate genes in ESC pluripotency.

20535210
Patient-specific induced pluripotent stem-cell-derived models of LEOPARD syndrome.
The generation of reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from patients with defined genetic disorders holds the promise of increased understanding of the aetiologies of complex diseases and may also facilitate the development of novel therapeutic interventions. We have generated iPSCs from patients with LEOPARD syndrome (an acronym formed from its main features; that is, lentigines, electrocardiographic abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary valve stenosis, abnormal genitalia, retardation of growth and deafness), an autosomal-dominant developmental disorder belonging to a relatively prevalent class of inherited RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase signalling diseases, which also includes Noonan syndrome, with pleomorphic effects on several tissues and organ systems. The patient-derived cells have a mutation in the PTPN11 gene, which encodes the SHP2 phosphatase. The iPSCs have been extensively characterized and produce multiple differentiated cell lineages. A major disease phenotype in patients with LEOPARD syndrome is hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. We show that in vitro-derived cardiomyocytes from LEOPARD syndrome iPSCs are larger, have a higher degree of sarcomeric organization and preferential localization of NFATC4 in the nucleus when compared with cardiomyocytes derived from human embryonic stem cells or wild-type iPSCs derived from a healthy brother of one of the LEOPARD syndrome patients. These features correlate with a potential hypertrophic state. We also provide molecular insights into signalling pathways that may promote the disease phenotype.

19796230
Genetic models to study quiescent stem cells and their niches.
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) have been defined by their ability to establish long-term hematopoiesis in myelo-ablated hosts. Prospective isolation using combinations of cell-surface markers and/or dye exclusion can yield highly purified and nearly homogeneous phenotypically defined cells that repopulate irradiated hosts. Although highly informative, these types of analyses may not necessarily reflect ongoing homeostatic hematopoiesis. HSCs are also described as being quiescent. This has been demonstrated by cell cycle analysis of phenotypically defined HSCs. Some studies have challenged the existence of truly quiescent HSCs, suggesting that they continuously cycle, albeit with very slow kinetics. Here we present a pulse-chase system based on the controllable incorporation of H2B-GFP into nucleosomes, which allows the identification, purification, and functional analysis of viable label-retaining cells. Our data complement and extend recent studies using similar strategies. These, together with our present studies, find a rare, quiescent or dormant subset within the population of stringently defined HSC phenotypes. To date, three types of niches, endosteal, vascular, and reticular, have been described; herein we review the cellular and spatial nature of these microenvironments. We propose that HSC label-retention combined with genetically manipulated stem cell niches will allow us to determine their anatomical architecture, to address HSC cell fate proliferation kinetics, and to begin to dissect the molecular cross talk among stem cells and niche cells in vivo during both normal and perturbed homeostasis.

