20404288
Risk factors for anastomotic leak following colorectal surgery: a case-control study.
To assess anastomotic leak (AL) risk factors in a large patient series. Case-control study. The Mount Sinai Hospital. Ninety patients with AL following colorectal resection and 180 patients who underwent uncomplicated procedures. Risk factors associated with development of AL. The AL rate was 2.6%. Five risk factors for AL were identified: (1) preoperative albumin level lower than 3.5 g/dL (odds ratio [OR] 2.8; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.3-5.1) (P = .03); (2) operative time of 200 minutes or longer (OR, 3.4; 95% CI, 2.0-5.8) (P = .01); (3) intraoperative blood loss of 200 mL or more (OR, 3.1; 95% CI, 1.9-5.3) (P = .01); (4) intraoperative transfusion requirement (OR, 2.3; 95% CI, 1.2-4.5) (P = .02); and (5) histologic specimen margin involvement in disease process in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (OR, 2.9; 95% CI, 1.4-6.1) (P = .01). Patients with all 3 intraoperative risk factors had an OR of 22.1; 95% CI, 2.8-175.4 (P < .001) for development of AL. Histologic resection margin involvement in disease process in patients with IBD, preoperative albumin levels lower than 3.5 g/dL, intraoperative blood loss of 200 mL or more, operative time of 200 minutes or more, and/or intraoperative transfusion requirement increased AL risk. Enteral nutritional optimization prior to elective surgery is essential. Proximal diversion should be considered for patients with all 3 intraoperative risk factors because they are at high risk for AL.

20339873
Comparison of comorbidity resolution and improvement between laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy and laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding.
This study aimed to compare the rates for resolution and improvement of common comorbidities between laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) and laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding. The comorbid conditions included were type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension (HTN), hyperlipidemias (LPD), degenerative joint disease (DJD), gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), and asthma. A retrospective chart review of the patients who underwent LSG or laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding at our institution from July 2004 to July 2007 was performed. The resolution of comorbidities was determined via patient-completed questionnaires and objective data. Of the 123 patients (29 men and 94 women) reviewed, 49 had undergone LSG, and 74 had undergone laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding. The mean preoperative body mass index (BMI) was 52 kg/m(2) for the LSG patients and 44 kg/m(2) for the laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding patients. The overall percentages of excess weight loss (%EWL) were respectively 50.6 and 40.3% (P = 0.03) during mean follow-up periods of 15 and 17 months. There was a greater resolution or improvement of DM after LSG (100% vs 46%), HTN (78% vs 48%), and LPD (87% vs. 50%) than after laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding. Other comorbidities resolved or improved at a similar rate. Although both LSG and laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding resulted in postoperative improvement or resolution of comorbidities associated with obesity, LSG statistically showed a significantly higher rate of resolution or improvement of DM, HTN, and LPD. There was no significant difference between the groups for DJD, GERD, OSA, or asthma.

19888635
Large epiphrenic diverticulum.


19879609
Significant parameters for surgery in adult intussusception.


19841363
Management and treatment of iliopsoas abscess.
Even with improved diagnostic modalities, the optimum management strategy for iliopsoas abscess (IPA) is not uniform, and a better understanding of treatment options is needed. Retrospective case series. Academic center. Sixty-one consecutive patients diagnosed as having IPA at the Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, New York, from August 1, 2000, to December 30, 2007. Development and cause of IPA, the need for additional interventions, morbidity, and mortality. The mean age of the patients was 53 years. Most patients were initially seen with pain (95% [58 of 61]), gastrointestinal tract complaints (43% [26 of 61]), and lower extremity pain (30% [18 of 61]). Primary and secondary abscesses occurred in 11% (7 of 61) and 89% (54 of 61), respectively. The most frequent underlying cause of secondary abscesses was inflammatory bowel disease. Broad-spectrum antibiotics were prescribed in all patients. Computed tomography was the most common diagnostic modality used. Abscesses were larger than 6 cm in 39% of patients (24 of 61), bilateral in 13% (8 of 61), and multiple in 25% (15 of 61). Nine patients were treated using antibiotics alone, with a success rate of 78% (7 of 9). Forty-eight patients initially underwent percutaneous drainage, which was successful in 40% (19 of 48). Among those with unresolved IPAs, 71% of patients ultimately required surgery, and the IPAs were typically associated with underlying gastrointestinal tract causes. Seven percent (4 of 61) of patients directly underwent exploratory surgery and drainage, and all of these interventions were successful. The overall mortality was 5% (3 of 61). Iliopsoas abscess remains a therapeutic challenge. Gastrointestinal tract disease is the most common cause, with computed tomography as the diagnostic modality of choice. Percutaneous drainage remains the initial treatment modality but is rarely the sole therapy required. Patients with inflammatory bowel disease are likely to require ultimate operative management.

19779946
Selective management of patients with acute biliary pancreatitis.
Detection of common bile duct (CBD) stones in patients with acute biliary pancreatitis (ABP) proves challenging. We hypothesized that grouping clinically significant predictors would increase reliability of detection. A retrospective review was performed of 144 consecutive patients who presented to a single tertiary care institution from 2002 to 2007 with ABP. Of the 144 patients, 32 had a persistent CBD stone. Following multivariate analysis, admission CBD size on ultrasound, gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT), alkaline phosphatase (AP), total bilirubin (TB), and direct bilirubin (DB) significantly correlated with persistent CBD stone. Receiver operator curve analysis and linear regression were applied to obtain optimal and equitable predictive values, and variables combined. Optimal values were: CBD >or= 9 mm; AP >or= 250 U/l; GGT >or= 350 U/l; TB >or= 3 mg/dl; and DB >or= 2 mg/dl. Presence of five variables had an associated odds ratio (OR) of 53.1 (p < 0.001) and four variables an OR of 8.97 (p = 0.004) for presence of persistent CBD stone. Zero variables conferred a significantly decreased probability of CBD stone, OR 0.15 (p < 0.001). Presence of one to three variables did not predict presence of CBD stone. Presence of four or five variables significantly correlated with persistent CBD stone. Biliary evaluation by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography is suggested, as initial magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) may only increase cost and delay time to intervention. In the absence of any variable, biliary evaluation by intraoperative cholangiogram may be sufficient. Decisions regarding patients with one to three variables should occur on a case-to-case basis. Initial biliary evaluation by MRCP is likely preferable, however, as no increased probability of CBD stone was identified, thus not warranting risks associated with intervention.

19325923
Current recommendations on diagnosis and management of right-sided diverticulitis.
We present the case of a 52-year-old female with recurrent symptomatic ascending colon diverticulitis who ultimately underwent elective laparoscopic right hemicolectomy. The following is a case report and literature review pertaining to right colonic diverticular disease.

19263141
Laparoscopic resection for Crohn's disease: an experience with 335 cases.
Laparoscopic resection for Crohn's disease has had a slow adoption rate in gastrointestinal surgery. This is not unexpected considering the inflammatory nature of the disease, the need for reoperative surgery, and the presence of fistulas. The authors review their experience with 335 laparoscopic resections for Crohn's disease over the past 15 years. This study is a retrospective analysis of a prospective database from one surgeon at the Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY. Since 1993, 335 patients with Crohn's disease in the current series have undergone laparoscopic resection. The mean age of the patients was 39 years, and 54% of the patients were women. In most cases, the indication for surgery was intestinal obstruction (73%) or abdominal pain (16%). The most common operation was primary ileocolic resection, performed for 178 cases (49%). Secondary ileocolic resections were performed for 20% and small bowel resections for 11% of the cases. Of the 117 patients with enteric fistulas, 45% had multiple fistulas. There were 80 enteroenteric, 51 ileosigmoid, 33 enteroabdominal wall, and 22 ileovesical fistulas. Multiple resections were performed for 33 patients (9%). Eight conversions occurred (2%), primarily because of large inflammatory masses involving the intestinal mesentery. The mean length of hospital stay was 5 days, and the mean operative time was 177 min (range, 62-400 min). There were no mortalities. The complications were primarily bowel obstruction, anastamotic leak, and postoperative bleeding, resulting in a postoperative complication rate of 13%. This review summarizes the largest series of laparoscopic resection for Crohn's disease to date. The most common operation performed was ileocolic resection. Fistulous disease is common, but it is not a contraindication to laparoscopic resection. These cases can be managed safely and with acceptable morbidity in experienced hands.

19250877
Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass after previous Nissen fundoplication.


19228508
Laparoscopic management and longterm outcomes of gastrointestinal stromal tumors.
Surgery remains the standard for nonmetastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs). Laparoscopic surgery should be considered for these tumors, because their biologic behavior lends them to curative resection without requiring large margins or extensive lymph-adenectomies. A retrospective review was performed of patients who underwent laparoscopic treatment of GISTs at Mount Sinai Medical Center from 2000 to 2007. Kaplan-Meier method was used for survival analysis. Chi-square analysis was used to identify factors associated with poor outcomes. Laparoscopic surgery was attempted in 76 patients. The average age was 66 years, and 39 were men. Forty-two percent of patients presented with gastrointestinal bleeding. Tumors were located in the stomach (72%) and in the small bowel (28%). Mean tumor sizes were 4.2 and 3.9 cm, respectively. Operations included laparoscopic wedge resection (26%), partial gastrectomy (25%), sleeve (9%) gastrectomy, and small bowel resection (22%). Reasons for conversions (14%) were invasion of tumor into adjacent organs, adhesions, proximity to the gastroesophageal junction, large tumor size, or coincidental pathology. There was 1 mortality and a 10% morbidity rate, including an evisceration, obstruction, and pelvic hematoma requiring reoperation. Mean followup was 41 months (range, 3 to 102 months). The overall survival rate was 89%. Gastric and small bowel survival rates were the same (89%). The recurrence rate was 6%. The overall disease-free survival was 78% (77% gastric versus 82% small bowel). Three percent of patients died of metastatic disease. Adjuvant therapy was used on patients initially diagnosed with metastatic disease (n=5) and recurrent disease (n=4). Laparoscopic resection of GISTs is considered safe and effective. The longterm disease-free survival of 78% establishes this minimally invasive approach as comparable to open techniques.

18435881
Postoperative pain after laparoscopic ventral hernia repair: a prospective comparison of sutures versus tacks.
Mesh fixation in laparoscopic ventral hernia repair typically involves the use of tacks, transabdominal permanent sutures, or both of these. We compared postoperative pain after repair with either of these 2 methods. Patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair at the Mount Sinai Medical Center were prospectively enrolled in the study. They were sorted into 2 groups (1) those undergoing hernia repairs consisting primarily of transabdominal suture fixation and (2) those undergoing hernia repairs consisting primarily of tack fixation. The patients were not randomized. The technique of surgical repair was based on surgeon preference. A telephone survey was used to follow-up at 1 week, 1 month, and 2 months postoperatively. From 2004 through 2005, 50 patients were enrolled in the study. Twenty-nine had hernia repair primarily with transabdominal sutures, and 21 had repair primarily with tacks. Both groups had similar average age, BMI, hernia defect size, operative time, and postoperative length of stay. Pain scores at 1 week, 1 month, and 2 months were similar. Both groups also had similar times to return to work and need for narcotic pain medication. Patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair with primarily transabdominal sutures or tacks experience similar postoperative pain. The choice of either of these fixation methods during surgery should not be based on risk of postoperative pain.

18376688
Recurrence after laparoscopic ventral hernia repair: a prospective pilot study of suture versus tack fixation.
Mesh fixation in laparoscopic ventral hernia repair requires the use of tacks and/or permanent transabdominal sutures. Sutures pass through all fascial and muscle layers of the anterior abdominal wall, whereas tacks secure the mesh simply to peritoneum. Controversy exists regarding the optimal fixation method. In this pilot study, we compared recurrence rates between these two techniques. Patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair at the Mount Sinai Medical Center were prospectively and nonrandomly enrolled in the study and underwent either suture-fixation or tack-fixation. Office charts, computed tomography, and telephone interviews were used to determine recurrence events. chi2 and Student's t tests were performed to compare group characteristics and multivariate Cox regression analysis was used to assess for recurrence predictors after adjusting for potential confounders. From 2004 to 2005, 27 patients had suture repairs and 21 had tack repairs. The two groups had similar demographic, history, and operative variables. At a mean follow-up of 18 months, the recurrence rate was 14 per cent. In multivariate analyses, fixation method did not significantly affect recurrence. In this pilot study, patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair with primarily transabdominal sutures or tacks experienced similar recurrence rates. Future studies will be needed to validate these findings.

18308281
Non-physician practitioners' overall enhancement to a surgical resident's experience.
The Mount Sinai Surgical Residency program uses physician assistants and nurse practitioners, jointly termed non-physician practitioners (NPPs), to adhere to the 80-hour work-week restrictions implemented by Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) resident duty hour requirements initiated in 2003. A survey was performed to determine how the integration of NPPs into the surgical subspecialty teams has affected surgical residents' perceptions of their education and overall residency experience. We review the roles of NPPs within surgical specialty teams as well as our survey findings about NPP and resident impressions about the NPP role. A survey was distributed to every surgical resident and inpatient NPP using a Likert scale for responses. The survey addressed general experiences about the NPP-resident relationship in regard to education, continuity of care, workload, communication, collaboration, role, and hierarchy. NPP responses were compared with resident responses through a Pearson chi-square test. Sixty-six residents and 28 NPP responses were obtained. Overall, NPPs and residents have similar perceptions about the NPP function. Most NPPs and residents believe that having an NPP on the service decreases their workload (96.4% and 84.8%, respectively), and they believe that adequate communication and collaboration occurs between the NPPs and the residents (85.7% and 73.8% and 67.9% and 80.3%, respectively). Significantly more NPPs than residents feel that NPPs contribute to the residents' clinical education (75.0% vs 38.5%, p = 0.005) and that NPPs provide better continuity of care (96.4% vs 60.6%, p = 0.002). Although NPPs and residents believe that the NPP role is clearly defined, NPPs and residents have very different perceptions about where NPPs fall within the surgical hierarchy. Seventy-five percent of NPPs believe that they function at a senior resident level or above, whereas 90.5% of residents believe that NPPs function at the intern level or below (p < 0.001). We found that at our institution, residents and NPPs agree that they work well together and that NPPs positively contribute to resident education. We recommend a service-specific orientation for the residents with each rotation to clarify NPP responsibilities and functions, thereby maximizing collaboration. With a firm understanding of the various roles of the NPPs, a cohesive, multidisciplinary group can be attained while enhancing surgical education.

18049397
Comparison of iatrogenic splenectomy during open and laparoscopic colon resection.
Iatrogenic splenic injury requiring splenectomy is a well-recognized and potentially serious complication of colon resection. Iatrogenic splenectomy is associated with significant morbidity and mortality, including bleeding and the postsplenectomy sepsis syndrome. Our study aims to compare the incidence of iatrogenic splenectomy in laparoscopic colon resection with that of open colon resection over an 11-year-period at Mount Sinai. A retrospective chart review of all patients undergoing colon resection at Mount Sinai Medical Center during the last 11 years was performed to identify patient demographics, procedure, indication, and outcome. There was a significant difference (P=0.03) in the incidence of iatrogenic splenectomy during open colectomy (13/5477, 0.24%) versus laparoscopic colectomy (0/1911, 0%). All cases complicated by iatrogenic splenectomy involved splenic flexure mobilization. Laparoscopy has many recognized advantages over open procedures, including shorter recovery and length of stay. This retrospective review of our experience at Mount Sinai presents another potential benefit of the laparoscopic approach to colon resection.

17687617
Pneumatosis intestinalis in adults: management, surgical indications, and risk factors for mortality.
Pneumatosis intestinalis (PI) is an unusual finding that can exist in a benign setting but can indicate ischemic bowel and the need for surgical intervention. We present a series of cases of PI in adults to illustrate factors associated with death and surgical intervention. We reviewed the radiology database of the Mount Sinai Medical Center for cases of PI between 1996-2006 in adult patients. Chi-square and multivariable logistic regression analyses were used to identify factors significant for surgery and death. Forty patients developed PI over a 10-year span. The overall in-hospital mortality rate was 20%, and the surgical rate was 35%. Factors independently associated with surgical management on multivariable analysis were age >or= 60 years (p = 0.03), the presence of emesis (p = 0.01), and a WBC > 12 c/mm3 (p = 0.03). Pre-existing sepsis was independently associated with mortality (p = 0.03) while controlling for surgery. Patients with the concomitant presence of PI, a WBC > 12 c/mm3, and/or emesis in the >60-year-old age group were most likely to have surgical intervention, whereas PI patients with sepsis had the highest risk for death. A management algorithm is proposed, but further research will be needed to determine which patients with PI may benefit most from surgery.

17469119
Surgery in malignant pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.
Because of their rarity and indolent nature, optimal management of malignant pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors remains controversial. The purpose of this study is to review a series of patients with these tumors and investigate the role of surgery in the treatment. A retrospective study of 73 patients (ages 24-86 years; 36 women) undergoing treatment at a tertiary academic medical center was performed. Patient demographics, diagnostic tests, operations, pathologic findings, adjuvant treatments, and survival were reviewed. Seventy-four percent of patients had advanced disease with hepatic metastases and 30% had functional tumors. Fifty-seven percent of the patients underwent pancreatic resections. Two 60-day mortalities occurred and the postoperative complication rate was 27%. Overall 5-year survival rate was 44%. There was no difference in survival between patients with functional and nonfunctional tumors. Patients undergoing resection, even in metastatic disease, had better survival than patients who had no resection (60% vs. 30%, P = 0.025). Recurrence occurred in 20% of patients who underwent a curative resection. Patients with malignant pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors commonly present with advanced disease. Although, curative resection is not frequent, survival benefit may be obtainable with aggressive surgical management even in the face of metastatic disease.

17458600
Internal hernias: clinical findings, management, and outcomes in 49 nonbariatric cases.
Internal hernia, the protrusion of a viscus through a peritoneal or mesenteric aperture, is a rare cause of small bowel obstruction. We report the clinical presentation, surgical management, and outcomes of one of the largest series of nonbariatric internal hernias. Ten-year retrospective review of patients at our institution yielded 49 cases of internal hernias. Majority of patients presented with symptoms of acute (75%) or intermittent (22%) small bowel obstruction. While 16% of CT scans were suspicious for internal hernia, in no cases the preoperative diagnosis of internal hernia was made. The most frequent internal hernias were transmesenteric (57.0%) and 34 hernias (69%) were caused by previous surgery. All internal hernias were reduced and the defects were repaired. Compromised bowel was present in 22 cases and 11 patients underwent small bowel resection. The mean postoperative hospitalization was 10.9 days. The overall mortality rate from our series is 2%, and the morbidity rate is 12%. Transmesenteric hernias, as complications of previous surgeries, are the most prevalent internal hernias. Preoperative diagnosis of internal hernia is extremely difficult because of the nonspecific clinical presentation. However, if discovered promptly, internal hernias can be repaired with acceptable morbidity and mortality.

17137862
Small-bowel perforation after colonoscopy.


19078885
Minimally invasive surgery for splenic malignancies.
While minimally invasive surgery, i.e. laparoscopy, has become well-accepted in the treatment algorithm for malignancies of the gastrointestinal tract and gynecologic tumors, the role of laparoscopy for malignancies involving the spleen is less clear. Initially described in 1992 for benign hematologic disease, laparoscopic splenectomy (LS) for splenic malignancy was avoided secondary to the severe hematologic disease, profound cytopenia, and massive splenomegaly frequently seen in these patients. As experience with LS grew and larger data were generated, it became clear that hematologic malignancy and splenomegaly could be safely managed laparoscopically. In experienced hands, LS can be used for the diagnosis and treatment of both lymphoproliferative and myeloproliferative disorders affecting spleen, in addition to splenic tumors of both primary and metastatic origin. LS can be performed from a lateral or anterior approach, and hand-assisted laparoscopic splenectomy can provide significant benefit in cases of massive splenomegaly. Preoperative imaging for accurate splenic measurement is invaluable to guide surgical planning. Triple vaccination should be given to all patients prior to surgery, and splenic artery embolization before surgery should be considered in patients with massive splenomegaly to reduce intraoperative bleeding. LS can be performed safely for nearly all cases of malignancy involving the spleen, and potentially offers significant advantages of decreased pain and recovery time while maintaining equivalent complications and survival compared to open splenectomy.

