20975020
Physicians' opinions about reforming reimbursement: results of a national survey.
Several strategies have been proposed to reform physician reimbursement while improving quality of care. Despite much debate, physicians' opinions regarding reimbursement reform proposals have not been objectively assessed. We conducted a national survey of randomly selected physicians between June 25 and October 31, 2009. Physicians rated their support for several reimbursement reform proposals: rewarding quality with financial incentives, bundling payments for episodes of care, shifting payments from procedures to management and counseling services, increasing pay to generalists, and offsetting increased pay to generalists with a reduction in pay for other specialties. Support for the different reform options was compared with physician practice characteristics. The response rate was 48.5% (n = 1222). Four of 5 physicians (78.4%) indicated that under Medicare, some procedures are compensated too highly and others are compensated at rates insufficient to cover costs. Incentives were the most frequently supported reform option (49.1%), followed by shifting payments (41.6%) and bundling (17.2%). Shifting payments and bundling were more commonly supported by generalists than by other specialists. There was broad support for increasing pay for generalists (79.8%), but a proposal to offset the increase with a 3% reduction in specialist reimbursement was supported by only 39.1% of physicians. Physicians are dissatisfied with Medicare reimbursement and show little consensus for major proposals to reform reimbursement. The successful adoption of payment reform proposals may require a better understanding of physicians' concerns and their willingness to make tradeoffs.

20660637
Development of and recovery from difficulty with activities of daily living: an analysis of national data.
Background: National-level data are needed on predictors of mild physical impairment among older adults to assist policy makers with resource allocation. We analyzed data on adults above age 64 from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS) with no activity of daily living (ADL) difficulties at baseline ( n = 14,226). Five ADLs were measured annually and recovery was defined as regaining complete ADL function at follow-up. The strongest correlates of ADL difficulty were use of antipsychotic medications (adjusted odds ratio [AOR] = 1.93, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.44 to 2.58), instrumental ADL difficulty (AOR = 1.90, 95% CI = 1.74 to 2.07), and fair-poor general health (AOR = 1.59, 95% CI = 1.42 to 1.78). Only the number of incident ADL difficulties was associated with recovery (AOR = 0.02, 95% CI = 0.01 to 0.02). Identifying factors associated with development of mild physical impairment could help direct patients toward preventive care programs to preempt decline in physical function.

20566978
Physician attitudes toward industry: a view across the specialties.
To explore attitudes of physicians from all specialties toward gifts from and interactions with the pharmaceutical and medical device industries. Anonymous, cross-sectional survey distributed and collected between June 1 and September 1, 2008. Hospitals in the Mount Sinai School of Medicine consortium in the New York, New York, metropolitan area. Faculty and trainee physicians from all clinical departments. Attitudes toward industry interactions and gifts and their appropriateness measured on 4-point Likert scales. A total of 590 physicians and medical students completed the survey (response rate, 67.0%); 351 (59.5%) were male, 230 (39.0%) were attending physicians, and 131 (23.7%) of 553 (excluding medical students) were from surgical specialties. Attitudes toward industry and gifts were generally positive: 72.2% found sponsored lunches appropriate, whereas 25.4% considered large gifts appropriate. Surgeons, trainees, and those unfamiliar with institutional policies on industry interactions held more positive attitudes than others and were more likely to deem some gifts appropriate, including industry funding of residency programs and, among surgeons, receiving meals, travel expenses, and payments for attending lectures. Nonattending physicians held more positive attitudes toward receiving meals in clinical settings, textbooks, and samples. Physicians continue to hold positive attitudes toward marketing-oriented activities of the pharmaceutical and device industries. Changes in medical culture and physician education focused on surgeons and trainees may align physician attitudes with current policy trends.

20403883
US pharmaceutical innovation in an international context.
We explored whether the United States, which does not regulate pharmaceutical prices, is responsible for the development of a disproportionate share of the new molecular entities (NMEs; a drug that does not contain an active moiety previously approved by the Food and Drug Administration) produced worldwide. We collected data on NMEs approved between 1992 and 2004 and assigned each NME to an inventor country. We examined the relation between the proportion of total NMEs developed in each country and the proportion of total prescription drug spending and gross domestic product (GDP) of each country represented. The United States accounted for 42% of prescription drug spending and 40% of the total GDP among innovator countries and was responsible for the development of 43.7% of the NMEs. The United Kingdom, Switzerland, and a few other countries innovated proportionally more than their contribution to GDP or prescription drug spending, whereas Japan, South Korea, and a few other countries innovated less. Higher prescription drug spending in the United States does not disproportionately privilege domestic innovation, and many countries with drug price regulation were significant contributors to pharmaceutical innovation.

19786162
Appropriateness of collaborations between industry and the medical profession: physicians' perceptions.
Physicians' ratings of the appropriateness of collaboration and of receiving payment for collaboration with the pharmaceutical and medical device industries may differ. We administered an anonymous, cross-sectional survey to a convenience sample of faculty and postgraduate physicians from all departments within the 11 hospitals affiliated with the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York City and New Jersey. We examined 12 collaborations with the pharmaceutical and medical device industries using 4-point Likert scales, ranging from very appropriate to very inappropriate. Surveys were distributed to physicians within 35 departments at 11 hospitals; 590 surveys were completed by physicians at 9 hospitals, yielding a 67% response rate. Physicians' assessment of appropriateness varied among the different collaborations, ranging from nearly all rating developing a drug or device (92%) and designing a drug/device trial (91%) as appropriate to fewer rating preparing a manuscript of a drug/device trial (60%) and recruiting patients for a drug/device trial (65%) as appropriate for physicians not involved in trial design. Physicians consistently rated receiving payment for collaboration as appropriate less often than they rated the collaboration itself as appropriate and ratings varied among the collaborations. For example, 81% rated receiving payment to develop a drug or device as appropriate, whereas 38% rated receiving payment to recruit patients for a drug/device trial when the physician was not involved in trial design as appropriate. Physicians' broadly perceived most collaboration with the pharmaceutical and medical device industries, and of receiving payment for collaboration, as appropriate.

19447364
Awareness of pharmaceutical cost-assistance programs among inner-city seniors.
Lack of awareness may be a significant barrier to participation by low- and middle-income seniors in pharmaceutical cost-assistance programs. The goal of this study was to determine whether older adults' awareness of 2 major state and federal pharmaceutical cost-assistance programs was associated with the seniors' ability to access and process information about assistance programs. Data were gathered from a cross-sectional study of independently living, English- or Spanish-speaking adults aged > or =60 years. Participants were interviewed in 30 community-based settings (19 apartment complexes and 11 senior centers) in New York, New York. The analysis focused on adults aged > or =65 years who lacked Medicaid coverage. Multivariable logistic regression was used to model program awareness as a function of information access (family/social support, attendance at senior or community centers and places of worship, viewing of live health insurance presentations, instrumental activities of daily living, site of medical care, computer use, and having a proxy decision maker for health insurance matters) and information-processing ability (education level, English proficiency, health literacy, and cognitive function). The main outcome measure was awareness of New York's state pharmaceutical assistance program (Elderly Pharmaceutical Insurance Coverage [EPIC]]) and the federal Medicare Part D low-income subsidy program (Extra Help). A total of 269 patients were enrolled (mean [SD] age, 76.9 [7.5] years; 32.0% male; 39.9% white). Awareness of the programs differed widely: 77.3%) knew of EPIC! and 22.3% knew of Extra Help. In multivariable analysis, study participants were more likely to have heard of the EPIC program if they had attended a live presentation about health insurance issues (adjusted odds ratio [AOR], 3.40; 95% CI, 1.20-9.61) and less likely if they received care in a clinic (AOR, 0.45; 95% CI, 0.23-0.92). Awareness of Extra Help in the multivariable models was more likely among study participants who had viewed a live health insurance presentation (AOR, 3.35; 95% CI, 1.55-7.24) and less likely for those with inadequate health literacy (AOR, 0.15; 95% CI, 0.03-0.74). Viewing of live health insurance presentations and adequate health literacy were associated with greater awareness of important pharmaceutical cost-assistance programs in this study in low-income, elderly individuals. The findings suggest that use of live presentations, in addition to health literacy materials and messages, may be important strategies in promoting knowledge of and enrollment in state and federal pharmaceutical cost-assistance programs for low-income seniors.

18835846
Overuse of tympanostomy tubes in New York metropolitan area: evidence from five hospital cohort.
To compare tympanostomy tube insertion for children with otitis media in 2002 with the recommendations of two sets of expert guidelines. Retrospective cohort study. New York metropolitan area practices associated with five diverse hospitals. 682 of 1046 children who received tympanostomy tubes in the five hospitals for whom charts from the hospital, primary care physician, and otolaryngologist could be accessed. The mean age was 3.8 years. On average, children with acute otitis media had fewer than four infections in the year before surgery. Children with otitis media with effusion had less than 30 consecutive days of effusion at the time of surgery. Concordance with recommendations was very low: 30.3% (n=207) of all tympanostomies were concordant with the explicit criteria developed for this study and 7.5% (n=13) with the 1994 guideline from the American Academy of Pediatrics, American Academy of Family Medicine, and American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery. Children who had previously had tympanostomy tube surgery, who were having a concomitant procedure, or who had "at risk conditions" were more likely to be discordant. A significant majority of tympanostomy tube insertions in the largest and most populous metropolitan area in the United States were inappropriate according to the explicit criteria and not recommended according to both guidelines. Regardless of whether current practice represents a substantial overuse of surgery or the guidelines are overly restrictive, the persistent discrepancy between guidelines and practice cannot be good for children or for people interested in improving their health care.

18166541
Clinical characteristics of New York City children who received tympanostomy tubes in 2002.
Tympanostomy tube insertion is the most common procedure that requires general anesthesia for children in the United States. We report on the clinical characteristics of a cohort of New York City children who received tympanostomy tubes in 2002. This retrospective cohort study included all 1046 children who received tubes in 2002 in any of 5 New York City area hospitals. We analyzed clinical data for all 682 (65%) children for whom we were able to abstract data for the preceding year from all of 3 sources: hospital, pediatrician, and otolaryngologist medical charts. Mean age was 3.8 years, 57% were male, and 74% had private insurance. More than 25% of children had received tubes previously. The stated reason for surgery was otitis media with effusion for 60.4% of children, recurrent acute otitis media for 20.7%, and eustachian tube dysfunction for 10.6%. Children with recurrent acute otitis media averaged 3.1 +/- 0.2 episodes (median: 3.0) in the previous year; those with otitis media with effusion averaged effusions that were 29 +/- 1.7 days long (median: 16 days) at surgery. Twenty-five percent of children had bilateral effusions of >42 days' duration at surgery. Despite a clinical practice guideline for otitis media with effusion that recommends withholding tympanostomy tubes for otherwise healthy children until a bilateral effusion is at least 3 to 4 months old, 50% of children had surgery without having had 3 months of effusion cumulatively during the year before surgery. The clinical characteristics of children who received tympanostomy tubes varied widely. Many children with otitis media with effusion had shorter durations of effusions than are generally recommended before surgery. The extent of variation in treating this familiar condition with limited treatment options suggests both the importance and the difficulty of managing common practice in accordance with clinical practice guidelines.

