21142228
On the information content of protein sequences.


20421501
Global characteristics of protein sequences and their implications.
Computational studies of the relationships between protein sequence, structure, and folding have traditionally relied on purely local sequence representations. Here we show that global representations, on the basis of parameters that encode information about complete sequences, contain otherwise inaccessible information about the organization of sequences. By studying the spectral properties of these parameters, we demonstrate that amino acid physical properties fall into two distinct classes. One class is comprised of properties that favor sequentially localized interaction clusters. The other class is comprised of properties that favor globally distributed interactions. This observation provides a bridge between two classic models of protein folding-the collapse model and the nucleation model-and provides a basis for understanding how any degree of intermediacy between these two extremes can occur.

19706520
Sequence physical properties encode the global organization of protein structure space.
It is demonstrated that, properly represented, the amino acid composition of protein sequences contains the information necessary to delineate the global properties of protein structure space. A numerical representation of amino acid sequence in terms of a set of property factors is used, and the values of those property factors are averaged over individual sequences and then over sets of sequences belonging to structurally defined groups. These sequence sets then can be viewed as points in a 10-dimensional space, and the organization of that space, determined only by sequence properties, is similar at both local and global scales to that of the space of protein structures determined previously.

18004788
Information and discrimination in pairwise contact potentials.
We examine the information-theoretic characteristics of statistical potentials that describe pairwise long-range contacts between amino acid residues in proteins. In our work, we seek to map out an efficient information-based strategy to detect and optimally utilize the structural information latent in empirical data, to make contact potentials, and other statistically derived folding potentials, more effective tools in protein structure prediction. Foremost, we establish fundamental connections between basic information-theoretic quantities (including the ubiquitous Z-score) and contact "energies" or scores used routinely in protein structure prediction, and demonstrate that the informatic quantity that mediates fold discrimination is the total divergence. We find that pairwise contacts between residues bear a moderate amount of fold information, and if optimized, can assist in the discrimination of native conformations from large ensembles of native-like decoys. Using an extensive battery of threading tests, we demonstrate that parameters that affect the information content of contact potentials (e.g., choice of atoms to define residue location and the cut-off distance between pairs) have a significant influence in their performance in fold recognition. We conclude that potentials that have been optimized for mutual information and that have high number of score events per sequence-structure alignment are superior in identifying the correct fold. We derive the quantity "information product" that embodies these two critical factors. We demonstrate that the information product, which does not require explicit threading to compute, is as effective as the Z-score, which requires expensive decoy threading to evaluate. This new objective function may be able to speed up the multidimensional parameter search for better statistical potentials. Lastly, by demonstrating the functional equivalence of quasi-chemically approximated "energies" to fundamental informatic quantities, we make statistical potentials less dependent on theoretically tenuous biophysical formalisms and more amenable to direct bioinformatic optimization.

17387739
Property-based sequence representations do not adequately encode local protein folding information.
We examine the informatic characteristics of amino acid representations based on physical properties. We demonstrate that sequences rewritten using contracted alphabets based on physical properties do not encode local folding information well. The best four-character alphabet can only encode approximately 57% of the maximum possible amount of structural information. This result suggests that property-based representations that operate on a local length scale are not likely to be useful in homology searches and fold-recognition exercises.

