21431547
Microarray database mining and cell differentiation defects in schizophrenia.
The causes of schizophrenia remain unknown, but a key role of oligodendrocytes and of the myelination process carried out by them has gained increasing support. The adult human brain parenchyma contains a relatively large population of progenitor cells that can generate oligodendrocytes. Defects in these adult oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) or in their proliferation/differentiation have received little attention as potential causes of schizophrenia yet. We compared the set of genes whose expression is modified in schizophrenia, as revealed by our microarray studies, with genes specifically expressed in stem cells, as revealed by studies on human embryonic stem cells. We also evaluated the genes that are upregulated when stem cells engage in differentiation programs. These genes can be viewed as fingerprints or signatures for differentiation processes. The comparisons revealed that a substantial fraction of the genes downregulated in the brains of persons with schizophrenia belong to the differentiation signature. A plausible interpretation of our observations is that a cell differentiation process, possibly of adult OPCs to oligodendrocytes, is perturbed in schizophrenia. These observations constitute an incentive for a new direction of study, aimed at investigating the potential role of OPCs in schizophrenia.

20961245
Expression of follicle-stimulating hormone receptor in tumor blood vessels.
In adult humans, the follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) receptor is expressed only in the granulosa cells of the ovary and the Sertoli cells of the testis. It is minimally expressed by the endothelial cells of gonadal blood vessels. We used immunohistochemical and immunoblotting techniques involving four separate FSH-receptor-specific monoclonal antibodies that recognize different FSH receptor epitopes and in situ hybridization to detect FSH receptor in tissue samples from patients with a wide range of tumors. Immunoelectron microscopy was used to detect FSH receptor in mouse tumors. In all 1336 patients examined, FSH receptor was expressed by endothelial cells in tumors of all grades, including early T1 tumors. The tumors were located in the prostate, breast, colon, pancreas, urinary bladder, kidney, lung, liver, stomach, testis, and ovary. In specimens obtained during surgery performed to remove tumors, the FSH receptor was not expressed in the normal tissues located more than 10 mm from the tumors. The tumor lymphatic vessels did not express FSH receptor. The endothelial cells that expressed FSH receptor were located at the periphery of the tumors in a layer that was approximately 10 mm thick; this layer extended both into and outside of the tumor. Immunoelectron microscopy in mice with xenograft tumors, after perfusion with anti–FSH-receptor antibodies coupled to colloidal gold, showed that the FSH receptor is exposed on the luminal endothelial surface and can bind and internalize circulating ligands. FSH receptor is selectively expressed on the surface of the blood vessels of a wide range of tumors. (Funded by INSERM.).

