20350649
Genomic loss of imprinting in first-trimester human placenta.
The purpose of this study was to investigate imprinting patterns in first-trimester human placentas. Using samples of 17 first-trimester and 14 term placentas from uncomplicated pregnancies, we assessed loss of imprinting (LOI) at the RNA level in a panel of 14 genes that are known to be imprinted in the placenta with the use of a quantitative allele-specific reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analysis of those genes that contained readout single nucleotide polymorphisms in their transcripts. There is significant LOI (ie, biallelic expression) in all 14 genes in first-trimester placentas. LOI was more variable and generally at lower levels at term. Although there is little difference in gene expression, the level of LOI is higher in the first-trimester placentas, compared with term placentas. Genomic imprinting appears to be a dynamic maturational process across gestation in human placenta. In contrast with prevailing theories, epigenetic imprints may continue to evolve past 12 weeks of gestation.

19672677
Introducing abortion patients to a culture of support: a pilot study.
Currently in the United States, women who have abortions face a societal culture in which disapproval, stigma, and misinformation about the risks and sequelae of abortion are common. The purpose of this study is to pilot test an intervention that introduces abortion patients to a "culture of support" by providing validating messages and information about groups and services that support women in their reproductive decisions, addressing stigma, and providing information to help women identify and avoid sources of abortion misinformation. Twenty-two women who completed their post-operative exam after abortion were enrolled to take part in the study intervention. In-depth interviews were conducted to explore patient experiences and responses to the intervention. All (22/22) participants responded that they believed that interventions like the one studied could help women avoid letting the judgmental actions and attitudes of others "get to them so much". All (20/20) participants felt that the intervention was personally helpful to them. An intervention that introduces women having abortions to a "culture of support" was well-received. This study provides a framework for future research about the content, strength, and effect of societal and cultural influences on women having abortions and for additional research about interventions to promote resilience after abortion.

