21415197
Role of FDG PET/CT in staging of recurrent ovarian cancer.
Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer death among women in the United States and has a high likelihood of recurrence despite aggressive treatment strategies. Detection and exact localization of recurrent lesions are critical for guiding management and determining the proper therapeutic approach, which may prolong survival. Because of its high sensitivity and specificity compared with those of conventional techniques such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, fluorine 18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET) combined with CT is useful for detection of recurrent or residual ovarian cancer and for monitoring response to therapy. However, PET/CT may yield false-negative results in patients with small, necrotic, mucinous, cystic, or low-grade tumors. In addition, in the posttherapy setting, inflammatory and infectious processes may lead to false-positive PET/CT results. Despite these drawbacks, PET/CT is superior to CT and MR imaging for depiction of recurrent disease.

20833849
PET/CT evaluation of cervical cancer: spectrum of disease.
The prognosis of invasive cervical cancer is based on the stage, size, and histologic grade of the primary tumor and the status of the lymph nodes. Assessment of disease stage is essential in determining proper management in individual cases. In the posttherapy setting, the timely detection of recurrence is essential for guiding management and may lead to increased survival. However, the official clinical staging system of the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics has inherent flaws that may lead to inaccurate staging and improper management. Combined positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) represents a major technologic advance, consisting of two integrated complementary modalities whose combined strength tends to overcome their respective weaknesses. PET/CT has higher sensitivity and specificity than do conventional anatomic modalities and is valuable in determining the extent of disease and detecting recurrent or residual tumor. The combination of 2-[fluorine-18]fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose PET with intravenous contrast material-enhanced high-resolution CT has proved useful for avoiding the interpretative weaknesses associated with either modality alone and in increasing the accuracy of staging or restaging. Nonetheless, accurate PET/CT interpretation requires a knowledge of the characteristics of disease spread or recurrence and an awareness of various imaging pitfalls if false interpretations are to be avoided.

20014427
Chemotherapy for gynecologic cancers.
This review highlights significant recent developments and trends in chemotherapy for major gynecologic malignancies, i.e., ovarian cancer, endometrial cancer, uterine sarcomas, gestational trophoblastic neoplasia, and cervical cancer. In ovarian cancer, chemotherapeutic options for early, advanced and recurrent disease are in the adjuvant setting as well as in the neoadjuvant setting are explored. For uterine cancer, adjuvant chemotherapy is employed for high risk epithelial subtypes with early disease, such as uterine papillary serous carcinomas, uterine carcinosarcomas and leiomyosarcomas, advanced stage cases, as well as recurrent disease. The review then proceeds to further discuss the appropriate treatment based on the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics prognostic scoring system for gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. Finally, chemotherapy is utilized in cervical cancer as neo-adjuvant therapy prior to surgery or radiation, as a sensitizer concomitantly with radiation therapy or for the treatment of advanced and recurrent disease.

20014423
Recent advances in the surgical management of cervical cancer.
Recent advances in the surgical management of early cervical cancer, including abdominal, laparoscopic, vaginal, and robotic approaches to radical hysterectomy as well as fertility-sparing radical trachelectomy, are reviewed. The nerve-sparing abdominal radical hysterectomy technique allows for a significant reduction in postoperative bladder morbidity. Radical vaginal hysterectomy with laparoscopic lymph node dissection is a well-recognized technique that offers excellent cure rates without abdominal entry as well as reduced postoperative febrile and gastrointestinal morbidity. Total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy is a minimally invasive alternative to the traditional abdominal radical hysterectomy approach and yields a comparable safety profile with a significant reduction in blood loss and hospital stay. Robotic surgery is becoming more widely accepted in the management of gynecologic cancers, including radical hysterectomy for early cervical cancer. Young women desiring to bear children in the future may be candidates for fertility preservation options, and the radical trachelectomy operation has been described and performed with abdominal, vaginal, laparoscopic, and robotic techniques. There are a number of surgical options for the treatment of women with early cervical cancer. The feasibility and safety of some of these techniques have been well established, whereas for others, the oncological outcome data are only preliminary. The decision to use newer techniques should be directed by patient variables as well as the surgeon's training and competence with laparoscopy, robotics, or vaginal surgery.

18667172
Patient clinical factors influencing use of hysterectomy in New York, 2001-2005.
To determine the effect of patient clinical factors on the utilization of hysterectomy and alternatives of hysterectomy. The database of Empire Blue Cross Blue Shield was abstracted for all claims relating to a hysterectomy procedure or a hysterectomy-associated diagnosis during the 48 consecutive months of May 2001-April 2005. Two hundred ninety-five thousand one hundred forty-eight claim lines were abstracted and analyzed by CPT and diagnostic grouping codes. One thousand nine hundred seventy-two hysterectomies were performed during the time analyzed, and 5,077 hysterectomy alternatives. The mean age of all patients encountered was 39.1 years. Patients undergoing a hysterectomy alternative or hysterectomy had mean ages of 46.0 and 49.7 years, respectively. Abnormal bleeding was associated with the most encounters, while leiomyomata was associated with the most hysterectomies performed. Patients who undergo hysterectomy are, on average, older than those undergoing office management or hysterectomy alternatives. Procedures are most commonly associated with diagnosis of bleeding, leiomyomata, or cancer. Bleeding typically results in a hysterectomy alternative, while leiomyomata has the highest association with hysterectomy.

18312988
Analysis of survival after laparoscopic management of endometrial cancer.
To assess the effect of laparoscopic surgery on the survival of women with early-stage endometrial cancer and to analyze the factors that affect survival. Retrospective cohort study (Canadian Task Force classification II-2). Tertiary teaching hospital. Women with clinical stage I and II endometrial cancer (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging, 1971) from January 1993 through June 2003. Demographic, surgical, perioperative, and pathologic characteristics of women treated with laparoscopy or laparotomy were compared by use of Fisher's exact test or the Student t test. Recurrence-free and overall survival was calculated by use of the Kaplan-Meier method. Stratified analyses were performed with the log-rank test for factors affecting survival (surgical stage, histologic study, and grade). Sixty-seven and 127 women were treated with laparoscopy and laparotomy, respectively. Median follow-up was 36.3 months for the laparoscopy group and 29.6 months for the laparotomy group. The complication rates in the 2 groups were comparable. Women undergoing laparoscopy had shorter hospital stay and less morbidity related to infection. The 2- and 5-year estimated recurrence-free survival rates for the laparoscopy and laparotomy groups (93 % vs 91.7% and 88.5% vs 85%, respectively), as well as the overall 2- and 5-year survival rates (100% vs 99.2% and 100% vs 97%, respectively) were similar. Laparoscopic surgery in women with early-stage endometrial carcinoma resulted in survival rates similar to laparotomy, although a small sample size precludes definitive conclusions. A larger randomized comparison of the 2 techniques is needed to validate these findings.

17851821
Sulforaphane induces growth arrest and apoptosis in human ovarian cancer cells.
Objectives. Isothiocyanates (ITC) from broccoli and other cruciferous vegetables have long been shown to have chemopreventive properties, as demonstrated in cancer models in rodents. Sulforaphane (SFN) is a major ITC present in broccoli. We examined the effects of SFN on the growth of the OVCAR-3 and SKOV-3 ovarian carcinoma cell lines. Methods. Cell cycle phase determination was performed using a Coulter flow cytometer. DNA strand breaks in apoptotic cells were measured by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated biotinylated UTP nick end-labelling (TUNEL). Results. There was a concentration dependent decrease in cell density. Approximately 50% decrease was observed after 48 h of incubation with SFN (2 microM). Analysis of cell cycle phase progression revealed a decrease in the cell populations in S and G2M phases, with an increase of G1 cell population, indicating a G1 cell cycle arrest. The degree of decrease in the replicating population was concentration and time dependent. Incubation of OVCAR-3 cells in cultures with concentrations of 2, 10 and 50 microM of SFN showed 6, 8 and 17% apoptosis, respectively. In addition, when OVCAR-3 cells were exposed to SFN for various time periods (1, 2 or 3 days), the percentage of cells undergoing apoptosis was directly proportional to the incubation period. In this regard, while 18% of the cells underwent apoptosis after 2 days, 42% of the cells showed apoptosis after 3 days of incubation. Conclusions. These results clearly demonstrated an effect of SFN in inducing growth arrest and apoptosis in ovarian carcinoma cell lines.

17292454
Renal artery thrombosis following secondary cytoreduction in a patient with ovarian cancer.
In order to successfully perform aggressive cytoreductive surgery for patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer, resection of retroperitoneal disease in close proximity to major vessels is often required. We describe a case of a 44-year-old female patient with a history of Stage IV carcinoma of the ovary, who underwent a successful secondary debulking procedure. To remove the left para-aortic tumor implant she required complete mobilization of the left kidney, with skeletonization of the left renal artery and vein. Postoperatively, the patient developed left renal artery thrombosis necessitating a unilateral nephrectomy. This is, to our knowledge, the first reported case of renal artery thrombosis following a debulking procedure. Gynecologic oncologists should be aware of this possibility and be familiar with the diagnosis and management of this condition.

17157364
Laparoscopic radical parametrectomy and partial vaginectomy for recurrent endometrial cancer.
Endometrial cancer recurrences in the vagina after surgery and radiation therapy are traditionally treated with pelvic exenteration. However, this operation is associated with significant morbidity and mortality, and thus alternative surgical options should be explored. We present a case of laparoscopic resection of recurrent endometrial cancer at the vaginal apex in the setting of prior brachytherapy and 32P intraperitoneal therapy. Laparoscopic radical parametrectomy and partial vaginectomy may be an option for patients with small central recurrences of endometrial cancer.

18217973
Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration in ovarian carcinoma: case report with review of immune modulation.
Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration (PCD) is a rare nonmetastatic complication of a carcinoma. It is typically mediated by antibodies generated against tumor antigens. These antigens are the same proteins as expressed on Purkinje cells within the cerebellum; immune activation in the central nervous system (CNS) results in the syndrome. A 56-year-old woman with stage IIIC serous ovarian carcinoma diagnosed 3 years prior developed progressive limb ataxia. Serum anti-Yo antibodies were positive, confirming the diagnosis of PCD. Treatment with plasmaphoresis, intravenous immune globulin, and immune modulation with corticosteroids and tacrolimus was unsuccessful. Although the syndrome can be debilitating and treatment options are limited, it may also be an example of a successful host immune response in certain cases.

17386041
A case-controlled study of total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy versus radical abdominal hysterectomy in a fellowship training program.
To determine whether total laparoscopic radical hysterectomy (TLRH) is a feasible alternative to an abdominal radical hysterectomy (ARH) in a gynecologic oncology fellowship training program. We prospectively collected cases of all of the patients with cervical cancer treated with TLRH and pelvic lymphadenectomy by our division from 2000 to 2006. All of the patients from the TLRH group were matched 1:1 with the patients who had ARH during the same period based on stage, age, histological subtype, and nodal status. Thirty patients were treated with TLRH with a mean age of 48.3 years (range, 29-78 years). The mean pelvic lymph node count was 31 (range, 10-61) in the TLRH group versus 21.8 (range, 8-42) (P < 0.01) in the ARH group. Mean estimated blood loss was 200 cc (range, 100-600 cc) in the TLRH with no transfusions compared to 520 cc in the ARH group (P < 0.01), in which five patients required transfusions. Mean operating time was 318.5 min (range, 200-464 min) compared to 242.5 min in the ARH group (P < 0.01), and mean hospital stay was 3.8 days (range, 2-11 days) compared to 5.6 days in the ARH group (P < 0.01). All TLRH cases were completed laparoscopically. All patients in the TLRH group are disease free at the time of this report. In conclusion, it is feasible to incorporate TLRH training into the surgical curriculum of gynecologic oncology fellows without increasing perioperative morbidity. Standardization of TLRH technique and consistent guidance by experienced faculty is imperative.

