19129700
Serum lipids are related to Alzheimer's pathology in nursing home residents.
Studies of associations between serum lipids and Alzheimer's disease (AD) or other dementias in the elderly show conflicting results, perhaps due to misclassification of the various dementias. For 358 nursing home residents, serum lipids were studied at admission and diagnoses established at autopsy. We used defined neuropathological criteria to distinguish the presence of AD and to avoid errors of clinical dementia assessment. Residents with any AD pathology, as compared to those without AD pathology, had higher mean serum total cholesterol (TC; 200.4 vs. 185.9 mg/dl; p = 0.02) and higher mean low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL; 124.5 vs. 111.5 mg/dl; p = 0.03). Further, mean TC, LDL and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels all increased progressively with increasing pathological certainty of AD (p for trend = 0.001, 0.02 and 0.02). TC and LDL were significantly related to pathologically defined AD. If serum lipids have a role in the pathogenesis of AD, interventions may modify the course of disease.

19061275
The autopsy and the elderly patient in the hospital and the nursing home: enhancing the quality of life.
The autopsy is the ultimate "peer review." Yet the autopsy has nearly disappeared from hospitals in the United States and around the world. It is rarely performed in the nursing home or other long-term care (LTC) setting. As a result, all of society has lost much, in terms of quality of health care, the skills of physicians, and insights gained through autopsy-based research. The elderly have the lowest rate of autopsies of any age group. This is a paradox, since the greatest quality and quantity of knowledge would accrue from the often surprising findings revealed at autopsy that reflect the acknowledged "multiple simultaneous illnesses" occurring in older persons. This review and analysis describe why autopsy rates have fallen in hospitals and offer rationales and solutions for reversing this trend in the nursing home and other LTC settings.

18992700
The effects of withdrawal of dopaminergic medication in nursing home patients with advanced parkinsonism.
To determine the effects of dopaminergic medication withdrawal in an elderly, demented and minimally ambulatory nursing home population with parkinsonism in New York City. In our double-blind, randomized study, 11 patients (7 males, 4 females) were randomized into 2 groups: one group underwent levodopa medication withdrawal (experimental group) and the other group continued on their levodopa (control group). Patients were evaluated weekly over the course of a month with a neurologic examination and a series of assessment tools, including the motor UPDRS (Unified Parkinson's disease rating scale), Hoehn and Yahr staging scale, the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Nursing Assistant Behavioral Detection Form. An academic nursing home in New York City. The patients had a mean age of 82.00 +/- 10.14 years, with a mean MMSE score of 9.50 +/- 6.60 out of 30.00 maximum. The control and experimental groups did not differ significantly with respect to age (P = .52), dementia severity (P = .35), nor severity of PD symptoms as measured by the UPDRS (P = .22) and Hoehn and Yahr staging (P = .65). Overall, no significant changes were observed between the control and experimental groups in cognitive, behavioral, and motor function across each time period. Of interest, 2 of the drug withdrawal patients showed modest improvements in cognitive function as measured by the MMSE. Our findings suggest that in patients with advanced parkinsonism and dementia, dopaminergic medication withdrawal may be a feasible way to reduce polypharmacy and potential medication-related side effects, with a minimal risk of worsening motor deterioration. Therefore, our findings may have potential implications for a medication intervention that could prevent potential deleterious side effects and improve health-related quality of life in this frail population.

17597235
Prevalence of movement disorders in an elderly nursing home population.
We studied the prevalence of movement disorders in a large nursing home population (397 patients, mean age 86 years) in New York City. Patients were first evaluated by specially trained research coordinators and final clinical diagnoses were confirmed by a movement disorder specialist. A movement disorder was identified in 21% of patients (83/397). The most frequent movement disorders were essential tremor (ET) (8.8%) and parkinsonism (7.1%). Only half of those admitted with a diagnosis of parkinsonism were confirmed in their diagnosis by the movement disorder specialists. Three percent of patients exhibited drug-induced tremor, 1.3% had dystonia, 0.5% had myoclonus and 0.3% had generalized dyskinesias. Overall, our findings underline the high frequency of movement disorders in a nursing home population. The discrepancy between our findings and the prevalence rates for parkinsonism reported on the initial transfer diagnosis emphasizes the difficulty of accurate diagnosis of movement disorders and in particular parkinsonism.

