20304838
Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano rapidly reverses aortic valve stenosis and decreases leaflet inflammation in an experimental rabbit model.
Aortic stenosis (AS) is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano (rApoA-I(M)) induces atherosclerotic plaque regression. The aims of this study were to determine the effects of rApoA-I(M) on experimental aortic valve degeneration and its mechanisms of action. New Zealand White rabbits (n = 20) were fed an atherogenic diet for 9 months and then randomized to either placebo or rApoA-I(M). Echocardiography was used to assess the effect of the treatments on AS. Porcine aortic valve myofibroblasts (PAVMF) treated with oxidized low-density lipoprotein served to define the effects of rApoA-I(M) on the expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB, and alkaline phosphatase (AP). Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano increased aortic valve area (AVA) by 32% (0.25 +/- 0.05 to 0.34 +/- 0.07 cm(2), P < 0.01); whereas AVA remained unchanged in the placebo group (0.24 +/- 0.05 to 0.26 +/- 0.04 cm(2), P = 0.58). Histopathological examination of aortic valves in the rApoA-I(M) animals showed significantly less leaflet thickening, inflammation, and calcification vs. the placebo group. In vitro, rApoA-I(M) significantly inhibited MCP-1, AP, and NF-kappaB and decreased intracellular cholesterol content in PAVMF. Recombinant apolipoprotein A-I Milano treatment reverses AS in this experimental rabbit model. The beneficial effects seem to be mediated by enhanced cholesterol removal and by reduced inflammation and calcification.

19559240
Aortic valve vegetation without endocarditis.
We present a 30-year-old man with an acute middle cerebral artery territory infarction. A transesophageal echocardiogram showed a large, highly mobile mass attached to the patient's aortic valve. We discuss the differential diagnosis of a cardiac mass that includes infection, tumor, and thrombus. A complete workup showed no evidence of systemic infection but did reveal the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies. The patient also had a history of a right lower extremity deep venous thrombosis. Anticoagulation therapy was started, and follow-up showed complete resolution of the aortic valve lesion. This case highlights that when a valvular vegetation is encountered in a clinical setting that does not suggest infectious endocarditis, the diagnosis of antiphospholipid antibody syndrome should be considered. This case and our review of the literature suggest that vegetations in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, no matter how large and ominous in appearance, can be treated successfully with anticoagulation and vigilant observation.

18638599
Comparison of National Football League linemen versus nonlinemen of left ventricular mass and left atrial size.
Retired National Football League (NFL) linemen have higher cardiovascular mortality compared with nonlinemen. We examined echocardiographic characteristics of retired NFL linemen compared with nonlinemen to determine if position-dependent cardiac remodeling resulted in increased left ventricular (LV) mass and left atrial (LA) size. We performed echocardiography in 487 retired NFL football players. Demographic, medical, and professional career information was collected. Interventricular septal and posterior wall thickness, LV end diastolic diameter, and LA area were measured. Body mass index (BMI) and LV mass were calculated. Retired linemen had significantly higher LV mass (234.8 +/- 65.8 g) than nonlinemen (199.8 +/- 55.4 g, p <0.0001). LA area was higher in linemen versus nonlinemen (22.5 vs 20.1 cm(2), p <0.0001). Independent predictors of increased LV mass were BMI (p <0.003), linemen position (p <0.024), and systolic blood pressure (p <0.005). In former players with BMI <35 kg/m(2) there was a difference between linemen and nonlinemen in LV mass (219.9 +/- 44.3 vs 182.6 +/- 44.3 g, p = 0.004) and LV mass/height (114.3 +/- 23.5 vs 98.8 +/- 25.2 g/m, p = 0.005). In former players with BMI >35 kg/m(2), there was no difference. There was no difference in LA area between linemen and nonlinemen in both BMI groups. In conclusion, LV mass and LA area size were highest in retired linemen. Player BMI, position, and systolic blood pressure were significant predictors of LV mass. In retired linemen compared with retired nonlinemen, the persistence of these cardiac adaptations may contribute to the higher cardiovascular mortality seen in retired linemen.

18572043
New classification scheme of left ventricular noncompaction and correlation with ventricular performance.
Isolated left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC) is an increasingly-recognized cardiomyopathy, and the possibility that it exists as a spectrum of disease has yet to be explored. We sought to determine the prevalence, spectrum, and functional consequences of LVNC; 2 blinded reviewers assessed 500 transthoracic echocardiograms for LVNC for adequate study quality, absence of co-existing cardiomyopathy, and LVNC. If present, the ratio of the maximum linear length of noncompacted to compacted myocardium (NC/C) and the planimetered area of LVNC on apical 4-chamber view were measured. Patients were classified by degree of noncompaction measured by either the NC/C ratio or LVNC area as controls, mild, moderate, and severe; 380 patients were included in the analysis and 60 (15.8%) had evidence of noncompaction. Patients with increasing severity of noncompaction had significantly decreased ejection fractions. In conclusion, these findings indicate that LVNC may be more common than previously recognized and may exist as a spectrum, which can be classified using the NC/C ratio or LVNC area classification schemes.

18435958
Prevalence of metabolic syndrome in retired National Football League players.
The National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health mortality study of National Football League (NFL) players concluded that retired NFL linemen have an increased risk of cardiovascular death compared with both nonlinemen and the general population. Though elevated body mass index contributed to the increased cardiac risk of linemen, it could not fully account for the mortality observed, suggesting that other unmeasured cardiovascular risk factors were involved. We performed a cross-sectional prevalence study of metabolic syndrome (MS), and its individual component criteria, in 510 retired NFL players who were recruited to multicity health screenings from February 2004 through June 2006. The International Diabetes Federation criteria were used to define MS. The MS component criteria of body mass index>30 kg/m2, reduced high-density lipoprotein, and raised fasting glucose were more prevalent in linemen compared with nonlinemen (85.4% vs 50.3%, p<0.001; 42.1% vs 32.7%, p=0.04; 60.4% vs 37.6%, p<0.001, respectively). Metabolic syndrome was more prevalent in linemen compared with nonlinemen (59.8% vs 30.1%, p<0.001). In conclusion, linemen exhibited a high prevalence of MS, almost double the prevalence of their nonlinemen counterparts. These findings may partially explain the increased risk for cardiovascular death observed in retired linemen and could have significant public health implications for preprofessional training regimens and postprofessional health maintenance.

17362678
Correlation or causation: untangling the relationship between patent foramen ovale and migraine.
Observational evidence from the literature has shown an association between migraine headaches and patent foramen ovale (PFO). This observation has led to hypotheses that could explain the etiology of migraines in those with a PFO, including right-to-left shunting of venous agents such as serotonin that are normally broken down in the pulmonary circulation. Further evidence suggests that closure of a PFO may improve migraine symptoms and serve as an effective treatment modality for migraines. Several randomized controlled double-blinded studies are underway that will more definitively establish the role of specific devices in PFO closure in those suffering from migraines.

17895030
Transesophageal echocardiography: diagnostic and clinical applications in the evaluation of the stroke patient.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is superior to transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) in diagnosing cardiac abnormalities that may result in cerebral embolism. The clinical importance of these abnormalities is unclear. We classified 96 consecutive stroke patients into high- or low-risk groups for cardioembolism based on historical criteria. The presence of left atrial thrombus, atrial smoke, patent foramen ovale, atrial septal aneurysm, and plaque in the ascending aorta was assessed with TEE. Stroke type and other possible stroke mechanisms were evaluated. Left atrial thrombus occurred only in the high-risk group. Patent foramen ovale, atrial septal aneurysm, and most cases of left atrial smoke occurred in the presence of another embolic source or were associated with a stroke related to hypertensive small vessel disease. Protruding atherosclerotic plaque in the ascending aorta and aortic arch was the most significant cause of stroke diagnosed by TEE because it frequently occurred in those without other risk factors for stroke. TEE identified aortic plaque in one and left atrial smoke in two patients with lacunar infarction without risk factors for small vessel disease. TEE should be considered in both lacunar and nonlacunar stroke that occur in the absence of stroke risk factors, although optimal management of most TEE findings is yet to be determined.

