21414821
Urothelial metaplasia of the seminal vesicles: a report of 2 cases.
Although urothelial metaplasia has been reported in the fallopian tube, urothelium in the seminal vesicle has been rarely reported. We report 2 cases of urothelial epithelium in seminal vesicles from radical prostatectomy specimens. One case involved a 63-year-old patient with pT2c prostatic adenocarcinoma (Gleason pattern 3+4; total score, 7). The other case involved a 60-year-old patient with pT2c prostatic adenocarcinoma (Gleason pattern 4+3; total score, 7; with focal Gleason pattern 5). Representative sections of the left seminal vesicles from both patients demonstrated a portion of urothelial epithelium consisting of 3 to 8 cell layers, which included superficial (umbrella), intermediate, and basal cells. An abrupt transition from the normal single layer of cuboidal cells of seminal vesicle to multilayered urothelium was identified in 1 case, and circumferential urothelium was identified in the other case. No urothelial metaplasia was seen in the prostatic tissue. The histogenesis of urothelial metaplasia in the seminal vesicle is unclear, but it possibly is a reaction to mechanical irritation, inflammation, or infection, as has been proposed for urothelial metaplasia in the fallopian tube and squamous metaplasia of the pelvic peritoneum. Nevertheless, a rare congenital malformation cannot be ruled out as an etiology. Clinical follow-up of patients with urothelial cell metaplasia of the fimbriae suggests that it bears no biologic significance, yielding no instances of carcinoma. However, whether there will be an impact on fertility awaits further study.

20227011
Renal pelvic urothelial carcinoma with divergent morphology.
Compared with that of urinary bladder, urothelial carcinoma of renal pelvis is infrequent and its morphologic features and presentations have seldom been described. Fifty-nine renal pelvic urothelial carcinomas were evaluated in this study. Seventy-eight percent of these were high-grade tumors, of which 39% contained variable amount of divergent morphology. Forty-four percent of the high-grade urothelial carcinomas presented with an advanced tumor stage. Seventy-eight percent of urothelial carcinomas with divergent morphology displayed a tumor stage of pT2 and above, compared with 21% of classical urothelial carcinomas, which presented at stage pT2 and above. In summary, high-grade and unusual morphology as well as advanced tumor stage were the frequent findings in pelvicalyceal urothelial carcinomas. In addition, divergent morphology was correlated with advanced tumor stage. The clinicopathologic features of pelvicalyceal urothelial carcinomas with unusual divergent morphology were particularly emphasized in this study.

19646822
Histological patterns and associated PSA levels for prostatic adenocarcinoma following brachytherapy.
Changes in morphologic patterns over a time course following radiation and their corresponding PSA levels were investigated. A total of 60 patients with prostatic adenocarcinoma treated with brachytherapy between 1993 and 2003, who had at least one positive post-radiation biopsy, were evaluated for their morphologic patterns as well as the associated PSA levels. A total of 86 positive post-radiation biopsies were performed. There were 17 patients with more than 1 positive post-radiation biopsy and 43 patients with single positive biopsy. Among the 17 with more than 1 positive biopsy, the morphologic patterns of treatment effect were commonly followed by patterns without treatment effect on subsequent biopsies. The morphology without treatment effect followed by treatment effect was infrequent. Furthermore, over a time course, the later the positive post-radiation biopsy, the much more common the morphologic pattern without treatment effect was observed. Compared to the morphologic pattern with treatment effect, the morphology without treatment effect was associated with a significantly higher PSA level (mean 0.69 versus 2.78 ng/ml, p<0.05). An increase in the Gleason's score in recurrent carcinoma was also noted in 14% of the cases. Multiple factors were likely involved in the variability of the changes in post-radiation morphologic patterns. A new neoplastic process was particularly considered in some of our cases, which may merit clinical attention. The significant difference in PSA levels between carcinomas without treatment effect and those with treatment effect also suggested a post-radiation variation of tumor biology and a potential role of these patterns in monitoring and managing the patients treated with brachytherapy.

19282293
Endosalpingiosis of the urinary bladder: a case of probable implantative origin with characterization of benign Fallopian tube immunohistochemistry.
Müllerianosis of the bladder is an infrequently described lesion consisting of multiple Müllerian-type tissues within the urinary bladder. Few previous cases of pure endosalpingiosis have been described. Here we present a 54-year-old post-menopausal female with a history of prior pelvic surgery with traumatic bladder injury, who was found to have a cystic lesion in the posterior wall of the bladder. Routine histology demonstrated cyst epithelium characteristic of endosalpingiosis. Three benign Fallopian tube specimens were obtained and stained with the relevant immunohistochemical markers for comparison. Results showed an identical immunohistochemical profile between the bladder cyst lining and the normal Fallopian tube controls. This case represents a rare instance of pure endosalpingiosis of the urinary bladder, with a likely implantative origin. This form of bladder Müllerianosis should therefore be considered within the differential diagnosis of cystic lesions of the bladder.

18788852
Clear cell adenocarcinoma of urinary bladder and urethra: another urinary tract lesion immunoreactive for P504S.
Clear cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder/ urethra is a rare tumor histologically resembling the neoplasms in the female genital tract. Adequate characterization of this tumor has been hampered by its rarity. alpha-Methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR)/P504S has been reported to be positive in prostatic adenocarcinoma, papillary renal cell carcinoma, and gastrointestinal neoplasmas; however, it has never been studied in clear cell carcinoma of the lower urinary tract. To investigate the immunohistochemical staining profile in 4 primary clear cell carcinomas of the urinary tract, including P504S, which has not been previously evaluated in these tumors. Four cases of clear cell adenocarcinoma were retrieved from our archives: 2 cases from the urinary bladder (one each from a man and a woman) and 2 cases from the urethra (both from women, 1 in a diverticulum). Immunohistochemistry performed on the cases were P504S, K903, cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK20, CA 125, and p63. We found that clear cell carcinomas had a distinct immunoreactive profile: strongly positive for P504S, K903, and CK7, and negative for p63. Two cases were also positive for CA 125 and CK20. The immunohistochemical profile of clear cell carcinomas shares some similarity to conventional urothelial carcinoma; however, it deviates from those tumors in being positive for P504S and negative for p63. This staining profile may suggest a nonurothelial origin for these tumors, may serve as a useful tool in the differential diagnosis of this tumor, and may reflect its etiology. Because similar expression of P504S is also seen in nephrogenic adenomas, this marker should not be used to differentiate nephrogenic adenomas from clear cell adenocarcinomas.

18486893
Renal benign epithelial nodal inclusions.
There are 3 case series reports describing benign epithelial inclusions in nodal sinuses of perinephric lymph nodes of pediatric patients. The majority of these inclusions were observed in perinephric lymph nodes removed during nephrectomies from pediatric patients with Wilms' tumors. We report 2 cases of benign renal tubular epithelial inclusions located in the perinephric hilar lymph nodes. One of our cases is, to our knowledge, the first case of benign renal epithelial inclusions reported in an adult patient.

18325477
Sarcomatoid carcinoma after radiation treatment of prostatic adenocarcinoma.
We report 2 patients with conventional prostatic adenocarcinoma who developed sarcomatoid carcinoma of probable prostatic origin 6 and 2.5 years after radiation treatment (seed implantation and external beam). Our cases had histologic features consistent with those cases previously reported in the literature. The tumors consisted of spindle cells with large hyperchromatic nuclei and a pattern mimicking a sarcoma. Immunohistochemical studies showed the tumors to be weakly positive for EMA, CK7, and vimentin. Ki67 staining showed positivity in more than 50% of tumor cells. The tumors also stained diffusely positive for p53 and p63. PSA and PAP were negative. Clinically, the sarcomatoid carcinomas appeared to be of prostatic origin. The pathogenesis of the tumors is still uncertain but most likely represent a radiation-induced dedifferentiation of prostatic adenocarcinoma.

18022132
Urinary bladder adenocarcinoma arising in a spina bifida patient.
Urinary bladder adenocarcinomas are rare malignancies accounting for approximately 2.5% of all urothelial neoplasms. Intestinal metaplasia of the urothelium indicates the presence of intestinal-type goblet cells and was generally observed to coexist with or to precede the diagnosis of bladder adenocarcinomas. Controversy continues of whether intestinal metaplasia is an acquired precancerous lesion, secondary to different insults to the urothelium, or a concomitant lesion in glandular carcinogenesis. Patients with neurogenic bladders are particularly at risk for developing bladder cancer, mostly squamous cell carcinoma and rarely adenocarcinoma. In these patients, chronic irritation of the urothelium as well as long-term indwelling urinary catheters were the most significant risk factors. Spina bifida is a congenital developmental abnormality that may result in neurogenic bladder. There is only one previously reported case of urothelial carcinoma with associated squamous metaplasia of the bladder occurring in a spina bifida patient. We report the first case of bladder adenocarcinoma associated with intestinal metaplasia occurring in a spina bifida occulta patient. The patient had a complicated clinical course and suffered recurrent urinary tract infections, renal calculi, and urinary incontinence and was managed with intermittent as well as indwelling catheterization.

17630106
Immunohistochemical detection of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) in neoplastic and other thyroid disorders.
The X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) is the most potent of the inhibitors of apoptosis, a group of related caspase inhibitors. X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis expression correlates with radio- and chemoresistance and clinical aggressiveness in certain tumors. XIAP expression was examined in 106 specimens from neoplastic and other thyroid disorders, which underwent citrate-based antigen retrieval and staining with monoclonal anti-XIAP. Normal thyroid was XIAP-negative. Of 35 papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTCs), 29 (83%) stained variably in intensity and/or extent. An insular carcinoma was strongly positive and 1 of 4 anaplastic carcinomas moderately positive. Follicular, medullary, and 3 of 4 anaplastic carcinomas, oncocytic neoplasms, and a hyalinizing trabecular tumor were nonstaining. Hashimoto's thyroiditis and adenomatous goiters were either nonstaining or occasionally stained in oncocytic foci. Because XIAP was highly specific for PTC among the thyroid neoplasms, it may be a useful marker for differential diagnosis when used alone or in combination with other markers. XIAP may also be useful in differentiating insular carcinoma from follicular neoplasm in certain difficult cases. In addition, the selective expression of XIAP in PTC and some high-grade thyroid malignancies also provides clues to the role of the apoptotic pathway in the tumorigenesis of these neoplasms.

