21371634
Rescuing the failing heart by targeted gene transfer.
Congestive heart failure is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in the United States. Although progress in conventional treatments is making steady and incremental gains to decrease heart failure mortality, there is a critical need to explore new therapeutic approaches. Gene therapy was initially applied in the clinical setting for inherited monogenic disorders. It is now apparent that gene therapy has broader potential that also includes acquired polygenic diseases, such as congestive heart failure. Recent advances in understanding of the molecular basis of myocardial dysfunction, together with the evolution of increasingly efficient gene transfer technology, have placed heart failure within the reach of gene-based therapy. Furthermore, the recent successful and safe completion of a phase 2 trial targeting the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase pump along with the start of more recent phase 1 trials are ushering in a new era of gene therapy for the treatment of heart failure.

21194040
Method of gene delivery in large animal models of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiovascular disease is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in contemporary societies. While progress in conventional treatment modalities is making steady and incremental gains to reduce this disease burden, there remains a need to explore new and potentially therapeutic approaches. Gene therapy, which was initially envisioned as a treatment strategy for inherited monogenic disorders, has been found to hold broader potential that also includes acquired polygenic diseases, such as atherosclerosis, arrhythmias, and heart failure. Advances in the understanding of the molecular basis of conditions such as these, together with the evolution of increasingly efficient gene transfer technology, have placed some cardiovascular pathophysiologies within the reach of gene-based therapy. In fact, gene therapy holds great promise as a targeted treatment for cardiovascular diseases. One of the major hurdles for effective cardiovascular gene therapy is the delivery of the viral vectors to the heart. In this chapter, we will present the various types of delivery techniques in preclinical, large animal models of cardiovascular diseases.

20981290
Multimodality imaging of chronic ischemia.
Although ischemic cardiomyopathy is commonly caused by chronic obstructive coronary disease, the mechanism of the cause is still under investigation. We present echocardiographic strain, magnetic resonance, and histology findings in a chronic ischemia model in preclinical study. This case illustrates the features of multimodality imaging in chronic obstructive coronary disease and gives us great insight into understanding the mechanism of ischemic cardiomyopathy.

20461063
SERCA2a gene transfer enhances eNOS expression and activity in endothelial cells.
Congestive heart failure (HF) is associated with impaired endothelium-dependent nitric oxide-mediated vasodilatation. The aim of this study was to examine the effects of sarco/endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca(2+)-ATPase 2a (SERCA2a) gene transfer on endothelial function in a swine HF model. Two months after the creation of mitral regurgitation to induce HF, the animals underwent intracoronary injection of adeno-associated virus (AAV) carrying SERCA2a (n = 7) or saline (n = 6). At 4 months, coronary flow (CF) was measured in the mid-portion of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery. In the failing animals, CF was decreased significantly; SERCA2a gene transfer rescued CF to levels observed in sham-group [ml/min/g, 0.47 +/- 0.064 saline versus 0.89 +/- 0.116, SERCA2a; P < 0.05; 1.00 +/- 0. 185 sham P = NS (nonsignificant)]. In coronary arteries from HF animals, SERCA2a and endothelial isoform of nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) protein expression were decreased, but restored to normal levels by SERCA2a gene transfer. In human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAECs), SERCA2a overexpression increased eNOS expression, phosphorylation, eNOS promoter activity, Ca(2+) storage capacity, and enhanced histamine-induced calcium oscillations, eNOS activity, and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) production. Thus, SERCA2a gene transfer increases eNOS expression and activity by modulating calcium homeostasis to improve CF. These findings suggest that SERCA2a gene transfer improves vascular reactivity in the setting of HF.

19687154
In vivo myocardial distribution of multipotent progenitor cells following intracoronary delivery in a swine model of myocardial infarction.
There are few data comparing the fate of multipotent progenitor cells (MPCs) used in cardiac cell therapy after myocardial infarction (MI). To document in vivo distribution of MPCs delivered by intracoronary (IC) injection. Using an anterior MI swine model, near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence was used for in vivo tracking of labelled MPCs [mesenchymal stromal (MSCs), bone marrow mononuclear (BMMNCs), and peripheral blood mononuclear (PBMNCs)] cells early after IC injection. Signal intensity ratios (SIRs) of injected over non-injected (reference) zones were used to report NIR fluorescence emission. Following IC injection, significant differences in mean SIR were documented when MSCs were compared with BMMNCs [1.28 +/- 0.10 vs. 0.77 +/- 0.11, P < 0.001; 95% CI (0.219, 0.805), respectively] or PBMNCs [1.28 +/- 0.10 vs. 0.80 +/- 0.14, P = 0.005; 95% CI (0.148, 0.813), respectively]. Differences were maintained during the 60 min tracking period, with only the MSC-injected groups continuously emitting NIR fluorescence (SIR>1). This is correlated with greater cell retention for MSCs relative to mononuclear cells. However, there was evidence of MSC-related vessel plugging in some swine. Our in vivo NIR fluorescence findings suggest that MPC distribution and retention immediately after intracoronary delivery vary depending on cell population and could potentially impact the clinical efficacy of cardiac cell therapy.

18665137
The cardiac sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase: a potent target for cardiovascular diseases.
The cardiac isoform of the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA2a) is a calcium ion (Ca(2+)) pump powered by ATP hydrolysis. SERCA2a transfers Ca(2+) from the cytosol of the cardiomyocyte to the lumen of the sarcoplasmic reticulum during muscle relaxation. As such, this transporter has a key role in cardiomyocyte Ca(2+) regulation. In both experimental models and human heart failure, SERCA2a expression is significantly decreased, which leads to abnormal Ca(2+) handling and a deficient contractile state. Following a long line of investigations in isolated cardiac myocytes and small and large animal models, a clinical trial is underway that is restoring SERCA2a expression in patients with heart failure by use of adeno-associated virus type 1. Beyond its role in contractile abnormalities in heart failure, SERCA2a overexpression has beneficial effects in a host of other cardiovascular diseases. Here we describe the mechanism of Ca(2+) regulation by SERCA2a, examine the beneficial effects as well as the failures, risks and complexities associated with SERCA2a overexpression, and discuss the potential of SERCA2a as a target for the treatment of cardiovascular disease.

18514926
Design of a phase 1/2 trial of intracoronary administration of AAV1/SERCA2a in patients with heart failure.
Heart failure (HF) remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality in North America. With an aging population and an unmet clinical need by current pharmacologic and device-related therapeutic strategies, novel treatment options for HF are being explored. One such promising strategy is gene therapy to target underlying molecular anomalies in the dysfunctional cardiomyocyte. Prior animal and human studies have documented decreased expression of SERCA2a, a major cardiac calcium cycling protein, as a major defect found in HF. We hypothesize that increasing the activity of SERCA2a in patients with moderate to severe HF will improve their cardiac function, disease status, and quality of life. Gene transfer of SERCA2a will be performed via an adeno-associated viral (AAV) vector, derived from a nonpathogenic virus with long-term transgene expression as well as a clinically established favorable safety profile. We describe the design of a phase 1 clinical trial of antegrade epicardial coronary artery infusion (AECAI) administration of AAVI/SERCA2a (MYDICAR) to subjects with HF divided into 2 stages: in Stage 1, subjects will be assigned open-label MYDICAR in one of up to 4 sequential dose escalation cohorts; in Stage 2, subjects will be randomized in parallel to 2 or 3 doses of MYDICAR or placebo in a double-blinded manner.

20559907
Advances in gene-based therapy for heart failure.
Heart failure is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in western countries. While progress in current treatment modalities is making steady and incremental gains to reduce this disease burden, there remains a need to explore novel therapeutic strategies. Clinicians and researchers alike have thus looked towards novel adjunctive therapeutic strategies, including gene-based therapy for congestive heart failure (CHF). Advances in the understanding of the molecular basis of CHF, combined to the evolution of increasingly efficient gene transfer technology, have placed congestive heart failure within reach of gene-based therapy. This review will discuss issues related to gene vector systems, gene delivery strategies, and gene targets for intervention in the setting of CHF.

18342232
Reversal of cardiac dysfunction after long-term expression of SERCA2a by gene transfer in a pre-clinical model of heart failure.
The aim of this study was to examine the effects of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase (SERCA2a) gene transfer in a swine heart failure (HF) model. Reduced expression and activity of SERCA2a have been documented in HF. Prior studies have reported the beneficial effects of short-term SERCA2a overexpression in rodent models. However, the effects of long-term expression of SERCA2a in pre-clinical large animal models are not known. Yorkshire-Landrace pigs were used (n = 16) to create volume overload by percutaneously severing chordae tendinae of the mitral apparatus with a bioptome to induce mitral regurgitation. At 2 months, pigs underwent intracoronary delivery of either recombinant adeno-associated virus type 1 (rAAV1) carrying SERCA2a under a cytomegalovirus promoter (rAAV1.SERCA2a) (n = 10; group 1) or saline (n = 6; group 2). At 2 months, study animals were found to be in a compensated state of volume-overload HF (increased left ventricular internal diastolic and systolic diameters [LVIDd and LVIDs]). At 4 months, gene transfer resulted in: 1) positive left ventricular (LV) inotropic effects (adjusted peak left ventricular pressure rate of rise (dP/dt)max/P, 21.2 +/- 3.2 s(-1) group 1 vs. 15.5 +/- 3.0 s(-1) group 2; p < 0.01); 2) improvement in LV remodeling (% change in LVIDs -3.0 +/- 10% vs. +15 +/- 11%, respectively; p < 0.01). At follow-up, brain natriuretic peptide levels remained stable in group 1 after gene transfer, in contrast to rising levels in group 2. Further, cardiac SERCA2a expression was significantly decreased in group 2 whereas in group 1 it was restored to normal levels. There was no histopathological evidence of acute myocardial inflammation or necrosis. Using a large-animal, volume-overload model of HF, we report that long-term overexpression of SERCA2a by in vivo rAAV1-mediated intracoronary gene transfer preserved systolic function, potentially prevented diastolic dysfunction, and improved ventricular remodeling.

17220178
Targeted gene transfer increases contractility and decreases oxygen cost of contractility in normal rat hearts.
The aim of this study was to examine how global cardiac gene transfer of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA2a) can influence left ventricular (LV) mechanical and energetic function, especially in terms of O(2) cost of LV contractility, in normal rats. Normal rats were randomized to receive an adenovirus carrying the SERCA2a (SERCA) or beta-galactosidase (beta-Gal) gene or saline by a catheter-based technique. LV mechanical and energetic function was measured in cross-circulated heart preparations 2-3 days after the infection. The end-systolic pressure-volume relation was shifted upward, end-systolic pressure at 0.1 ml of intraballoon water volume was higher, and equivalent maximal elastance, i.e., enhanced LV contractility, was higher in the SERCA group than in the normal, beta-Gal, and saline groups. Moreover, the LV relaxation rate was faster in the SERCA group. There was no significant difference in myocardial O(2) consumption per beat-systolic pressure-volume area relation among the groups. Finally, O(2) cost of LV contractility was decreased to subnormal levels in the SERCA group but remained unchanged in the beta-Gal and saline groups. This lowered O(2) cost of LV contractility in SERCA hearts indicates energy saving in Ca(2+) handling during excitation-contraction coupling. Thus overexpression of SERCA2a transformed the normal energy utilization to a more efficient state in Ca(2+) handling and superinduced the supranormal contraction/relaxation due to enhanced Ca(2+) handling.

21512506
Delivery of gelfoam-enabled cells and vectors into the pericardial space using a percutaneous approach in a porcine model.
Intrapericardial drug delivery is a promising procedure, with the ability to localize therapeutics with the heart. Gelfoam particles are nontoxic, inexpensive, nonimmunogenic and biodegradable compounds that can be used to deliver therapeutic agents. We developed a new percutaneous approach method for intrapericardial injection, puncturing the pericardial sac safely under fluoroscopy and intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) guidance. In a porcine model of myocardial infarction (MI), we deployed gelfoam particles carrying either (a) autologous mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) or (b) an adenovirus encoding enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) 48?h post-MI. The presence of MSCs and viral infection at the infarct zone was confirmed by immunoflourescence and PCR. Puncture was performed successfully in 16 animals. Using IVUS, we successfully determined the size of the pericardial space before the puncture, and safely accessed that space in setting of pericardial effusion and also adhesions induced by the MI. Intrapericardial injection of gelfoam was safe and reliable. Presence of the MSCs and eGFP expression from adenovirus in the myocardium were confirmed after delivery. Our novel percutaneous approach to deliver (stem-) cells or adenovirus was safe and efficient in this pre-clinical model. IVUS-guided delivery is a minimally invasive procedure that seems to be a promising new strategy to deliver therapeutic agents locally to the heart.Gene Therapy advance online publication, 21 April 2011; doi:10.1038/gt.2011.52.

