21536742
Pretransplant CSF-1 therapy expands recipient macrophages and ameliorates GVHD after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation.
Acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) results from the attack of host tissues by donor allogeneic T cells and is the most serious limitation of allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (allo-HCT). Host antigen-presenting cells are thought to control the priming of alloreactive T cells and the induction of acute GVHD after allo-HCT. However, whereas the role of host DC in GVHD has been established, the contribution of host macrophages to GVHD has not been clearly addressed. We show that, in contrast to DC, reducing of the host macrophage pool in recipient mice increased donor T cell expansion and aggravated GVHD mortality after allo-HCT. We also show that host macrophages that persist after allo-HCT engulf donor allogeneic T cells and inhibit their proliferation. Conversely, administration of the cytokine CSF-1 before transplant expanded the host macrophage pool, reduced donor T cell expansion, and improved GVHD morbidity and mortality after allo-HCT. This study establishes the unexpected key role of host macrophages in inhibiting GVHD and identifies CSF-1 as a potential prophylactic therapy to limit acute GVHD after allo-HCT in the clinic.

21316261
Harnessing dendritic cells to improve allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation outcome.
In clinical practice, hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) is now recognized as a powerful means of delivering effective cellular immunotherapy for malignant and non-malignant diseases. In patients with severe hematological malignancies, the success of allogeneic HCT is largely based on immunologic graft-versus-tumor (GVT) effects mediated by allogeneic T lymphocytes present in the graft. Unfortunately, this beneficial effect is counterbalanced by the occurrence of graft versus host reactions directed against normal host tissues resulting in graft versus host disease (GVHD), a potentially life-threatening complication that limits the success of allogeneic HCT. Therefore, while preserving beneficial GVT effects, a major objective in allogeneic HCT is the prevention of GVHD. Studies in the last decade revealed the central role of dendritic cells and macrophages in modulating graft versus host immune reactions after allogeneic HCT. In this review, we summarize recent progress and potential new therapeutic avenues using dendritic cell-based strategies to improve allogeneic HCT outcome.

21284665
Dendritic cells in alcoholic liver injury and fibrosis.
Alcohol consumption impairs the development of innate and adaptive immune responses, however the exact mechanism by which alcohol leads to immune defects remains to be established. Dendritic cells (DCs) form a heterogeneous population of hematopoietic cells that are present in all tissues including the liver. DC are initially described playing a key role in the induction of innate and adaptive immune response against specific antigens. In our presentation, we discussed few new aspects of DC development, critical assessment of DC in non-lymphoid organs and the impact of alcohol consumption on DC function. Understanding the mechanism by which DC modulate liver function after alcohol consumption may help uncover novel therapeutic strategies for the treatment of these conditions.

21282381
Bone marrow CD169+ macrophages promote the retention of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells in the mesenchymal stem cell niche.
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) reside in specialized bone marrow (BM) niches regulated by the sympathetic nervous system (SNS). Here, we have examined whether mononuclear phagocytes modulate the HSC niche. We defined three populations of BM mononuclear phagocytes that include Gr-1(hi) monocytes (MOs), Gr-1(lo) MOs, and macrophages (M?) based on differential expression of Gr-1, CD115, F4/80, and CD169. Using MO and M? conditional depletion models, we found that reductions in BM mononuclear phagocytes led to reduced BM CXCL12 levels, the selective down-regulation of HSC retention genes in Nestin(+) niche cells, and egress of HSCs/progenitors to the bloodstream. Furthermore, specific depletion of CD169(+) M?, which spares BM MOs, was sufficient to induce HSC/progenitor egress. M? depletion also enhanced mobilization induced by a CXCR4 antagonist or granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. These results highlight two antagonistic, tightly balanced pathways that regulate maintenance of HSCs/progenitors in the niche during homeostasis, in which M? cross talk with the Nestin(+) niche cell promotes retention, and in contrast, SNS signals enhance egress. Thus, strategies that target BM M? hold the potential to augment stem cell yields in patients that mobilize HSCs/progenitors poorly.

21105125
Melanoma immunotherapy.
Melanoma immunotherapy has been an area of intense research for decades, and this work is now yielding more tangible results for patients. Work has focused on 4 main areas: cytokine therapy, administration of immune-modulating antibodies, adoptive T-cell therapy, and vaccines. Cytokine therapy is an established treatment for advanced melanoma, and immune-modulating antibodies have recently emerged as an exciting new area of drug development with efficacy now established in a phase III trial. Adoptive T-cell therapy provides the proof of principle that T cells can attack and eliminate tumors. It has been challenging, however, to adapt this treatment for widespread use. Vaccines have generally yielded poor results, but intratumor pathogen-based strategies have shown encouraging results in recent trials, perhaps due to stronger immune stimulation. A review of the field of melanoma immunotherapy is provided here, with emphasis on those agents that have reached clinical testing. Novel strategies to induce the immune system to attack melanomas are reviewed. In the future, it is envisioned that immunotherapy will have further application in combination with cytotoxic and targeted therapies.

20966214
Fate mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia derive from primitive macrophages.
Microglia are the resident macrophages of the central nervous system and are associated with the pathogenesis of many neurodegenerative and brain inflammatory diseases; however, the origin of adult microglia remains controversial. We show that postnatal hematopoietic progenitors do not significantly contribute to microglia homeostasis in the adult brain. In contrast to many macrophage populations, we show that microglia develop in mice that lack colony stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) but are absent in CSF-1 receptor-deficient mice. In vivo lineage tracing studies established that adult microglia derive from primitive myeloid progenitors that arise before embryonic day 8. These results identify microglia as an ontogenically distinct population in the mononuclear phagocyte system and have implications for the use of embryonically derived microglial progenitors for the treatment of various brain disorders.

20593373
Longitudinal tracking of human dendritic cells in murine models using magnetic resonance imaging.
Ex vivo generated dendritic cells are currently used to induce therapeutic immunity in solid tumors. Effective immune response requires dendritic cells to home and remain in lymphoid organs to allow for adequate interaction with T lymphocytes. The aim of the current study was to detect and track Feridex labeled human dendritic cells in murine models using magnetic resonance imaging. Human dendritic cells were incubated with Feridex and the effect of labeling on dendritic cells immune function was evaluated. Ex vivo dendritic cell phantoms were used to estimate sensitivity of the magnetic resonance methods and in vivo homing was evaluated after intravenous or subcutaneous injection. R2*-maps of liver, spleen, and draining lymph nodes were obtained and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry or relaxometry methods were used to quantify the Feridex tissue concentrations. Correlations between in vivo R2* values and iron content were then determined. Feridex labeling did not affect dendritic cell maturation or function. Phantom results indicated that it was possible to detect 125 dendritic cells within a given slice. Strong correlation between in vivo R2* values and iron deposition was observed. Importantly, Feridex-labeled dendritic cells were detected in the spleen for up to 2 weeks postintravenous injection. This study suggests that magnetic resonance imaging may be used to longitudinally track Feridex-labeled human dendritic cells for up to 2 weeks after injection.

20008528
The origin and development of nonlymphoid tissue CD103+ DCs.
CD103(+) dendritic cells (DCs) in nonlymphoid tissues are specialized in the cross-presentation of cell-associated antigens. However, little is known about the mechanisms that regulate the development of these cells. We show that two populations of CD11c(+)MHCII(+) cells separated on the basis of CD103 and CD11b expression coexist in most nonlymphoid tissues with the exception of the lamina propria. CD103(+) DCs are related to lymphoid organ CD8(+) DCs in that they are derived exclusively from pre-DCs under the control of fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (Flt3) ligand, inhibitor of DNA protein 2 (Id2), and IFN regulatory protein 8 (IRF8). In contrast, lamina propria CD103(+) DCs express CD11b and develop independently of Id2 and IRF8. The other population of CD11c(+)MHCII(+) cells in tissues, which is CD103(-)CD11b(+), is heterogenous and depends on both Flt3 and MCSF-R. Our results reveal that nonlymphoid tissue CD103(+) DCs and lymphoid organ CD8(+) DCs derive from the same precursor and follow a related differentiation program.

19941116
Isolation of cutaneous dendritic cells.
Cutaneous dendritic cells represent the first immunological interface with the environment and play a key role in the defense against pathogens that breach the skin. This protocol describes how to isolate cutaneous dendritic cells from mouse ears for flow cytometry analysis and functional assay studies.

19733489
Origin of the lamina propria dendritic cell network.
CX(3)CR1(+) and CD103(+) dendritic cells (DCs) in intestinal lamina propria play a key role in mucosal immunity. However, the origin and the developmental pathways that regulate their differentiation in the lamina propria remain unclear. We showed that monocytes gave rise exclusively to CD103(-)CX(3)CR1(+) lamina propria DCs under the control of macrophage-colony-stimulating factor receptor (M-CSFR) and Fms-like thyrosine kinase 3 (Flt3) ligands. In contrast, common DC progenitors (CDP) and pre-DCs, which give rise to lymphoid organ DCs but not to monocytes, differentiated exclusively into CD103(+)CX(3)CR1(-) lamina propria DCs under the control of Flt3 and granulocyte-macrophage-colony-stimulating factor receptor (GM-CSFR) ligands. CD103(+)CX(3)CR1(-) DCs but not CD103(-)CX(3)CR1(+) DCs in the lamina propria constitutively expressed CCR7 and were the first DCs to transport pathogenic Salmonella from the intestinal tract to the mesenteric lymph nodes. Altogether, these results underline the diverse origin of the lamina propria DC network and identify mucosal DCs that arise from pre-DCs as key sentinels of the gut immune system.

19501588
Expression of the chemokine binding protein M3 promotes marked changes in the accumulation of specific leukocytes subsets within the intestine.
Chemokines are small proteins that direct leukocyte trafficking under homeostatic and inflammatory conditions. We analyzed the differential expression of chemokines in distinct segments of the intestine and investigated the importance of chemokines for the distribution of leukocytes in the intestine during homeostatic and inflammatory conditions. We analyzed messenger RNA for all known chemokines in different segments of the gut by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. To study the effect of multiple-chemokine blockade in the gut, we generated transgenic mice that expressed the chemokine binding protein M3 in the intestine (V-M3 mice). We used flow cytometry to evaluate the changes in the numbers of leukocytes. We observed distinct chemokine expression profiles in the 6 segments of the gut. Some chemokines were expressed throughout the intestine (CCL28, CCL6, CXCL16, and CX3CL1), whereas others were expressed preferentially in the small (CCL25 and CCL5) or large intestine (CCL19, CCL21, and CXCL5). Expression of the chemokine blocker M3 in intestinal epithelial cells resulted in reduced numbers of B and T cells in Peyer's patches, reduced numbers of intraepithelial CD8alphabeta(+)/TCRalphabeta(+) and CD8alphaalpha(+)/TCRalphabeta(+) T cells, and reduced numbers of lamina propria CD8(+) T cells. Strikingly, M3 expression markedly reduced the number of eosinophils and macrophages in the small and large intestines. Dextran sulfate sodium treatment of control mice led to marked changes in the expression of chemokines and in the number of myeloid cells in the colon. These cellular changes were significantly attenuated in the presence of M3. Our study reveals a complex pattern of chemokine expression in the intestine and indicates that chemokines are critical for leukocyte accumulation in the intestine during homeostasis and inflammation.

19265143
MHC class I/peptide transfer between dendritic cells overcomes poor cross-presentation by monocyte-derived APCs that engulf dying cells.
In vivo data suggest that monocytes participate critically in cross-presentation, but other data suggest that lymph node resident dendritic cells (DCs) mainly cross-present. Here, we utilized a three-dimensional model of a blood vessel wall that endogenously supports DC development from human monocytes, and we incorporated dying autologous cells in the subendothelial matrix of the model. Flu-infected dying cells promoted monocytes to become mature DCs and cross-present cell-associated Ags for the activation of CTLs. Similar responses were induced by loading the dying cells with the TLR7/8 ligand ssRNA, whereas dying cells loaded with TLR3 ligand were less efficient. Monocyte-derived DCs that developed in this model cross-presented Ag to T cells efficiently regardless of whether they engulfed detectable amounts of labeled dying cells. Unexpectedly, the monocyte-derived cells that directly engulfed dying cells in vitro were not the major APCs stimulating CD8(+) lymphocytes. Instead, bystander DCs acquired more robust capacity to cross-prime through receipt of MHC class I/peptide from the phagocytic, monocyte-derived cells. In mice, lymph node-homing monocyte-derived DCs processed Ags from engulfed cells and then transferred MHC class I/peptide complexes to confer cross-priming capacity to MHC class I-deficient lymph node resident CD8alpha(+) DCs. Thus, natural or synthetic TLR7/8 agonists contained within dying cells promote the conversion of monocytes to DCs with capacity for cross-presentation and for "cross-dressing" other DCs. These data reveal a way in which migratory monocyte-derived DCs and other DCs, like lymph node resident DCs, both mediate cross-presentation.

19176316
Dendritic cell homeostasis.
Dendritic cells (DCs) are a heterogeneous fraction of rare hematopoietic cells that coevolved with the formation of the adaptive immune system. DCs efficiently process and present antigen, move from sites of antigen uptake to sites of cellular interactions, and are critical in the initiation of immune responses as well as in the maintenance of self-tolerance. DCs are distributed throughout the body and are enriched in lymphoid organs and environmental contact sites. Steady-state DC half-lives account for days to up to a few weeks, and they need to be replaced via proliferating hematopoietic progenitors, monocytes, or tissue resident cells. In this review, we integrate recent knowledge on DC progenitors, cytokines, and transcription factor usage to an emerging concept of in vivo DC homeostasis in steady-state and inflammatory conditions. We furthermore highlight how knowledge of these maintenance mechanisms might impact on understanding of DC malignancies as well as posttransplant immune reactions and their respective therapies.

19029989
Origin, homeostasis and function of Langerhans cells and other langerin-expressing dendritic cells.
Langerhans cells (LCs) are a specialized subset of dendritic cells (DCs) that populate the epidermal layer of the skin. Langerin is a lectin that serves as a valuable marker for LCs in mice and humans. In recent years, new mouse models have led to the identification of other langerin(+) DC subsets that are not present in the epidermis, including a subset of DCs that is found in most non-lymphoid tissues. In this Review we describe new developments in the understanding of the biology of LCs and other langerin(+) DCs and discuss the challenges that remain in identifying the role of different DC subsets in tissue immunity.

18981237
Lymph-migrating, tissue-derived dendritic cells are minor constituents within steady-state lymph nodes.
Observations that dendritic cells (DCs) constitutively enter afferent lymphatic vessels in many organs and that DCs in some tissues, such as the lung, turnover rapidly in the steady state have led to the concept that a major fraction of lymph node DCs are derived from migratory DCs that enter the lymph node through upstream afferent lymphatic vessels. We used the lysozyme M-Cre reporter mouse strain to assess the relationship of lymph node and nonlymphoid organ DCs. Our findings challenge the idea that a substantial proportion of lymph node DCs derive from the upstream tissue during homeostasis. Instead, our analysis suggests that nonlymphoid organ DCs comprise a major population of DCs within lymph nodes only after introduction of an inflammatory stimulus.

18292524
Blood monocyte subsets differentially give rise to CD103+ and CD103- pulmonary dendritic cell populations.
There are two major myeloid pulmonary dendritic cell (DC) populations: CD103+ DCs and CD11bhigh DCs. In this study, we investigated in detail the origins of both myeloid DC pools using multiple experimental approaches. We show that, in resting lung, Ly-6ChighCCR2high monocytes repopulated CD103+ DCs using a CCR2-dependent mechanism, and these DCs preferentially retained residual CCR2 in the lung, whereas, conversely, Ly-6ClowCCR2low monocytes repopulated CD11bhigh DCs. CX3CR1 was required to generate normal numbers of pulmonary CD11bhigh DCs, possibly because Ly-6Clow monocytes in the circulation, which normally express high levels of CX3CR1, failed to express bcl-2 and may have diminished survival in the circulation in the absence of CX3CR1. Overall, these data demonstrate that the two circulating subsets of monocytes give rise to distinct tissue DC populations.

18195738
Langerhans cells at the interface of medicine, science, and industry.


18086862
Blood-derived dermal langerin+ dendritic cells survey the skin in the steady state.
Langerin is a C-type lectin receptor that recognizes glycosylated patterns on pathogens. Langerin is used to identify human and mouse epidermal Langerhans cells (LCs), as well as migratory LCs in the dermis and the skin draining lymph nodes (DLNs). Using a mouse model that allows conditional ablation of langerin(+) cells in vivo, together with congenic bone marrow chimeras and parabiotic mice as tools to differentiate LC- and blood-derived dendritic cells (DCs), we have revisited the origin of langerin(+) DCs in the skin DLNs. Our results show that in contrast to the current view, langerin(+)CD8(-) DCs in the skin DLNs do not derive exclusively from migratory LCs, but also include blood-borne langerin(+) DCs that transit through the dermis before reaching the DLN. The recruitment of circulating langerin(+) DCs to the skin is dependent on endothelial selectins and CCR2, whereas their recruitment to the skin DLNs requires CCR7 and is independent of CD62L. We also show that circulating langerin(+) DCs patrol the dermis in the steady state and migrate to the skin DLNs charged with skin antigens. We propose that this is an important and previously unappreciated element of immunosurveillance that needs to be taken into account in the design of novel vaccine strategies.

18037890
The sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 1 causes tissue retention by inhibiting the entry of peripheral tissue T lymphocytes into afferent lymphatics.
Although much is known about the migration of T cells from blood to lymph nodes, less is known about the mechanisms regulating the migration of T cells from tissues into lymph nodes through afferent lymphatics. Here we investigated T cell egress from nonlymphoid tissues into afferent lymph in vivo and developed an experimental model to recapitulate this process in vitro. Agonism of sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 1 inhibited the entry of tissue T cells into afferent lymphatics in homeostatic and inflammatory conditions and caused the arrest, mediated at least partially by interactions of the integrin LFA-1 with its ligand ICAM-1 and of the integrin VLA-4 with its ligand VCAM-1, of polarized T cells at the basal surface of lymphatic but not blood vessel endothelium. Thus, the increased sphingosine 1-phosphate present in inflamed peripheral tissues may induce T cell retention and suppress T cell egress.

