21345500
Regional and global ventricular systolic function in isolated ventricular non-compaction Pathophysiological insights from magnetic resonance imaging.
BACKGROUND: Isolated ventricular non-compaction (IVNC) is frequently, but not invariably, associated with left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction. Factors impacting on regional and global LV function are unknown. The aim of the study was to apply magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to evaluate the impact of extent and severity of ventricular non-compaction on LV systolic function in patients with IVNC. METHODS: Sixteen adult patients with IVNC as defined by previously validated MRI criteria [ratio between end-diastolic thickness of non-compacted and compacted myocardium (NC/C ratio)>2.3 in ?1 LV segment] were enrolled. Short-axis cine images were employed for analysis. Applying a 16-segment LV model, regional systolic performance was assessed qualitatively (wall motion score, WMS; 1 = normal, 2 = mild hypokinesia, 3 = moderate-to-severe hypokinesia, and 4 = a/dyskinesia) as well as quantitatively [fractional wall thickening, FWT (%)=100×(end-diastolic wall thickness-end-systolic wall thickness)/end-diastolic wall thickness)]. RESULTS: Mean LV ejection fraction was 43.8±15.4% (range, 17-68%). Regional disease severity, as expressed by the NC/C ratio, revealed a significant correlation with WMS (r=0.26; p=0.018) and FWT (r=-0.30; p=0.006). The total number of non-compacted segments/patient (NoNC) as an index of disease extent was a significant independent correlate of LV ejection fraction by multivariate regression analysis (?=-5.24; p=0.038) and an excellent predictor of global LV dysfunction (ROC analysis, AUC=0.98; p<0.0001). CONCLUSIONS: In patients with IVNC, disease severity correlates with the degree of LV dysfunction at a regional level. The extent of myocardial non-compaction is an independent predictor of global LV dysfunction.

19356573
Evaluation of pulmonary artery stiffness in pulmonary hypertension with cardiac magnetic resonance.
This study sought to evaluate indexes of pulmonary artery (PA) stiffness in patients with pulmonary hypertension (PH) using same-day cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) and right heart catheterization (RHC). Pulmonary artery stiffness is increased in the presence of PH, although the relationship to PH severity has not been fully characterized. Both CMR and RHC were performed on the same day in 94 patients with known or suspected PH. According to the RHC, patients were classified as having no PH (n = 13), exercise-induced PH (EIPH) only (n = 6), or PH at rest (n = 75). On CMR, phase-contrast images were obtained perpendicular to the pulmonary trunk. From CMR and RHC data, PA areas and indexes of stiffness (pulsatility, compliance, capacitance, distensibility, elastic modulus, and the pressure-independent stiffness index beta) were measured at rest. All quantified indexes showed increased PA stiffness in patients with PH at rest in comparison with those with EIPH or no PH. Despite the absence of significant differences in baseline pressures, patients with EIPH had lower median compliance and capacitance than patients with no PH: 15 (interquartile range: 9 to 19.8) mm2/mm Hg versus 8.4 (interquartile range: 6 to 10.3) mm2/mm Hg, and 5.2 (interquartile range: 4.4 to 6.3) mm3/mm Hg versus 3.7 (interquartile range: 3.1 to 4.1) mm3/mm Hg, respectively (p < 0.05). The different measurements of PA stiffness, including stiffness index beta, showed significant correlations with PA pressures (r2 = 0.27 to 0.73). Reduced PA pulsatility (<40%) detected the presence of PH at rest with a sensitivity of 93% and a specificity of 63%. Pulmonary artery stiffness increases early in the course of PH (even when PH is detectable only with exercise and before overt pressure elevations occur at rest). These observations suggest a potential contributory role of PA stiffness in the development and progression of PH.

18545083
Fatty infiltration of the right ventricle assessed by computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging.


18371595
Radiation dose and cancer risk estimates in 16-slice computed tomography coronary angiography.
Recent advances have led to a rapid increase in the number of computed tomography coronary angiography (CTCA) studies performed. Whereas several studies have reported the effective dose, there are no data available on cancer risk for current CTCA protocols. Effective and organ doses were estimated, by use of scanner-derived parameters and Monte Carlo methods, for 50 patients having 16-slice CTCA performed for clinical indications. Lifetime attributable risks were estimated with models developed in the National Academies' Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation VII report. The effective dose of a complete CTCA averaged 9.5 mSv, whereas that of a complete study, including calcium scoring when indicated, averaged 11.7 mSv. Calcium scoring increased effective dose by 25%, whereas tube current modulation reduced it by 34% and was more effective at lower heart rates. Organ doses to the lungs and female breast were highest. The lifetime attributable risk of cancer incidence from CTCA averaged approximately 1 in 1,600 but varied widely among patients, being highest in younger women. For all patients, the greatest risk was from lung cancer. CTCA is associated with non-negligible risk of malignancy. Doses can be reduced by careful attention to scanning protocol.

18033232
Technology Insight: magnetic resonance angiography for the evaluation of patients with peripheral artery disease.
Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is a common manifestation of systemic atherosclerosis. Although clinical history in conjunction with ankle-brachial index and evaluation of segmental pressures/waveforms is sufficient to diagnose PAD in a large percentage of patients, imaging is required for disease localization and treatment planning. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography (CE-MRA) is a noninvasive, three-dimensional technique that has emerged as a front-line imaging approach for comprehensive evaluation of PAD. Technical advances such as parallel imaging and moving-table, time-resolved angiography and extended field-of-view approaches have greatly improved the accuracy of CE-MRA. In the clinical setting, CE-MRA can be extremely helpful in the initial diagnosis as well as subsequent management of patients with PAD. Continued hardware and software improvements will enable further refinements in imaging protocol for peripheral MRA, consolidating its clinical role for the evaluation of patients with PAD.

17697838
Prevalence and correlates of septal delayed contrast enhancement in patients with pulmonary hypertension.
Using cardiac magnetic resonance, the presence of myocardial delayed contrast enhancement (DCE) has been described in the ventricular septum at the level of the right ventricular insertion points in patients with pulmonary hypertension (PH). The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence, extent, and correlates of this finding. Septal DCE was evaluated in 55 patients with known or suspected PH of various causes. The extent of DCE was estimated visually with an insertion enhancement score (range 0 to 4) and quantified as DCE mass. The results were correlated with cine magnetic resonance and right-sided cardiac catheterization. Predictors of DCE were investigated using multivariate analysis. PH at rest was present in 42 patients (group 1) and absent in 13 (group 2). DCE was noted in 41 patients (97%) in group 1 and 3 (23%) in group 2 (p <0.0001). The extent of DCE was higher in group 1 than group 2 (median insertion enhancement score 3 vs 0, median DCE mass 8.7 vs 0 g, respectively; p <0.0001 for both). The extent of DCE showed moderate to good univariate correlations (r = 0.5 to 0.73) with pulmonary pressures and with right ventricular volumes, mass, and ejection fractions. In multivariate analysis, systolic pulmonary pressure was the only predictor of DCE. In conclusion, the presence of septal DCE at the right ventricular insertion points is common in PH of different causes, and the level of systolic pulmonary pressure elevation appears to be the main determinant of this finding.

17443112
Magnetic resonance imaging of a bioprosthetic mitral valve: a smiling heart.


17392248
Pulmonary hypertension: accuracy of detection with left ventricular septal-to-free wall curvature ratio measured at cardiac MR.
To retrospectively evaluate the accuracy and reproducibility of the cardiac magnetic resonance (MR) imaging-derived left ventricular septal-to-free wall curvature ratio for prediction of the right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) in patients clinically known to have or suspected of having pulmonary hypertension (PH), with same-day right-side heart catheterization (RHC) as the reference standard. Institutional review board approval was received for this HIPAA-compliant study. Sixty-one patients clinically known or suspected of having PH underwent cardiac MR and RHC on the same day. Interventricular septal curvature (C(IVS)) and left ventricular free wall curvature (C(FW)) measured at end systole were used to derive the curvature ratio (C(IVS)/C(FW)). Effective distending transmural pressure (dP(FW)) and transseptal pressure gradient (dP(IVS)) were assumed to be equivalent, respectively, to the systolic blood pressure (SBP) and the difference between SBP and RVSP. Curvature ratio and SBP were used to noninvasively estimate RVSP. Linear regression analysis was performed to assess the difference between curvature ratio and rate of pressure rise (dP) ratio (dP(IVS)/dP(FW)). The accuracy of the dichotomized curvature ratio in PH detection was analyzed by using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. PH, defined as RVSP higher than 40 mm Hg, was confirmed with RHC in 46 patients. A direct linear correlation between dP ratio and curvature ratio was observed (r = 0.85, P < .001). Bland-Altman analysis revealed moderate agreement between cardiac MR- and RHC-derived RVSPs (mean difference, -1.1 mm Hg +/- 15.9 [standard deviation]). ROC analysis of the accuracy of the curvature ratio for detection of increased RVSP revealed 87% sensitivity and 100% specificity (area under ROC curve, 0.95; P < .001). Intraobserver (r = 0.97) and interobserver (r = 0.95) curvature ratio measurements were closely correlated. In patients clinically known to have or suspected of having PH, cardiac MR-derived curvature ratio, as compared with RHC measurement, was an accurate and reproducible index for estimation of RVSP.

17329691
Pulmonary arterial hypertension: noninvasive detection with phase-contrast MR imaging.
To retrospectively identify pulmonary arterial (PA) flow parameters measured with phase-contrast magnetic resonance (MR) imaging that allow noninvasive diagnosis of chronic PA hypertension (PAH). The study was HIPAA compliant and was approved by the institutional review board; a waiver of informed consent was obtained. Fifty-nine patients (49 female patients; mean age, 46 years; range, 16-85 years) known to have or suspected of having PAH underwent breath-hold phase-contrast MR imaging and right-sided heart catheterization (RHC). The presence of PAH (mean pulmonary artery pressure [mPAP], >25 mm Hg) was confirmed in 42 patients. Parameters, including PA areas, PA strain, average velocity, peak velocity, acceleration time, and ejection time, were measured in each patient by investigators blinded to RHC results. These measurements were correlated with mPAP, systolic pulmonary artery pressure (sPAP), and pulmonary vascular resistance index (PVRI). The diagnostic ability of phase-contrast MR imaging to depict PAH was quantified. Statistical tests included Spearman rho coefficients, receiver operating characteristic curve analysis, and Bland-Altman plots. Results showed average velocity to have the best correlation with mPAP, sPAP, and PVRI (r = -0.73, -0.76, and -0.86, respectively; P < .001). Average velocity (cutoff value = 11.7 cm/sec) revealed PAH with a sensitivity of 92.9% (39 of 42) and a specificity of 82.4% (14 of 17). Sensitivity and specificity for the minimum PA area (cutoff value = 6.6 cm(2)) were 92.9% (39 of 42) and 88.2% (15 of 17), respectively. The average blood velocity throughout the cardiac cycle is strongly correlated with pulmonary pressures and resistance.

