17720376
Preservation of spinal cord function after extensive segmental artery sacrifice: regional variations in perfusion.
Sacrifice of intercostal and lumbar arteries simplifies thoracoabdominal aneurysm surgery and enables endovascular stenting. Little is known about alterations in cord perfusion after extensive segmental artery sacrifice. We explored this question using hypothermia to reduce metabolism. Twelve juvenile Yorkshire pigs (mean weight, 22.3 kg) were randomized to segmental artery sacrifice at 32 degrees C or 37 degrees C. Cord integrity was assessed with myogenic-evoked potential (MEP) monitoring. Stepwise craniocaudal sacrifice of segmental arteries was continued until MEP diminution occurred; the last segmental artery was then reopened. Fluorescent microspheres were used to measure spinal cord blood flow (SCBF) at baseline, 5 minutes, 1 hour, and 3 hours after segmental artery sacrifice. Hind limb function was monitored for 5 days. All animals recovered normal hind limb function. At 32 degrees C, more segmental arteries, 16.5 versus 15 (p = 0.03), could be sacrificed without MEP loss. Baseline SCBF at 32 degrees C was 50% that at 37 degrees C (p = 0.003) and remained fairly stable throughout. At 37 degrees C, SCBF to the craniocaudal extremes of the cord (C1 to T3 and L2 to L6) increased markedly (p = 0.01) at 1 hour and returned toward normal at 3 hours. Concomitantly, SCBF fell in the middle portion of the cord (T9 to T13) at 1 hour before returning to normal at 3 hours. Almost all segmental arteries can be sacrificed with preservation of spinal cord function. No major change occurs in the central cord in normothermic animals, but there is significant transient hyperemia in segments adjacent to extrasegmental vessels. Hypothermia reduces SCBF and abolishes this possible steal phenomenon. Metabolic and hemodynamic manipulation should enable routine sacrifice of all segmental arteries without spinal cord injury.

17720373
Perfusing the cold brain: optimal neuroprotection for aortic surgery.
Selective cerebral perfusion (SCP) may enhance the neuroprotective benefits of hypothermia during aortic surgery. However, despite its widespread adoption, there is no consensus regarding optimal implementation of SCP. We used a survival porcine model to explore the physiologic characteristics and behavioral benefits of various protocols involving hypothermic circulatory arrest (HCA) and SCP. Thirty pigs (26.3 +/- 1.4 kg), cooled to 15 degrees C on cardiopulmonary bypass, using alpha-stat pH management (mean hematocrit 30%), were randomly allocated to differing brain protection strategies: 90 minutes of HCA (group A); 30 minutes of HCA, then 60 minutes of SCP (group B); or 90 minutes of SCP (group C). Using fluorescent microspheres and sagittal sinus sampling, cerebral blood flow (CBF [mL x 100g(-1) x min(-1)]) and cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen (CMRO2 [mL x 100g(-1) x min(-1)]) were assessed at baseline, after cooling, during SCP (where applicable), and for 2 hours after cardiopulmonary bypass. Neurobehavioral scores were assessed blindly from standardized videotaped sessions for 7 days postoperatively. Cerebral blood flow was significantly higher (p = 0.0001) during SCP (60 and 90 minutes) if preceded by HCA. The CMRO2 was also significantly higher in group B versus group C (p = 0.016) at 60 minutes. The CMRO2 in all three groups rebounded promptly toward baseline after weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass. Postoperative neurobehavioral scores were significantly worse in group A. Continuous SCP provides the best brain protection overall. However, an initial period of HCA does not seem to impair late outcome; perhaps the elevated CBF and CMRO2 observed reflect a beneficial cerebral response to a recoverable insult. Clearly, 90 minutes of HCA induces permanent brain injury, even in this carefully controlled setting.

17198797
The fate of the distal aorta after repair of acute type A aortic dissection.
The residual aorta's behavior after repair of acute type A dissection is incompletely understood. We analyzed segmental growth rates, distal reoperation, and factors influencing long-term survival. One hundred seventy-nine consecutive patients (70% male; mean age, 60 years) with acute type A dissection underwent aggressive resection of the intimal tear and open distal anastomosis (1986-2003). Hospital mortality was 13.4%. Survivors had serial computed tomographic scans: digitization yielded distal segmental dimensions. Segment-specific average rates of enlargement and factors influencing faster growth were analyzed. Distal reoperations and patient survival were examined. Eighty-nine (57%) patients had imaging data sufficient for growth rate calculations. The median diameters after repair were as follows: aortic arch, 3.6 cm; descending aorta, 3.7 cm; and abdominal aorta, 3.2 cm. Subsequent growth rates were 0.8, 1.0, and 0.8 mm/y, respectively. Initial size of greater than 4 cm (P = .005) and initial diameter of less than 4 cm with a patent false lumen (P = .004) predicted greater growth in the descending aorta, and male sex (P = .05) significantly affected growth in the abdominal aorta. No significant factors were found for the aortic arch. There were 25 distal aortic reoperations (16 patients), and risk of reoperation was 16% at 10 years. Risk factors reducing long-term survival after repair of acute type A dissection included age (P < .0001), new neurological deficit at presentation (P = .04), absence of preoperative thrombus in the false lumen of the ascending aorta (P = .03), and a patent distal false lumen postoperatively (P = .06) but not distal reoperation. Growth of the distal aorta after repair of acute type A dissection is typically slow and linear. Distal reoperation is uncommon, and late risk of death is approximately twice that of a healthy population.

