21451408
Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes as models for genetic cardiovascular disorders.
The development of induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology has led to many advances in the areas of directed cell differentiation and characterization. New methods for generating iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes provide an invaluable resource for the study of certain cardiovascular disorders. This review highlights the current technology in this field, its application thus far to the study of genetic disorders of the RAS/MAPK pathway and long-QT syndrome (LQTS), and future directions for the field. Enhanced methods increase the efficiency of generating and stringently purifying iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes. The use of cardiomyocytes derived from patients with LEOPARD syndrome and LQTS has shed light on the molecular mechanisms of disease and validated their use as reliable human disease models. The use of iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes to study genetic cardiovascular disorders will enable a deeper and more applicable understanding of the molecular mechanisms of human disease, as well as improving our ability to achieve successful cell-based therapies. Methods to efficiently generate these cells are improving and provide promise for future applications of this technology.

21440552
Cyclosporine attenuates cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by RAF1 mutants in Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes.
RAS activation is implicated in physiologic and pathologic cardiac hypertrophy. Cross-talk between the Ras and calcineurin pathways, the latter also having been implicated in cardiac hypertrophy, has been suspected for pathologic hypertrophy. Our recent discovery that germ-line mutations in RAF1, which encodes a downstream RAS effector, cause Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes with a high prevalence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy provided an opportunity to elaborate the role of RAF1 in cardiomyocyte biology. Here, we characterize the role of RAF1 signaling in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy with an aim of identifying potential therapeutic targets. We modeled hypertrophic cardiomyopathy by infecting neonatal and adult rat cardiomyocytes (NRCMs and ARCMs, respectively) with adenoviruses encoding wild-type RAF1 and three Noonan/LEOPARD syndrome-associated RAF1 mutants (S257L, D486N or L613V). These RAF1 proteins, except D486N, engendered cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Surprisingly, these effects were independent and dependent of mitogen activated protein kinases in NRCMs and ARCMs, respectively. Inhibiting Mek1/2 in RAF1 overexpressing cells blocked hypertrophy in ARCMs but not in NRCMs. Further, we found that endogenous and heterologously expressed RAF1 complexed with calcineurin, and RAF1 mutants causing hypertrophy signaled via nuclear factor of activated T cells (Nfat) in both cell types. The involvement of calcineurin was also reflected by down regulation of Serca2a and dysregulation of calcium signaling in NRCMs. Furthermore, treatment with the calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine blocked hypertrophy in NRCMs and ARCMs overexpressing RAF1. Thus, we have identified calcineurin as a novel interaction partner for RAF1 and established a mechanistic link and possible therapeutic target for pathological cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by mutant RAF1. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 'Possible Editorial'.

21339640
RAS signaling pathway mutations and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: getting into and out of the thick of it.
In this issue of the JCI, Wu et al. and Marin et al. describe two new mouse models of inherited disorders of the RAS/MAPK signal transduction pathway that display hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM); the model from the former paper was from a gain-of-function Raf1 mutation, and the model from the latter paper was from a protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 11 (Ptpn11) mutated allele encoding Shp2 with impaired catalytic function. The two groups show that HCM arises from increased signaling through Erk1/2 and the mTor complex 1, respectively, and that those cardiac issues can be prevented or reversed with small-molecule therapies inhibiting the appropriate pathway. Aside from being the first studies of treatment for Noonan syndrome and related disorders in a mammalian system, these papers provide important insights into the role of RAS signaling in cardiac hypertrophy and suggest the complexity in developing meaningful therapy for individuals with these RASopathies.

20826270
Protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPN14 is a regulator of lymphatic function and choanal development in humans.
The lymphatic vasculature is essential for the recirculation of extracellular fluid, fat absorption, and immune function and as a route of tumor metastasis. The dissection of molecular mechanisms underlying lymphangiogenesis has been accelerated by the identification of tissue-specific lymphatic endothelial markers and the study of congenital lymphedema syndromes. We report the results of genetic analyses of a kindred inheriting a unique autosomal-recessive lymphedema-choanal atresia syndrome. These studies establish linkage of the trait to chromosome 1q32-q41 and identify a loss-of-function mutation in PTPN14, which encodes a nonreceptor tyrosine phosphatase. The causal role of PTPN14 deficiency was confirmed by the generation of a murine Ptpn14 gene trap model that manifested lymphatic hyperplasia with lymphedema. Biochemical studies revealed a potential interaction between PTPN14 and the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 (VEGFR3), a receptor tyrosine kinase essential for lymphangiogenesis. These results suggest a unique and conserved role for PTPN14 in the regulation of lymphatic development in mammals and a nonconserved role in choanal development in humans.

20535210
Patient-specific induced pluripotent stem-cell-derived models of LEOPARD syndrome.
The generation of reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from patients with defined genetic disorders holds the promise of increased understanding of the aetiologies of complex diseases and may also facilitate the development of novel therapeutic interventions. We have generated iPSCs from patients with LEOPARD syndrome (an acronym formed from its main features; that is, lentigines, electrocardiographic abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary valve stenosis, abnormal genitalia, retardation of growth and deafness), an autosomal-dominant developmental disorder belonging to a relatively prevalent class of inherited RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase signalling diseases, which also includes Noonan syndrome, with pleomorphic effects on several tissues and organ systems. The patient-derived cells have a mutation in the PTPN11 gene, which encodes the SHP2 phosphatase. The iPSCs have been extensively characterized and produce multiple differentiated cell lineages. A major disease phenotype in patients with LEOPARD syndrome is hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. We show that in vitro-derived cardiomyocytes from LEOPARD syndrome iPSCs are larger, have a higher degree of sarcomeric organization and preferential localization of NFATC4 in the nucleus when compared with cardiomyocytes derived from human embryonic stem cells or wild-type iPSCs derived from a healthy brother of one of the LEOPARD syndrome patients. These features correlate with a potential hypertrophic state. We also provide molecular insights into signalling pathways that may promote the disease phenotype.

18849586
Phosphatase-defective LEOPARD syndrome mutations in PTPN11 gene have gain-of-function effects during Drosophila development.
Missense mutations in the PTPN11 gene, which encodes the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, cause clinically similar but distinctive disorders, LEOPARD (LS) and Noonan (NS) syndromes. The LS is an autosomal dominant disorder with pleomorphic developmental abnormalities including lentigines, cardiac defects, short stature and deafness. Biochemical analyses indicated that LS alleles engender loss-of-function (LOF) effects, while NS mutations result in gain-of-function (GOF). These biochemical findings lead to an enigma that how PTPN11 mutations with opposite effects on function result in disorders that are so similar. To study the developmental effects of the commonest LS PTPN11 alleles (Y279C and T468M), we generated LS transgenic fruitflies using corkscrew (csw), the Drosophila orthologue of PTPN11. Ubiquitous expression of the LS csw mutant alleles resulted in ectopic wing veins and, for the Y279C allele, rough eyes with increased R7 photoreceptor numbers. These were GOF phenotypes mediated by increased RAS/MAPK signaling and requiring the LS mutant's residual phosphatase activity. Our findings provide the first evidence that LS mutant alleles have GOF developmental effects despite reduced phosphatase activity, providing a rationale for how PTPN11 mutations with GOF and LOF produce similar but distinctive syndromes.

18495928
Transcription factor Ap2delta associates with Ash2l and ALR, a trithorax family histone methyltransferase, to activate Hoxc8 transcription.
The family of Ap2 transcription factors comprises five members with highly conserved DNA-binding domains. Among the family members, Ap2delta is the most divergent, because it lacks highly conserved residues within the transactivation domain (TAD) and has weak affinity for known Ap2 binding sites. To identify specific Ap2delta coactivators/regulators during development, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen, using Ap2delta's TAD. We identified the trithorax superfamily member, Ash2l, as a binding partner that interacts exclusively with Ap2delta. We showed that Ash2l positively mediates Ap2delta transactivation in a dose-dependent manner. Given the known role of Ash2l in histone modification, we determined whether Ap2delta was able to form a complex with that activity. Our results showed that Ap2delta associates with endogenous ASH2L and a member of the MLL family of histone lysine methyltransferases (HKMTs), MLL2 (ALR), forming a complex that methylates lysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4). Additionally, we showed that Ap2delta is necessary for recruitment of Ash2l and Alr to the Hoxc8 locus and that recruitment of this complex leads to H3K4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and subsequent gene activation. Altogether, we provide evidence of an association between a highly restricted gene-specific transcription factor and a Su(var), Enhancer of Zeste, Trithorax (SET)1/trithorax-like complex with H3K4 methyltransferase activity. Our studies also document a functional role for Ap2delta in recruiting histone methyltransferases (HMTs) to specific gene targets, such as Hoxc8. This role provides a mechanism through which these transcription factors can have diverse effects despite nearly identical DNA-binding motifs.

18377533
Evaluation of pulmonary artery banding in the setting of ventricular septal defects and severely elevated pulmonary vascular resistance.
Children with pulmonary hypertension secondary to large left-to-right, post-tricuspid valve shunts can eventually have severe and/or irreversible pulmonary vascular disease, yielding them inoperable for conventional surgery. It has been shown, however, that unloading of the pulmonary hypertension can result in remodeling of the pulmonary vasculature and, thus, improvement of the pulmonary hypertension. This study explored whether such patients might experience a significant reduction in pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) after pulmonary artery band (PAB) placement. Pulmonary hypertension hemodynamics were evaluated by cardiac catheterization in 4 patients with pulmonary hypertension secondary to nonrestrictive left-to-right, post-tricuspid valve shunts before and after PAB placement. Two patients with severe pulmonary hypertension who were considered high risk for conventional surgery benefited from PAB placement with a significant reduction in their PVR, permitting subsequent complete intracardiac repair. The medium-term follow-up for these 2 patients demonstrated good outcomes. The PVR failed to improve after PAB placement in the remaining 2 patients, leading to medical therapy for pulmonary hypertension. There was 1 late death, presumably related to pulmonary hypertension. Current practice provides 3 relatively unattractive options for patients with severe pulmonary hypertension secondary to nonrestrictive left-to-right, post-tricuspid valve shunts: transplantation, high-risk intracardiac repair, or palliative medical therapy. Our study suggests that a staged approach with initial PAB placement can be considered for select patients with large left-to-right, post-tricuspid valve shunts and high PVR prior to committing them to other high-risk therapeutic options.

18242288
Multiple thoracic aortic aneurysms after mediastinitis in an infant after repair of coarctation of the aorta.


17603483
Gain-of-function RAF1 mutations cause Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes are developmental disorders with overlapping features, including cardiac abnormalities, short stature and facial dysmorphia. Increased RAS signaling owing to PTPN11, SOS1 and KRAS mutations causes approximately 60% of Noonan syndrome cases, and PTPN11 mutations cause 90% of LEOPARD syndrome cases. Here, we report that 18 of 231 individuals with Noonan syndrome without known mutations (corresponding to 3% of all affected individuals) and two of six individuals with LEOPARD syndrome without PTPN11 mutations have missense mutations in RAF1, which encodes a serine-threonine kinase that activates MEK1 and MEK2. Most mutations altered a motif flanking Ser259, a residue critical for autoinhibition of RAF1 through 14-3-3 binding. Of 19 subjects with a RAF1 mutation in two hotspots, 18 (or 95%) showed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), compared with the 18% prevalence of HCM among individuals with Noonan syndrome in general. Ectopically expressed RAF1 mutants from the two HCM hotspots had increased kinase activity and enhanced ERK activation, whereas non-HCM-associated mutants were kinase impaired. Our findings further implicate increased RAS signaling in pathological cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

17413276
The genetics of congenital heart disease: a review of recent developments.
As our understanding of the molecular regulation of cardiac development has progressed, an increasing number of genes that cause congenital heart disease when mutated are being identified. This review focuses on the progress made during the past year. After PTPN11 was identified as a Noonan syndrome disease gene, additional discoveries have made clear that mutations in other genes along the RAS signaling pathway can cause a spectrum of syndromes and possibly isolated congenital heart disease. Similarly, alterations of genes in other signaling and transcriptional pathways may contribute to the development of atrial septal defects and bicuspid aortic valves. Recently identified disease genes for syndromes associated with congenital heart disease are also reviewed. Finally, the possibility that somatic mosaicism may contribute to the development of congenital heart disease is discussed. The recent knowledge about the molecular genetic causes of congenital heart disease is reviewed. In many instances, these gene discoveries are being rapidly translated into meaningful genetic testing, which is improving the diagnosis and prognostication for congenital heart disease in isolation or in the context of a syndrome. Ultimately, genetic information will be necessary for planning care as well as clinical research.

18759865
PTPN11 analysis for the prenatal diagnosis of Noonan syndrome in fetuses with abnormal ultrasound findings.
Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by short stature, congenital heart defects and distinctive facies. The disorder is genetically heterogeneous with approximately 50% of patients having PTPN11 mutations. Prenatally, the diagnosis of NS has been suspected following certain ultrasound findings, such as cystic hygroma, increased nuchal translucency (NT) and hydrops fetalis. Studies of fetuses with cystic hygroma have suggested an NS prevalence of 1-3%. A retrospective review was performed to assess the utility of PTPN11 testing based on prenatal sonographic findings (n = 134). The most commonly reported indications for testing were increased NT and cystic hygroma. Analysis showed heterozygous missense mutations in 12 fetuses, corresponding to a positive test rate of 9%. PTPN11 mutations were identified in 16% and 2% of fetuses with cystic hygroma and increased NT, respectively. Among fetuses with isolated cystic hygroma, PTPN11 mutation prevalence was 11%. The mutations observed in the three fetuses with hydrops fetalis had previously been reported as somatic cancer mutations. Prenatal PTPN11 testing has diagnostic and possible prognostic properties that can aid in risk assessment and genetic counseling. As NS is genetically heterogeneous, negative PTPN11 testing cannot exclude the diagnosis and further study is warranted regarding the other NS genes.

