21618080
Trafficking of stem cells.
Stem cells undergo regulated trafficking from the developmental stages to the adulthood. Stem cell migration is critical to organize developing organs and likely contributes postnatally to tissue regeneration. Here, we review the molecular mechanisms underlying migration of hematopoietic stem cells, neural stem cells, and primordial germ cells, revealing common operative pathways.

21536742
Pretransplant CSF-1 therapy expands recipient macrophages and ameliorates GVHD after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation.
Acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) results from the attack of host tissues by donor allogeneic T cells and is the most serious limitation of allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (allo-HCT). Host antigen-presenting cells are thought to control the priming of alloreactive T cells and the induction of acute GVHD after allo-HCT. However, whereas the role of host DC in GVHD has been established, the contribution of host macrophages to GVHD has not been clearly addressed. We show that, in contrast to DC, reducing of the host macrophage pool in recipient mice increased donor T cell expansion and aggravated GVHD mortality after allo-HCT. We also show that host macrophages that persist after allo-HCT engulf donor allogeneic T cells and inhibit their proliferation. Conversely, administration of the cytokine CSF-1 before transplant expanded the host macrophage pool, reduced donor T cell expansion, and improved GVHD morbidity and mortality after allo-HCT. This study establishes the unexpected key role of host macrophages in inhibiting GVHD and identifies CSF-1 as a potential prophylactic therapy to limit acute GVHD after allo-HCT in the clinic.

21282381
Bone marrow CD169+ macrophages promote the retention of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells in the mesenchymal stem cell niche.
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) reside in specialized bone marrow (BM) niches regulated by the sympathetic nervous system (SNS). Here, we have examined whether mononuclear phagocytes modulate the HSC niche. We defined three populations of BM mononuclear phagocytes that include Gr-1(hi) monocytes (MOs), Gr-1(lo) MOs, and macrophages (M?) based on differential expression of Gr-1, CD115, F4/80, and CD169. Using MO and M? conditional depletion models, we found that reductions in BM mononuclear phagocytes led to reduced BM CXCL12 levels, the selective down-regulation of HSC retention genes in Nestin(+) niche cells, and egress of HSCs/progenitors to the bloodstream. Furthermore, specific depletion of CD169(+) M?, which spares BM MOs, was sufficient to induce HSC/progenitor egress. M? depletion also enhanced mobilization induced by a CXCR4 antagonist or granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. These results highlight two antagonistic, tightly balanced pathways that regulate maintenance of HSCs/progenitors in the niche during homeostasis, in which M? cross talk with the Nestin(+) niche cell promotes retention, and in contrast, SNS signals enhance egress. Thus, strategies that target BM M? hold the potential to augment stem cell yields in patients that mobilize HSCs/progenitors poorly.

20703299
Mesenchymal and haematopoietic stem cells form a unique bone marrow niche.
The cellular constituents forming the haematopoietic stem cell (HSC) niche in the bone marrow are unclear, with studies implicating osteoblasts, endothelial and perivascular cells. Here we demonstrate that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), identified using nestin expression, constitute an essential HSC niche component. Nestin(+) MSCs contain all the bone-marrow colony-forming-unit fibroblastic activity and can be propagated as non-adherent 'mesenspheres' that can self-renew and expand in serial transplantations. Nestin(+) MSCs are spatially associated with HSCs and adrenergic nerve fibres, and highly express HSC maintenance genes. These genes, and others triggering osteoblastic differentiation, are selectively downregulated during enforced HSC mobilization or beta3 adrenoreceptor activation. Whereas parathormone administration doubles the number of bone marrow nestin(+) cells and favours their osteoblastic differentiation, in vivo nestin(+) cell depletion rapidly reduces HSC content in the bone marrow. Purified HSCs home near nestin(+) MSCs in the bone marrow of lethally irradiated mice, whereas in vivo nestin(+) cell depletion significantly reduces bone marrow homing of haematopoietic progenitors. These results uncover an unprecedented partnership between two distinct somatic stem-cell types and are indicative of a unique niche in the bone marrow made of heterotypic stem-cell pairs.

20508165
GMI-1070, a novel pan-selectin antagonist, reverses acute vascular occlusions in sickle cell mice.
Leukocyte adhesion in the microvasculature influences blood rheology and plays a key role in vaso-occlusive manifestations of sickle cell disease. Notably, polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) can capture circulating sickle red blood cells (sRBCs) in inflamed venules, leading to critical reduction in blood flow and vaso-occlusion. Recent studies have suggested that E-selectin expression by endothelial cells plays a key role by sending activating signals that lead to the activation of Mac-1 at the leading edge of PMNs, thereby allowing RBC capture. Thus, the inhibition of E-selectin may represent a valuable target in this disease. Here, we have tested the biologic properties of a novel synthetic pan-selectin inhibitor, GMI-1070, with in vitro assays and in a humanized model of sickle cell vaso-occlusion analyzed by intravital microscopy. We have found that GMI-1070 predominantly inhibited E-selectin-mediated adhesion and dramatically inhibited sRBC-leukocyte interactions, leading to improved microcirculatory blood flow and improved survival. These results suggest that GMI-1070 may represent a valuable novel therapeutic intervention for acute sickle cell crises that should be further evaluated in a clinical trial.

20392229
Cooperation of beta(2)- and beta(3)-adrenergic receptors in hematopoietic progenitor cell mobilization.
CXCL12/SDF-1 dynamically regulates hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) attraction in the bone marrow (BM). Circadian regulation of bone formation and HSC traffic is relayed in bone and BM by beta-adrenergic receptors (beta-AR) expressed on HSCs, osteoblasts, and mesenchymal stem/progenitor cells. Circadian HSC release from the BM follows rhythmic secretion of norepinephrine from nerve terminals, beta(3)-AR activation, and Cxcl12 downregulation, possibly from reduced Sp1 nuclear content. Here, we show that beta-AR stimulation in stromal cells causes Sp1 degradation, partially mediated by the 26S proteasome. Inverted trends of circulating hematopoietic progenitors and BM Cxcl12 mRNA levels change acutely after light onset, shown to induce sympathetic efferent activity. In BM stromal cells, activation of beta(3)-AR downregulates Cxcl12, whereas beta(2)-AR stimulation induces clock gene expression. Double deficiency in beta(2)- and beta(3)-ARs compromises enforced mobilization. Therefore, beta(2)- and beta(3)-ARs have specific roles in stromal cells and cooperate during progenitor mobilization.

20376047
Bad blood: a trigger for TRALI.


19923987
Neutrophil microdomains: linking heterocellular interactions with vascular injury.
Neutrophil infiltration is an important feature in inflammatory scenarios. Before these cells infiltrate tissues, however, they contribute to crucial intravascular events in which neutrophil microdomains mediate heterotypic interactions with endothelial cells, red blood cells and/or platelets. In vascular diseases, this can result in exacerbated neutrophil activation, subsequent vascular injury and obstruction of microcirculatory blood flow. This review discusses recent advances in elucidating these neutrophil domains and their associated functions in cell adhesion. Neutrophil recruitment is mediated by sequential interactions with the endothelium, termed rolling, adhesion and extravasation. Evidence points to novel signaling pathways induced during the rolling phase resulting in the transition to leukocyte adhesion, which appear to contribute to chemokine mediated activation. In addition, specific neutrophil microdomains are important for interactions with other hematopoietic cells inducing reductions in microvascular flow and injury. Neutrophils integrate signals received from the endothelium to act as linkers between the vessel wall and a variety of vascular components (i.e. endothelial cells, platelets, red blood cells) in acute and chronic inflammatory conditions to mediate interactions that can result in vascular injury and vasoocclusion.

19427288
Galpha(s) uncouples hematopoietic stem cell homing and mobilization.
Defects of hematopoietic stem cell adhesion or migration generally lead to reduced homing to, and enhanced mobilization from, the bone marrow. In a recent publication in Nature, Adams et al. (2009) demonstrate that the guanine-nucleotide-binding stimulatory alpha subunit (Galpha(s)) can, unexpectedly, promote both phenomena.

19305412
Heterotypic interactions enabled by polarized neutrophil microdomains mediate thromboinflammatory injury.
Selectins and their ligands mediate leukocyte rolling, allowing interactions with chemokines that lead to integrin activation and arrest. Here we show that E-selectin is crucial for generating a secondary wave of activating signals, transduced specifically by E-selectin ligand-1, that induces polarized, activated alpha(M)beta(2) integrin clusters at the leading edge of crawling neutrophils, allowing capture of circulating erythrocytes or platelets. In a humanized mouse model of sickle cell disease, the capture of erythrocytes by alpha(M)beta(2) microdomains leads to acute lethal vascular occlusions. In a model of transfusion-related acute lung injury, polarized neutrophils capture circulating platelets, resulting in the generation of oxidative species that produce vascular damage and lung injury. Inactivation of E-selectin or alpha(M)beta(2) prevents tissue injury in both inflammatory models, suggesting broad implications of this paradigm in thromboinflammatory diseases. These results indicate that endothelial selectins can influence neutrophil behavior beyond its canonical rolling step through delayed, organ-damaging, polarized activation.

18650456
Osteoblasts: yes, they can.


18256599
Haematopoietic stem cell release is regulated by circadian oscillations.
Haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) circulate in the bloodstream under steady-state conditions, but the mechanisms controlling their physiological trafficking are unknown. Here we show that circulating HSCs and their progenitors exhibit robust circadian fluctuations, peaking 5 h after the initiation of light and reaching a nadir 5 h after darkness. Circadian oscillations are markedly altered when mice are subjected to continuous light or to a 'jet lag' (defined as a shift of 12 h). Circulating HSCs and their progenitors fluctuate in antiphase with the expression of the chemokine CXCL12 in the bone marrow microenvironment. The cyclical release of HSCs and expression of Cxcl12 are regulated by core genes of the molecular clock through circadian noradrenaline secretion by the sympathetic nervous system. These adrenergic signals are locally delivered by nerves in the bone marrow, transmitted to stromal cells by the beta(3)-adrenergic receptor, leading to a decreased nuclear content of Sp1 transcription factor and the rapid downregulation of Cxcl12. These data indicate that a circadian, neurally driven release of HSC during the animal's resting period may promote the regeneration of the stem cell niche and possibly other tissues.

18083941
Hematopoietic stem cell trafficking: regulated adhesion and attraction to bone marrow microenvironment.
Hematopoiesis takes place preferentially within bone cavities, suggesting that bone-derived factors contribute to blood formation. Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) can be mobilized from the bone marrow parenchyma to the circulation by various agonists whose common downstream action leads to alteration in the expression or function of the chemokine CXCL12 and adhesion molecules mediating migration. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), the most prevalent drug used to mobilize HSPCs, dramatically suppresses osteoblast function. Recent studies suggest that G-CSF-mediated suppression requires signals from the sympathetic nervous system (SNS). This review summarizes emerging concepts thought to contribute to stem cell migration.

17932253
Intravenous immunoglobulins reverse acute vaso-occlusive crises in sickle cell mice through rapid inhibition of neutrophil adhesion.
Previous studies using intravital microscopy in a sickle cell disease (SCD) mouse model suggest that adherent white blood cells (WBCs) play a key role in vaso-occlusion by capturing circulating red blood cells (RBCs) in venules. Commercial intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) given before the inflammatory stimuli increased microcirculatory blood flow and survival. To mimic the clinical situation in which SCD patients seek medical attention after the onset of symptoms, we developed an in vivo model in which the therapeutic intervention (eg, IVIG) was administered after in the inflammatory challenge. In this setting, IVIG rapidly (<10 minutes) reduced adherent leukocyte numbers and dramatically inhibited interactions between RBCs and WBCs, resulting in improved microcirculatory blood flow and survival of sickle cell "Berkeley" mice. Longer survival correlated positively with blood flow (P=.001) and negatively with the number of adherent leukocytes (P=.001) and RBC-WBC interactions (P=.002). Using multichannel digital fluorescence videomicroscopy, we found that IVIG affected specifically the recruitment of neutrophils. Moreover, further analyses of leukocyte behavior revealed that IVIG significantly increased rolling velocities, indicating that it alters adhesion pathways involved in slow rolling. These data suggest that the potential therapeutic benefits of IVIG in SCD crises should be evaluated in a clinical trial.

17582348
Leukocyte podosomes sense their way through the endothelium.
Whether leukocytes can transmigrate through endothelial cells, rather than between them, is controversial. In this issue, Carman et al. (2007) demonstrate that lymphocytes can extend podosomes to palpate endothelial cells searching for areas permissive for transcellular diapedesis.

17442598
Complete identification of E-selectin ligands on neutrophils reveals distinct functions of PSGL-1, ESL-1, and CD44.
The selectins and their ligands are required for leukocyte extravasation during inflammation. Several glycoproteins have been suggested to bind to E-selectin in vitro, but the complete identification of its physiological ligands has remained elusive. Here, we showed that E-selectin ligand-1 (ESL-1), P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1), and CD44 encompassed all endothelial-selectin ligand activity on neutrophils by using gene- and RNA-targeted loss of function. PSGL-1 played a major role in the initial leukocyte capture, whereas ESL-1 was critical for converting initial tethers into steady slow rolling. CD44 controlled rolling velocity and mediated E-selectin-dependent redistribution of PSGL-1 and L-selectin to a major pole on slowly rolling leukocytes through p38 signaling. These results suggest distinct and dynamic contributions of these three glycoproteins in selectin-mediated neutrophil adhesion and signaling.

17404610
Sickle cell disease: old discoveries, new concepts, and future promise.
The discovery of the molecular basis of sickle cell disease was an important landmark in molecular medicine. The modern tools of molecular and cellular biology have refined our understanding of its pathophysiology and facilitated the development of new therapies. In this review, we discuss some of the important advances in this field and the impediments that limit the impact of these advances.

17322889
Imaging receptor microdomains on leukocyte subsets in live mice.
We present a simple method to identify the recruitment of leukocyte subsets and determine concurrent surface-receptor clustering in live mice. We show that CD45+ F4/80- Gr-1+ neutrophils are robustly recruited in surgery-activated cremasteric venules, whereas adherent CD45+ B220+ B lymphocytes were dominant in bone marrow venules. Most adherent Gr-1+ leukocytes are not firmly stationary but actively migrate on TNF-alpha-activated cremasteric venular endothelium and exhibit marked polarization of surface PSGL-1, but not LFA-1, to the trailing edge.

