19608544
Differential gene expression in the pig limbal side population: implications for stem cell cycling, replication, and survival.
To define the molecular signature of limbal SP cells and identify signaling pathways associated with the phenotype of these putative stem cells. Primary cultures of pig limbal epithelial cells stained with Hoechst 33342 were sorted by flow cytometry into SP and non-SP cells, and purified RNA was processed for microarray analysis with an oligonucleotide spotted array. Expressed transcripts for which SP and non-SP expressions differed by more that 1.5-fold in each paired set and by twofold overall were considered to be differentially expressed. Differential expression was validated by quantitative PCR and immunostaining. Data-mining methods were used to identify cellular processes that are either salient or depressed in the SP cells. The microarray identified approximately 9000 distinct, expressed, and identifiable genes. Of those, 382 and 296 were either over- or underexpressed in the SP cells, respectively. Overrepresentation analysis indicated that SP cells are in a low metabolic and biosynthetic state. In addition, a pattern of elevated MXD1, MAXI2, DUSP5, p27/KIP1, and p57/KIP2 and decreased Cyclin D and CDK genes can be expected to slow intrinsic and mitogen-induced G(1)-to-S cell cycle transition. SP cells were also rich in genes associated with stem cell phenotype and genes providing protection against oxidative and/or xenobiotic damage. Microarray analysis of pig limbal SP cells yielded a molecular signature underscoring a phenotype characterized by slow cycling and low metabolic activity. The results provide valuable insights for the preservation and/or replication of epithelial stem cells.

19324848
Molecular profiling of conjunctival epithelial side-population stem cells: atypical cell surface markers and sources of a slow-cycling phenotype.
Side-population (SP) cells isolated from limbal and conjunctival epithelia derive from cells that are slow cycling in vivo, a known feature of tissue stem cells. The purpose of this study was to define the molecular signature of the conjunctival SP cells and identify markers and signaling pathways associated with the phenotype of these cells. Overnight cultures of freshly isolated human conjunctival epithelial cells stained with Hoechst 33342 were sorted by flow cytometry into SP and non-SP cohorts. Isolated RNA was processed for microarray analysis using a commercial oligonucleotide spotted array. Results were validated at the gene and protein levels by quantitative PCR and immunologic methods. Data mining methods were used to identify cellular processes relevant for stem cell function. Comparative analyses of transcripts expression based on present and absent software calls across four replicate experiments identified 16,993 conjunctival epithelial transcripts including 10,266 unique known genes of approximately 24,000 represented in the array. Of those genes, 1254 and 363 were overexpressed (>2-fold) or underexpressed (<0.5-fold), respectively, in the SP. The overexpressed set included genes coding for proteins that have been associated with (1) embryonic development and/or stem cell self renewal (MSX, MEIS, ID, Hes1, and SIX homeodomain genes); (2) cell survival (e.g., CYP1A1 to degrade aromatic genotoxic compounds); (3) cycling rate (e.g., DUSPs and Pax6 to foster slow cycling); and (4) genes whose expression is not typical in epithelia (e.g., CD62E). The molecular signature of conjunctival SP cells is consistent with a stem cell phenotype. Their gene expression patterns underpin slow cycling and plasticity, features associated with tissue stem cells. The results provide valuable insights for the preservation and/or expansion of epithelial stem cells.

19116146
sPLA2-IIa is an inflammatory mediator when the ocular surface is compromised.
sPLA2-IIa is an enzyme at high concentration in tears that has been known as an innate barrier of the ocular surface against microbial infection. sPLA2-IIa and other enzymes in the same protein family are known to hydrolyze fatty acids resulting in the generation of free arachidonic acid (AA) and lysophospholipids, which are the precursors of pro-inflammatory lipid mediators, such as PGE(2). sPLA2-IIa has been shown to be an inflammatory mediator in non-ocular inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA). It was also found to be increased in the tears of the patients with dry eye disease, chronic blepharitis and contact lens intolerance. However, the role of sPLA2-IIa in chronic ocular surface inflammation has yet to be determined. In the current study, we examined the potential role of sPLA2-IIa in inflammation of ocular surface diseases. Our results show that the activity of sPLA2-IIa was significantly increased in tears from dry eye disease patients compared with that from normal subjects. Also, sPLA2-IIa stimulated the production of PGE(2) in ocular surface epithelial cell cultures. The stimulating effect was markedly enhanced when the cells or tissues were pre-compromised with TNF-alpha, IL-1beta or desiccation. Furthermore, sPLA2-IIa stimulated inflammatory cytokine production in the ocular surface epithelial cell cultures in vitro. To our knowledge, this is the first report regarding the role of sPLA2-IIa as an inflammatory mediator in ocular surface inflammation. These findings indicate that sPLA2-IIa may play an important role in chronic ocular surface inflammation, especially when the ocular surface is compromised.

17460260
Comparative analysis of human conjunctival and corneal epithelial gene expression with oligonucleotide microarrays.
To determine global mRNA expression levels in corneal and conjunctival epithelia and identify transcripts that exhibit preferential tissue expression. cDNA samples derived from human conjunctival and corneal epithelia were hybridized in three independent experiments to a commercial oligonucleotide array representing more than 22,000 transcripts. The resultant signal intensities and microarray software transcript present/absent calls were used in conjunction with the local pooled error (LPE) statistical method to identify transcripts that are preferentially or exclusively expressed in one of the two tissues at significant levels (expression >1% of the beta-actin level). EASE (Expression Analysis Systematic Explorer software) was used to identify biological systems comparatively overrepresented in either epithelium. Immuno-, and cytohistochemistry was performed to validate or expand on selected results of interest. The analysis identified 332 preferential and 93 exclusive significant corneal epithelial transcripts. The corresponding numbers of conjunctival epithelium transcripts were 592 and 211, respectively. The overrepresented biological processes in the cornea were related to cell adhesion and oxiredox equilibria and cytoprotection activities. In the conjunctiva, the biological processes that were most prominent were related to innate immunity and melanogenesis. Immunohistochemistry for antigen-presenting cells and melanocytes was consistent with these gene signatures. The transcript comparison identified a substantial number of genes that have either not been identified previously or are not known to be highly expressed in these two epithelia, including testican-1, ECM1, formin, CRTAC1, and NQO1 in the cornea and, in the conjunctiva, sPLA(2)-IIA, lipocalin 2, IGFBP3, multiple MCH class II proteins, and the Na-Pi cotransporter type IIb. Comparative gene expression profiling leads to the identification of many biological processes and previously unknown genes that are potentially active in the function of corneal and conjunctival epithelia.

