20501913
Discontinuous drug binding to proteins: binding of an antineoplastic benzyl styryl sulfone to albumin and enzymes in vitro and in phase I clinical trials.
Sodium (E)-{N-[2-methyloxy-5-(2',4',6'-trimethoxy-styrylsulfonyl) methylenephenyl]amino}acetate (C(21)H(24)NNaO(8)S, ON 01910.Na) is a novel, synthetic benzyl styryl sulfone, currently in phase I clinical trials in cancer patients. Our objective was to use electrospray mass spectrometry to determine, in intact complexes, the number of drug molecules bound to albumin and selected enzymes. Native and recombinant albumin incubated with the drug, at various molar ratios, revealed simultaneous and discontinuous progression of drug binding, yielding intact albumin-drug complexes containing up to 22 drug molecules. Comparable complex protein-drug patterns were obtained for several enzymes, e.g., carbonic anhydrase. Intact albumin-ON 01910 complexes were also found in all patient samples. The drug-binding profiles were comparable, but not identical, for increasing sampling times and different doses (400-1700 mg/m(2)). We concluded that the techniques developed are capable of detecting the simultaneous formation of intact protein-drug complexes and of determining the number of drug molecules bound to proteins. The results enhance our hypothesis that drug binding may lead to conformational changes in proteins that, in turn, account for the exclusion of specific binding complexes and may influence protein behavior and activity. Application of these techniques reveals new insights about the nature of the antineoplastic drug ON 01910 in patient plasma, and the information obtained may have significance in understanding drug delivery to tumors.

20388788
The effect of CXCL12 processing on CD34+ cell migration in myeloproliferative neoplasms.
Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) and polycythemia vera (PV) are chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms. PMF and, to a lesser degree, PV are characterized by constitutive mobilization of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and progenitor cells (HPC) into the peripheral blood (PB). The interaction between the chemokine CXCL12 and its receptor CXCR4 plays a pivotal role in determining the trafficking of CD34(+) cells between the bone marrow (BM) and the PB. PMF, but not PV, is associated with downregulation of CXCR4 by CD34(+) cells due to epigenetic events. Both PV and PMF patients have elevated levels of immunoreactive forms of CXCL12 in the BM and PB. Using electrospray mass spectrometry, the PB and BM plasma of PV and PMF patients was shown to contain reduced amounts of intact CXCL12 but significant amounts of several truncated forms of CXCL12, which are lacking in normal PB and BM plasma. These truncated forms of CXCL12 are the product of the action of several serine proteases, including dipeptidyl peptidase-IV, neutrophil elastase, matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), MMP-9, and cathepsin G. Unlike CXCL12, these truncates either lack the ability to act as a chemoattractant for CD34(+) cells and/or act as an antagonist to the action of CXCL12. These data suggest that proteolytic degradation of CXCL12 is characteristic of both PV and PMF and that the resulting truncated forms of CXCL12, in addition to the reduced expression of CXCR4 by CD34(+) cells, lead to a profound mobilization of HSC/HPC in PMF.

