21598272
New academic partnerships in global health: innovations at mount sinai school of medicine.
Global health has become an increasingly important focus of education, research, and clinical service in North American universities and academic health centers. Today there are at least 49 academically based global health programs in the United States and Canada, as compared with only one in 1999. A new academic society, the Consortium of Universities for Global Health, was established in 2008 and has grown significantly. This sharp expansion reflects convergence of 3 factors: (1) rapidly growing student and faculty interest in global health; (2) growing realization-powerfully catalyzed by the acquired immune deficiency syndrome epidemic, the emergence of other new infections, climate change, and globalization-that health problems are interconnected, cross national borders, and are global in nature; and (3) rapid expansion in resources for global health. This article examines the evolution of the concept of global health and describes the driving forces that have accelerated interest in the field. It traces the development of global health programs in academic health centers in the United States. It presents a blueprint for a new school-wide global health program at Mount Sinai School of Medicine. The mission of that program, Mount Sinai Global Health, is to enhance global health as an academic field of study within the Mount Sinai community and to improve the health of people around the world. Mount Sinai Global Health is uniting and building synergies among strong, existing global health programs within Mount Sinai; it is training the next generation of physicians and health scientists to be leaders in global health; it is making novel discoveries that translate into blueprints for improving health worldwide; and it builds on Mount Sinai's long and proud tradition of providing medical and surgical care in places where need is great and resources few. Mt Sinai J Med 78:471-483, 2011. © 2011 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

20014418
Obesity and pregnancy: implications and management strategies for providers.
Obesity in pregnancy (pregravid body mass > or =30) has been linked to several adverse pregnancy outcomes, including spontaneous abortion, preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, fetal macrosomia, cesarean delivery, and wound complications post-cesarean section. Intrapartum and postpartum management of obese gravidas requires multidisciplinary consultations between obstetricians, anesthesiologists, nurses, and pediatricians in order to improve the pregnancy outcomes of the mother and neonate. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists currently supports risk-reducing strategies for obese pregnant patients, including limiting weight gain to 15 lb (standardized by the Institute of Medicine). Interventions to reduce gestational weight gain may be important modifiable risk factors for maternal and fetal perinatal complications. Interventions have targeted modifications of diet and exercise with educational methods such as radio broadcasts, pamphlets, and counseling. Interventions have also focused on motivational methods, such as individual and group classes, and have been implemented both before conception and immediately after birth. Effective interventions appear to be individualized in approach, but there is a lack of data to support any specific model. Prospective interventional studies are needed to demonstrate the benefits of weight limitation on pregnancy outcomes.

20013602
Lifestyle modification program decreases pregnancy weight gain in obese women.
We assessed the impact of a lifestyle modification program (LMP) on weight gain in pregnancy and evaluated its effect on adverse pregnancy outcomes. A prospective matched controlled study design was employed. Inclusion criteria consisted of pregnant women with singleton gestations and body mass index (BMI) > or = 30 without underlying medical conditions. In the study group, patients were prospectively enrolled in the first trimester. Through the LMP, women participated in a comprehensive program on nutrition, exercise, and weight control in pregnancy. The control group consisted of matched patients by starting BMI, parity, and socioeconomic status during the same study period cared for at the same institution. The primary outcome evaluated was weight gain in pregnancy. Adverse pregnancy outcomes including preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, gestational hypertension, and various postpartum complications were evaluated between the two groups. Statistical analysis was performed using nonparametric methods, with p < 0.5 considered significant. Twenty-eight patients were recruited for this study and underwent the intervention. Patient compliance with the LMP was 75%, two patients were lost to follow-up, one had a preterm delivery, and four had incomplete data due to various reasons. Twenty-one patients completed their pregnancy and were available for analysis. Twenty matched control patients were identified for analysis. Study participants gained significantly less weight in their pregnancies when compared with controls (mean weight gain 17 versus 34 pounds, respectively; p = 0.008). Secondary outcomes of preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, cesarean section, as well as infant birth weight did not significantly differ between the groups. This study suggests an effective method of reducing prenatal weight gain in the obese population. This type of comprehensive intervention could be an important, cost-effective risk-reduction strategy.

