20224335
Modified poly-L-lactic acid injection technique: safety and efficacy of "cross-fanning" in non-HIV-related facial atrophy.
Proper injection of poly-l-lactic acid has a role in avoiding development of subcutaneous papules. We evaluated the safety and efficacy of our injection technique ("cross-fanning") and compared it to 4 previous studies. Forty patients were evaluated for adverse events (bruising, edema, erythema, subcutaneous papules) and satisfaction. Papule incidence was compared with the other studies. The incidence of papules (4/40) was significantly lower than that of VEGA and Chelsea and Westminster (P = 0.00003, P = 0.03), but not significantly different than APEX002 or Blue Pacific (P = 0.42, P = 0.61). Bruising (5/40), edema (2/40), papules (4/40), and patient self-satisfaction (80%, P = 0.0001) was also documented. We maintain that cross-fanning has an excellent safety profile and patient satisfaction rate. We also maintain that our modified technique has advantages over the recommended "tunneling cross-hatch" and "depot" technique. Because 38 of 40 patients were HIV-negative, this study also represents the first single-practice series of proper injection of poly-l-lactic acid administration in the immuno-competent patient.

18186871
Correction of chest wall deformity after implant-based breast reconstruction using poly-L-lactic acid (Sculptra).
Implant-based breast reconstruction after mastectomy offers excellent cosmetic results in select individuals. However, this technique may result in a step-off between the implant and the soft tissue of the chest wall, which can be problematic in the extremely thin patient. Also, the removal of soft tissue can result in prominent ribs and visible intercostal spaces. A number of surgical options exist to correct these defects and include dermal grafts, flap reconstruction, and implant exchange. We present the case of a thin woman with a persistent "step-off" deformity and visible intercostal spaces after mastectomy and two-stage implant reconstruction. Placement of acellular cadaveric dermis (Alloderm) failed to improve the appearance of her chest wall. The authors utilized poly-L-lactic acid (Sculptra) for soft tissue augmentation of her chest wall with significant esthetic improvement. This novel use of poly-L-lactic acid offers a useful alternative to invasive surgical procedures to correct a soft tissue deformity of the chest wall. While poly-L-lactic acid has recently gained popularity for soft tissue augmentation of the face, to date, no reports in the literature exist describing its use in the correction of difficult chest wall defects after mastectomy and implant reconstruction. We maintain that poly-L-lactic acid may also be useful to improve a variety of soft tissue deformities of the breast.

