21533060
Assessment of cardiovascular fibrosis using novel fluorescent probes.
Cardiovascular fibrosis resulted from pressure overload or ischemia could alter myocardial stiffness and lead to ventricular dysfunction. Fluorescently labeled collagen-binding protein CNA 35, derived from the surface component of Staphylococcus aureus, and a novel synthetic biphenylalanine containing peptide are applied to stain fibrosis associated collagen and myocytes, respectively. Detailed pathological characteristics of cardiovascular fibrosis could be identified clearly in 2 hours. This staining pair requires only simple staining and brief washing, generating less than 10 ml of waste. The image information collected by this novel fluorescent staining pair is compatible with it collected by the traditional Masson's Trichrome and Picrosirius Red staining which are widely used to stain cardiovascular fibrosis and isolated cells.

20133817
Effects of CXCR4 gene transfer on cardiac function after ischemia-reperfusion injury.
Acute coronary occlusion is the leading cause of death in the Western world. There is an unmet need for the development of treatments to limit the extent of myocardial infarction (MI) during the acute phase of occlusion. Recently, investigators have focused on the use of a chemokine, CXCL12, the only identified ligand for CXCR4, as a new therapeutic modality to recruit stem cells to individuals suffering from MI. Here, we examined the effects of overexpression of CXCR4 by gene transfer on MI. Adenoviruses carrying the CXCR4 gene were injected into the rat heart one week before ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery followed by 24 hours reperfusion. Cardiac function was assessed by echocardiography couple with 2,3,5-Triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining to measure MI size. In comparison with control groups, rats receiving Ad-CXCR4 displayed an increase in infarct area (13.5% +/- 4.1%) and decreased fractional shortening (38% +/- 5%). Histological analysis revealed a significant increase in CXCL12 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha expression in ischemic area of CXCR4 overexpressed hearts. CXCR4 overexpression was associated with increased influx of inflammatory cells and enhanced cardiomyocyte apoptosis in the infarcted heart. These data suggest that in our model overexpressing CXCR4 appears to enhance ischemia/reperfusion injury possibly due to enhanced recruitment of inflammatory cells, increased tumor necrosis factor-alpha production, and activation of cell death/apoptotic pathways.

