20533965
Geriatric patients: oral health and the operating room.
Many patients requiring surgery possess poor oral health. The presence of decayed teeth and periodontitis represent potentially potent causes of odontogenic infection that could significantly compromise the surgical outcome. Geriatric patients presenting for surgery who have not had a dental examination for years may be harboring an undetected oral infection. In the perioperative period, the harmful effects of such an infection are amplified in terms of treatment and expenses. This article will elaborate on the association between oral health and systemic disease, present unique intraoral characteristics of elderly patients, and emphasize the importance of obtaining a dental evaluation and treating any acute oral infection before surgery. Augmenting the awareness of the perioperative dental considerations in the geriatric population can lead to the implementation of effective and preventive measures that can contain costs and achieve optimal patient care.

20472615
Characterization and management of cardiac tumors.
Cardiac tumors are infrequent clinical entities with an autopsy frequency ranging from 0.001% to 0.030%. The occurrence of metastatic cardiac tumors has been reported a 100-fold more commonly than primary lesions. Three quarters of primary cardiac tumors are benign; approximately half of these are cardiac myxomas, and the rest are lipomas, papillary fibroelastomas, and rhabdomyomas. Among malignant primary cardiac tumors, the most reported are those histopathologically considered as undifferentiated, followed by angiosarcomas and leiomyosarcomas. Traditionally, cardiac tumors have been identified as curious autopsy findings resulting in a literature paucity of large clinical series, therefore, providing knowledge mostly based on case report collection. However, recent technological advances in noninvasive imaging modalities such as echocardiography and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have resulted in a rapid acquisition of real-time heart images with high spatial and temporal resolution and an excellent tissue characterization of the tumor. This consequent earlier, more frequent, and more complete assessment of cardiac tumors before significant symptoms develop has challenged cardiologists, cardiac anesthesiologists, and surgeons to create a tailored referral pattern and approach.

20382033
The left thoracotomy approach for reoperative cardiac surgery: considerations for the surgeon and anesthesiologist.


20038506
A variety of research and clinical reviews from surgeons, intensive care physicians, cardiologists, pharmacologists, and anesthesiologists. Preface.


19945957
The need for specialized preanesthesia clinics for day admission cardiac and major vascular surgery patients.
The majority of patients undergoing surgical procedures today are not admitted to the hospital prior to the morning of surgery. In a medical world that strives not only for patient safety, but also for cost containment, Day Admission Surgery (DAS) plays an important role in our healthcare systems. This is true even for patients undergoing cardiac and major vascular (CMV) procedures. However, CMV patients often present with more complicated pre-, intra- and post-operative issues than other surgical patients.In order to optimize the preoperative evaluation and care of CMV patients, we developed a specialized Pre-Anesthesia Clinic (PAC). We believed that patients, surgeons, anesthesiologists, and intensive care unit (ICU) teams would all benefit when appropriate preoperative evaluations are thoughtfully performed by those specializing in the care of these complicated patients. Planning for this specialized clinic included a survey of other institutions' practices. Following initiation of our clinic, we performed a patient satisfaction survey. We report these findings along with the demographic data concerning the patients and types of surgeries evaluated in our initial experience. Finally, we discuss the preoperative evaluation including various areas of assessment provided by our PAC.

19376733
Epidemiology of deep sternal wound infection in cardiac surgery.
The aim of this study was to investigate the incidence and predictors of deep sternal wound infection (DSWI) in a contemporary cohort of patients undergoing cardiac surgery. The early and late outcomes of patients with this complication also were analyzed. A retrospective study of consecutive patients undergoing cardiac surgery using a computerized database based on the New York State Department of Health registry. Data collection was performed prospectively. A university hospital (single institution). Five thousand seven hundred ninety-eight patients who underwent cardiac surgery between January 1998 and December 2005 including isolated coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) (n = 2,749, 47%), single- or multiple-valve surgery (n = 1,280, 22%), combined valve and CABG procedures (n = 934, 16%), and surgery involving the ascending aorta or the aortic arch (n = 835, 15%). None. The overall incidence of DSWI was 1.8% (n = 106). The highest rate of DSWI occurred after combined valve/CABG surgery (2.4%, n = 22) and aortic procedures (2.4%, n = 19). Multivariate analysis revealed 11 predictors of DSWI: obesity (odds ratio [OR] = 2.2), previous myocardial infarction (OR = 2.1), diabetes (OR = 1.7), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (OR = 2.3), preoperative length of stay >3 days (OR = 1.9), aortic calcification (OR = 2.7), aortic surgery (OR = 2.4), combined valve/CABG procedures (OR = 1.9), cardiopulmonary bypass time (OR = 1.8), re-exploration for bleeding (OR = 6.3), and respiratory failure (OR = 3.2). The mortality rate was 14.2% (n = 15) versus 3.6% (n = 205) in the control group (p < 0.001). One- and 5-year survival after DSWI were significantly decreased (72.4% +/- 4.4% and 55.8% +/- 5.6% v 93.8% +/- 0.3% and 82.0% +/- 0.6%, p < 0.001). DSWI remains a rare but devastating complication and is associated with significant comorbidity, increased hospital mortality, and reduced long-term survival.

18834824
Excellent results of cardiac surgery in patients with previous kidney transplantation.
Patients with a kidney allograft are at high risk for the development of cardiovascular diseases that may require surgical intervention. Little is known about the outcome of cardiac surgery in these patients. A retrospective study. A university hospital (single institution). Twenty-nine patients with a kidney allograft who underwent cardiac surgery between January 1998 and December 2006. None. Main outcome measures were hospital mortality, postoperative complications, allograft function, and late survival. Twenty-nine patients (mean age, 53 +/- 14 years; 18 (62%) male; 22 preserved allograft function, 2 acute failure, and 5 chronic failure) were identified. Hospital mortality was 3.4% (n = 1). Temporary allograft dysfunction determined by a >30% increase of creatinine and blood urea nitrogen was noticed in 5 (23%) patients with preserved allograft and recovered before discharge. Two patients required postoperative dialysis (1 temporary and 1 permanent). Six (21%) other major complications occurred and included respiratory failure (n = 4, 14%) and sepsis (n = 2, 7%). One- and 5-year survival was 89% +/- 6% and 50% +/- 14%, respectively. Four of 9 patients who died during follow-up had chronic allograft failure. Cardiac surgery can be performed safely in kidney transplant recipients with low mortality and acceptable morbidities. Allograft dysfunction is a common finding, but it is transient with early functional recovery. Late survival of kidney recipients with chronic allograft failure undergoing cardiac procedures is limited when compared with that of the general cardiac surgery population. The present data suggest that these patients should be considered for cardiac surgery in reference centers with expertise in complex cardiac procedures and perioperative management of these highly specific patients.

18662625
Predictors and early and late outcomes of dialysis-dependent patients in contemporary cardiac surgery.
The aim of the study was to investigate the incidence and predictors of renal failure requiring dialysis (RF-D) in a contemporary cohort of patients undergoing cardiac surgery. The authors also analyzed early and late outcome of patients with this complication. A retrospective study of consecutive patients undergoing cardiac surgery using a computerized database based on the New York State Department of Health registry. Data collection was performed prospectively. A university hospital (single institution). Six thousand four hundred forty-nine patients who underwent cardiac surgery between January 1998 and December 2006 including isolated coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery (n = 2,819, 44%), single- or multiple-valve surgery (n = 1,378, 21%), combined valve and CABG procedures (n = 1,032, 16%), and surgery involving the ascending aorta or the aortic arch (n = 1,220, 19%). None. The incidence of RF-D was 2.2% (n = 139). The incidence per type of procedure was as follows: CABG surgery (0.8%), valve/CABG surgery (2.7%), valve surgery (2.9%), and aortic surgery (4%) (p = 0.001). Multivariate analysis revealed preoperative renal dysfunction (odds ratio [OR] = 5.5), hemodynamic instability (OR = 5.2), diabetes (OR = 2.6), aortic surgery (OR = 2.2), congestive heart failure (CHF) (OR = 2.1), peripheral vascular disease (PVD) (OR = 1.9), and reoperation (OR = 1.8) as independent predictors of RF-D. The hospital mortality after RF-D was 36.7% (n = 51) compared with 2.9% (n = 180) in the control group (p < 0.001). Long-term survival after RF-D was significantly decreased (1-year and 5-year survival 48.5% +/- 6.1% and 28.7% +/- 7.2% v 94.5% +/- 0.3% and 83.5% +/- 0.6% in the control group, p < 0.001). Hypertension, CHF, and PVD were independent predictors of late mortality. The authors observed an increase in the overall incidence of RF-D compared with previous studies, probably related to an increased prevalence of patients undergoing more complex procedures with a worsening risk profile. Postoperative RF-D was not only associated with increased hospital mortality and morbidity, but also with a significant reduction of long-term survival in discharged patients. Seven independent predictors of RF-D were identified. Future research efforts should focus on a more precise identification of patients at risk and the development of new treatment modalities, which would potentially prevent the occurrence of this complication.

18397906
Cardiac anesthesia and surgery in geriatric patients.
The average age of US population is steadily increasing, with more than 15 million people aged 80 and older. Coronary artery disease and degenerative cardiovascular diseases are particularly prevalent in this population. Consequently, an increasing number of elderly patients are referred for surgical intervention. Advanced age is associated with decreased physiologic reserve and significant comorbidity. Thorough preoperative assessment, identification of the risk factors for perioperative morbidity and mortality, and optimal preparation are critical in these patients. Age-related changes in comorbidities and altered pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics impacts anesthetic management, perioperative monitoring, postoperative care, and outcome. This article updates the age-related changes in organ subsystems relevant to cardiac anesthesia, perioperative issues, and intraoperative management. Early and late operative outcome in octogenarians undergoing cardiac surgery are reviewed. The data clearly indicate that no patient group is "too old" for cardiac surgery and that excellent outcomes can be achieved in selected group of elderly patients.

18068053
Results and predictors of early and late outcomes of coronary artery bypass graft surgery in octogenarians.
The aim of this study was to investigate early and late outcomes of coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery in a large cohort of octogenarian patients. The results were compared with 2 other age groups including septuagenarians and patients <70 years old. A retrospective study of consecutive patients undergoing CABG surgery using a computerized database based on the New York State Department of Health registry. Data collection was performed prospectively. Setting: A university hospital (single institution). Two thousand nine hundred eighty-five patients undergoing CABG surgery including 282 (9.4%) octogenarians, 852 (28.6%) septuagenarians, and 1851 (62%) patients younger than 70 years old. None. Patient characteristics, hospital mortality, morbidity, length of stay, and long-term survival were analyzed. Octogenarians were more likely female and presented significantly more often with comorbidities such as heart failure, an ejection fraction <30%, peripheral vascular disease, and aortic calcification. Crude hospital mortality was 4.6% (n = 13) in octogenarians compared with 2.2% (n = 19) in septuagenarians and 2.4% (n = 44) in patients <70 years old (p = 0.067). Respiratory failure and gastrointestinal complications occurred more frequently in octogenarians. The stroke rate was 1.6% and similar in the 3 age groups. In multivariate logistic regression analysis, age >80 years was not a predictor of hospital mortality. The length of stay was significantly higher in octogenarians compared with nonoctogenarians (16 +/- 24 days v 10 +/- 13 days, p < 0.001). Five-year survival was 63% +/- 4% in octogenarians and was similar to that of an age- and sex-matched general US population. Excellent results after CABG surgery can be expected in octogenarians, with a minimal increase in postoperative mortality and acceptable postoperative morbidity. Respiratory failure is the main postoperative complication in octogenarians. Recent advances in operative techniques and perioperative management have contributed in improving surgical outcome in these patients compared with historic reports.

18047491
Excellent early and late outcomes of aortic valve replacement in people aged 80 and older.
To investigate early and late outcome of aortic valve replacement (AVR) in a large cohort of patients aged 80 and older. Retrospective study of consecutive patients undergoing AVR using a computerized database based on the New York State Department of Health registry. Data collection was performed prospectively. University hospital (single institution). One thousand three hundred eight patients undergoing AVR (231 (17.6%) aged > or = 80, 1,077 (82.4%) < 80). Patient characteristics, hospital mortality, morbidity, length of stay and long-term survival were analyzed. Subjects aged 80 and older were more likely to be female, had a lower body mass index, and presented significantly more often with comorbidities such as heart failure, renal failure, and extensive aortic calcification. Crude hospital mortality was 5.2% (n=12) in subjects age 80 and older, compared with 4.5% (n=48) in those younger than 80 (P=.37). Respiratory failure occurred more frequently in those aged 80 and older. In multivariate logistic regression analysis, age of 80 and older was not a predictor of hospital mortality. The median length of stay was significantly higher in those aged 80 and older than in those younger than 80 (10 days vs 7 days, P=.01). Five-year survival was 64+/-5% in those aged 80 and older, which was similar to that of the age- and sex-matched general U.S. population. Excellent results after AVR can be expected in patients aged 80 and older, with minimal increase in postoperative mortality and acceptable postoperative morbidity. Respiratory failure is the main postoperative complication in patients aged 80 and older. Recent advances in operative techniques and perioperative management have contributed to better surgical outcomes in these patients than found in historical reports.

17678794
The value of optimizing dentition before cardiac surgery.


