19841356
Ischemic colitis after endovascular aortoiliac aneurysm repair: a 10-year retrospective study.
To examine the incidence, cause, and outcomes of ischemic colitis after endovascular stent graft repair of aortoiliac aneurysms (EVAR). Medical record review. University teaching hospital. Eight hundred nine patients treated during 10 years were included in the study. Preoperative data regarding the size of the aneurysm, hypogastric coil embolization, and inferior mesenteric artery patency were evaluated by means of computed tomographic scans and aortograms. Ischemic colitis was diagnosed by lower endoscopy or pathology reports. Ischemic colitis after EVAR. Eleven patients (1.4%) developed ischemic colitis. Seven patients' episode occurred less than 30 days from repair (early), whereas 4 occurred 30 days or more from repair (late). Ten of 11 patients had preoperative inferior mesenteric artery occlusion. Microembolization was seen histologically in 2 patients in the early group, both of whom died. A significant increase in ischemic colitis was seen in patients undergoing preoperative unilateral hypogastric coil embolization (P = .02). Three of the patients with late ischemic colitis had comorbidities other than the EVAR to explain the ischemia. The incidence of ischemic colitis is decreased in patients undergoing EVAR vs open repair. The cause of the ischemia is multifactorial and seems to differ between patients in the early and late groups. Microembolization tends to produce severe ischemic colitis and is usually fatal. There should be a low threshold for performing endoscopy in any patient thought to have ischemic colitis after EVAR.

19787715
Differentiating multiple sclerosis from other causes of demyelination using diffusion weighted imaging of the corpus callosum.
To compare diffusion weighted imaging metrics in gray and white matter brain regions of patients diagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS) to those diagnosed with secondary demyelinating diseases such as neurosarcoid and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM). Diffusion weighted scans were performed and apparent diffusion coefficients of 12 regions of interest were determined in 30 MS patients, 21 neurosarcoid patients, and 4 ADEM patients. Mean apparent diffusion coefficients were significantly higher in MS patients than in non-MS patients in 6 of 6 of the corpus callosal regions assessed but not in any of the non-callosal white or gray matter regions assessed. Elevated apparent diffusion coefficients within the corpus callosum on diffusion weighted imaging may potentially help differentiate between patients with MS and patients with other diseases affecting the central nervous system white matter.

18208875
Long-term (up to 22 years), open-label, compassionate-use study of glatiramer acetate in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis.
To evaluate the safety and efficacy of long-term glatiramer acetate (GA) therapy, 46 patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) were treated for up to 22 years in an ongoing, open-label study. Kurtzke expanded disability status scale (EDSS) was measured every six months, relapses were reported at occurrence and patients self-reported adverse events (AEs). At GA initiation, disease durations ranged from 0-20 years (median 6.0 years) and at data cut-off (October 2004), GA therapy duration ranged from 1-22 years (median 12.0 years). Mean EDSS score increased 0.9 +/- 1.9 from the pretreatment score (3.0 +/- 1.8; P = 0.076). Only 10/28 (36%) patients with baseline EDSS <4.0 had a last observed value >or= 4.0 and 8/34 (24%) with entry EDSS < 6.0 reached EDSS >or= 6.0. A majority (57%) maintained improved or unchanged EDSS scores. Annualized relapse rate decreased to 0.1 +/- 0.2 from 2.9 +/- 1.4 prestudy (P < 0.0001). Of the 18 remaining patients in October 2004 (average disease duration 23 years), 17% with baseline EDSS scores < 4.0 reached EDSS >or= 4.0 and 28% with baseline scores < 6.0 reached EDSS >or= 6.0. Adverse events were similar to those reported in short-term clinical trials. This study shows a low rate of relapses and EDSS progression in RRMS patients on GA for up to 22 years.

