20212205
Suppression of corticosteroid-induced ocular hypertension in sheep by anecortave.
To confirm the ocular hypotensive effects of anecortave acetate on an ovine model for steroid-induced ocular hypertension. Eyes of normal sheep exhibit a robust steroid-induced ocular hypertensive response. Recent observations in an uncontrolled, interventional case series indicated that anecortave elicited hypotensive effects when administered as a sub-Tenon depot in the eyes of a small sample of patients with glaucoma. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was monitored by Perkins applanation tonometry in 16 normal sheep receiving topically administered prednisolone acetate, 0.5%, in both eyes, 3 times daily, a protocol that doubled IOP within 12 days. Half of the sheep had received a unilateral sub-Tenon injection of anecortave in 1 eye prior to the initiation of the bilateral prednisolone instillations, while the 8 remaining sheep received the unilateral anecortave sub-Tenon depot after the IOP was maximally elevated by the prednisolone instillations. In these 2 sets of experiments, the presence of the anecortave depot suppressed the steroid-induced IOP elevation and reverted the elevated IOP to baseline levels. Measurements of aqueous outflow facility indicated that eyes treated with prednisolone plus anecortave exhibited a 5.8-fold higher outflow facility than the fellow eyes solely exposed to prednisolone, indicating that anecortave prevented the increase in outflow resistance produced by the corticosteroid. Elucidation of the mechanisms of action of anecortave in animal models may prove relevant to the design of novel interventions for the management of primary open-angle glaucoma.

19427852
Changes in rabbit and cow lens shape and volume upon imposition of anisotonic conditions.
In vivo, mammalian lenses have the capacity to effect fully reversible changes in shape, and possibly volume, during the accommodation process. Isolated lenses also change shape by readily swelling or shrinking when placed in anisotonic media. However, the manner by which the lens changes its shape when its volume is changed osmotically is not firmly established. Putatively, the lens could swell or shrink evenly in all directions, or manifest distinctive swelling and/or shrinking patterns when exposed to anisotonic media. The present study measured physical changes in lenses consistent with the latter alternative using methods we developed for determining rapid changes in lens shape and volume. It was found in isolated rabbit and cow lenses that the length of the axis between the anterior and posterior poles (A-P length) primarily increases under hypotonic conditions (-40 to -100 mOsM), with smaller, or no changes, in equatorial diameter (ED). Hypertonic conditions (+50 to +100 mOsM) on rabbit lenses elicited a predominant reduction in ED, while the A-P length was only marginally reduced. Hypertonic solutions of +150 mOsM were required to obtain similar changes in cow lens shape. The ratio of the A-P length to the ED was taken as a measure of "circularity". This ratio increased gradually in rabbit and cow lenses bathed in hypotonic solutions because of the increase in the A-P length. The calculated lens volume increased in tandem with the increase in "circularity". Lens circularity also increased under hypertonic conditions due to the decrease in ED, but this increase in circularity during shrinkage was not as pronounced as that which occurred during swelling. As such, the lens has a tendency upon swelling to change its shape by approaching the structure of a globular spheroid (as occurs during accommodation for near focusing), but lens shrinkage does not result in a flatter lens with a reduced A-P length as occurs during dis-accommodation for distance focusing. Moreover, osmotically evoked shape changes appear irreversible, in contrast to the mechanically elicited shape changes of accommodation.

18385280
Surface change of the mammalian lens during accommodation.
Classical theories suggest that the surface area of the crystalline lens changes during accommodation while the lens volume remains constant. Our recent work challenged this view by showing that the lens volume decreases as the lens flattens during unaccommodation. In this paper we investigate 1) the magnitude of changes in the surface of the in vitro isolated cow lens during simulated accommodation, as well as that of human lens models, determined from lateral photographs and the application of the first theorem of Pappus; and 2) the velocity of the equatorial diameter recovery of prestretched cow and rabbit lenses by using a custom-built software-controlled stretching apparatus synchronized to a digital camera. Our results showed that the in vitro cow lens surface changed in an unexpected manner during accommodation depending on how much tension was applied to flatten the lens. In this case, the anterior surface initially collapsed with a reduction in surface followed by an increase in surface, when the stretching was applied. In the human lens model, the surface increased when the lens unaccommodated. The lens volume always decreases as the lens flattens. An explanation for the unexpected surface change is presented and discussed. Furthermore, we determined that the changes in lens volume, as reflected by the speed of the equatorial diameter recovery in in vitro cow and rabbit lenses during simulated accommodation, occurred within a physiologically relevant time frame (200 ms), implying a rapid movement of fluid to and from the lens during accommodation.

18289913
Fluid transport phenomena in ocular epithelia.
This article discusses three largely unrecognized aspects related to fluid movement in ocular tissues; namely, (a) the dynamic changes in water permeability observed in corneal and conjunctival epithelia under anisotonic conditions, (b) the indications that the fluid transport rate exhibited by the ciliary epithelium is insufficient to explain aqueous humor production, and (c) the evidence for fluid movement into and out of the lens during accommodation. We have studied each of these subjects in recent years and present an evaluation of our data within the context of the results of others who have also worked on electrolyte and fluid transport in ocular tissues. We propose that (1) the corneal and conjunctival epithelia, with apical aspects naturally exposed to variable tonicities, are capable of regulating their water permeabilities as part of the cell-volume regulatory process, (2) fluid may directly enter the anterior chamber of the eye across the anterior surface of the iris, thereby representing an additional entry pathway for aqueous humor production, and (3) changes in lens volume occur during accommodation, and such changes are best explained by a net influx and efflux of fluid.

18234193
IBMX-elicited inhibition of water permeability in the isolated rabbit conjunctival epithelium.
Agents expected to increase intracellular cAMP levels were tested on the diffusional water permeability (P(dw)) of isolated rabbit conjunctival epithelia given recent indications of the apical expression of AQP5, a water channel homologue regulated by cAMP in other cell systems. For these experiments, segments of conjunctivae were mounted between Ussing-type hemichambers under short-circuit conditions. Unidirectional water fluxes (J(dw)) were measured by adding (3)H(2)O to one hemichamber and sampling from the other, while the electrical parameters (I(sc) and R(t)) were recorded simultaneously. J(dw) were determined under control conditions and after the introduction of forskolin, dibutyryl-cAMP, rolipram and IBMX. All agents reduced J(dw), with rolipram and IBMX the most effective inhibitors (~28% reduction), while simultaneously evoking stimulations of the I(sc); suggesting that cAMP regulates ionic transport and P(dw) independently. This observation was consistent with the elimination of the IBMX-elicited I(sc) stimulations by the PKA inhibitor, H89, and the ineffectiveness of the sulfonamide in preventing the J(dw) reductions produced by the xanthine. Data from mannitol fluxes and Arrhenius plots indicated that the IBMX-elicited P(dw) reduction occurred at the level of water-transporting channels, but the specific moiety was not identified. Instead it was observed that lipophiles commonly used in other systems to uncouple cellular communication precluded the effects of IBMX on J(dw), but the mechanism for these results was not directly linked to gap-junction blockade in the conjunctiva, as assessed by the transepithelial electrical parameters. Putatively, agents such as heptanol, by also fluidizing the bilayer, may have changed the conformation of a water channel in a manner preventing down-regulation by IBMX. Nevertheless, this study uncovered an apparently unique response to cAMP elevation exhibited by the conjunctiva, namely that P(dw) declines via an H89-insensitive pathway under conditions whereby PKA-dependent electrolyte transport might be over stimulated due to excessive cAMP levels (e.g., PDE inhibition).

17537805
Volume change of the ocular lens during accommodation.
During accommodation, mammalian lenses change shape from a rounder configuration (near focusing) to a flatter one (distance focusing). Thus the lens must have the capacity to change its volume, capsular surface area, or both. Because lens topology is similar to a torus, we developed an approach that allows volume determination from the lens cross-sectional area (CSA). The CSA was obtained from photographs taken perpendicularly to the lenticular anterior-posterior (A-P) axis and computed with software. We calculated the volume of isolated bovine lenses in conditions simulating accommodation by forcing shape changes with a custom-built stretching device in which the ciliary body-zonulae-lens complex (CB-Z-L) was placed. Two measurements were taken (CSA and center of mass) to calculate volume. Mechanically stretching the CB-Z-L increased the equatorial length and decreased the A-P length, CSA, and lens volume. The control parameters were restored when the lenses were stretched and relaxed in an aqueous physiological solution, but not when submerged in oil, a condition with which fluid leaves the lens and does not reenter. This suggests that changes in lens CSA previously observed in humans could have resulted from fluid movement out of the lens. Thus accommodation may involve changes not only in capsular surface but also in volume. Furthermore, we calculated theoretical volume changes during accommodation in models of human lenses using published structural parameters. In conclusion, we suggest that impediments to fluid flow between the aquaporin-rich lens fibers and the lens surface could contribute to the aging-related loss of accommodative power.

