20809735
Increased incidence of cage migration and nonunion in instrumented transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion with bioabsorbable cages.
Recent advances in the field of spinal implants have led to the development of the bioabsorbable interbody cage. Although much has been written about their advantageous characteristics, little has been reported regarding complications associated with these cages. The authors conducted this prospective cohort study to compare fusion and complication rates in patients undergoing transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (TLIF) with carbon fiber cages versus biodegradable cages made from 70/30 poly(l-lactide-co-d,l-lactide) (PLDLA). Between January 2005 and May 2006, 81 patients with various degenerative and/or structural pathologies affecting the lumbar spine underwent single- or multilevel TLIF with posterior segmental pedicle screw fixation using implants made of carbon fiber (37 patients) or 70/30 PLDLA (44 patients). Clinical and radiological follow-up was performed at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year, and is ongoing. The incidence of nonunion, screw breakage, and cage migration were compared between the 2 groups. There was no significant difference in demographic data between the 2 groups, the mean number of lumbar levels operated, or distribution of the levels operated. There was a significantly increased incidence of nonunion (8 patients, 18.2%) and cage migrations (8 patients, 18.2%) in patients receiving the PLDLA implants compared with carbon fiber implants (no patients) (p = 0.006 and 0.007, respectively). There was no significant difference in demographic data between patients with cage migration and the rest of the patient population. Five of the 8 cases of migration occurred at the L5-S1 level while the remaining 3 occurred at the L4-5 level. The mean time to implant failure was 9.3 months. This study showed an increased incidence of nonunion (18.2%) and postsurgical cage migration (18.2%) in patients undergoing TLIF with biodegradable cages versus carbon fiber implants (0%) (p = 0.006 and 0.007, respectively).

18082462
Uncorrected sagittal plane imbalance predisposes to symptomatic instrumentation failure.
Elucidation of the factors responsible for symptomatic failure of spinal instrumentation has been a keen interest for many investigators. To quantitate the number of symptomatic instrumentation failures (SIFs) encountered during a 2-year period. The effect of sagittal plane imbalance (corrected or uncorrected) on the rate of SIF was evaluated. Retrospective evaluation of all patients requiring spinal instrumentation to determine which factors predispose toward instrumentation failure. All patients requiring spinal instrumentation over a 2-year period were retrospectively studied. Sagittal plane imbalance pre- and postoperatively was determined using Cobb angle analysis on plain X-rays. SIF was defined as screw back-out and/or breakage, pseudarthrosis, cage migration, or rod disconnection in patients with concordant symptoms. Asymptomatic patients did not demonstrate instrumentation failure on the routine postoperative X-rays. Of the 355 patients who fit the criteria, 47 patients presented with either idiopathic or secondary sagittal plane deformity preoperatively. Additionally, long-segment fixation, smoking, age, and fixation across junctional segments were evaluated as risk factors for SIF. Of the 47 patients with sagittal plane deformity, 40 patients (85%) achieved correction demonstrated on postoperative radiographs whereas in 7 (15%), the sagittal plane imbalance was not corrected. Of these seven cases, five suffered instrumentation failure (failure rate 71.5%) versus no instrumentation failures (failure rate 0%) for the remaining 40 patients. SIF was demonstrated in 10 patients overall (failure rate of 2.8%). There was no correlation found between factors such as age, indications for surgery, or long-segment fixation, and instrumentation failure. Failure to correct sagittal plane deformity intraoperatively predisposes patients to SIF regardless of age, level of surgery, or indication of surgery.

