21161614
Metamorphosis of subarachnoid hemorrhage research: from delayed vasospasm to early brain injury.
Delayed vasospasm that develops 3-7 days after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) has traditionally been considered the most important determinant of delayed ischemic injury and poor outcome. Consequently, most therapies against delayed ischemic injury are directed towards reducing the incidence of vasospasm. The clinical trials based on this strategy, however, have so far claimed limited success; the incidence of vasospasm is reduced without reduction in delayed ischemic injury or improvement in the long-term outcome. This fact has shifted research interest to the early brain injury (first 72 h) evoked by SAH. In recent years, several pathological mechanisms that activate within minutes after the initial bleed and lead to early brain injury are identified. In addition, it is found that many of these mechanisms evolve with time and participate in the pathogenesis of delayed ischemic injury and poor outcome. Therefore, a therapy or therapies focused on these early mechanisms may not only prevent the early brain injury but may also help reduce the intensity of later developing neurological complications. This manuscript reviews the pathological mechanisms of early brain injury after SAH and summarizes the status of current therapies.

21116923
Nitric oxide in early brain injury after subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Nitric Oxide (NO) is the major regulator of cerebral blood flow. In addition, it inhibits platelet adherence and aggregation, reduces adherence of leukocytes to the endothelium, and suppresses vessel injury. NO is produced on demand by nitric oxide synthase and has a very short half life. Hence maintenance of its cerebral level is crucial for normal vascular physiology. Time dependent alterations in cerebral NO level and the enzymes responsible for its synthesis are found after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Cerebral NO level decreases, recovers and increases within the first 24 h after SAH. Each change in cerebral NO level elicits a different pathological response form already compromised brain. These response range from constriction, platelet aggregation and vascular injury that occurs during the early hours and delayed occurring vasospasm, neuronal and axonal damage. This review summarizes the underlying mechanism and the consequence of alteration in cerebral NO level on brain during the first 72 h after SAH.

21116914
Early micro vascular changes after subarachnoid hemorrhage.
During the last decade much effort has been invested in understanding the events that occur early after SAH. It is now widely accepted that these early events not only participate in the early ischemic injury but also set the stage for the pathogenesis of delayed vasospasm. That early cerebral ischemia occurs after SAH is documented in both experimental SAH and in human autopsy studies; however, angiographic evidence for vasoconstriction early after SAH is lacking and the source of early ischemic injury is therefore unclear. Recently, the cerebral microvasculature has been identified as an early target of SAH. Changes in the anatomical structure of cerebral microvessels, sufficient to cause functional deficits, are found early after experimental SAH. These changes may explain cerebral ischemia in human in the absence of angiographic evidence of large vessel vasoconstriction. This paper summarizes known alterations in cerebral microvasculature during the first 48 h after SAH.

20654597
Luminal platelet aggregates in functional deficits in parenchymal vessels after subarachnoid hemorrhage.
The pathophysiology of early ischemic injury after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is not understood. This study examined the acute effect of endovascular puncture-induced SAH on parenchymal vessel function in rat, using intravascular fluorescent tracers to assess flow and vascular permeability and immunostaining to assess structural integrity and to visualize platelet aggregates. In sham-operated animals, vessels were well filled with tracer administered 10s before sacrifice, and parenchymal escape of tracer was rare. At ten minutes and three hours after hemorrhage, patches of poor vascular filling were distributed throughout the forebrain. Close examination of these regions revealed short segments of narrowed diameter along many profiles. Most vascular profiles with reduced perfusion contained platelet aggregates and in addition showed focal loss of collagen IV, a principal component of basal lamina. In contrast, vessels were well filled at 24h post-hemorrhage, indicating that vascular perfusion had recovered. Parenchymal escape of intravascular tracer was detected at 10 min post-hemorrhage and later as plumes of fluorescence emanating into parenchyma from restricted microvascular foci. These data demonstrate that parenchymal microvessels are compromised in function by 10 min after SAH and identify focal microvascular constriction and local accumulation of luminal platelet aggregates as potential initiators of that compromise.

19895201
Adenosine A(2A) receptors in early ischemic vascular injury after subarachnoid hemorrhage. Laboratory investigation.
The role of adenosine A(2A) receptors in the early vascular response after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is unknown. In other forms of cerebral ischemia both activation and inhibition of A(2A) receptors is reported to be beneficial. However, these studies mainly used pharmacological receptor modulation, and most of the agents available exhibit low specificity. The authors used adenosine A(2A) receptor knockout mice to study the role of A(2A) receptors in the early vascular response to SAH. Subarachnoid hemorrhage was induced in wild-type mice (C57BL/6) and A(2A) receptor knockout mice by endovascular puncture. Cerebral blood flow, intracranial pressure, and blood pressure were recorded, and cerebral perfusion pressure was deduced. Animals were sacrificed at 1, 3, or 6 hours after SAH or sham surgery. Coronal brain sections were immunostained for Type IV collagen, the major protein of the basal lamina. The internal diameter of major cerebral arteries and the area fraction of Type IV collagen-positive microvessels (< 100 ?m) were determined. The initial increase in intracranial pressure and decrease in cerebral perfusion pressure at SAH induction was similar in both types of mice, but cerebral blood flow decline was significantly smaller in A(2A) receptor knockout mice as compared with wild-type cohorts. The internal diameter of major cerebral vessels decreased progressively after SAH. The extent of diameter reduction was significantly less in A(2A) receptor knockout mice than in wild-type mice. Type IV collagen immunostaining decreased progressively after SAH. This decrease was significantly less in A(2A) receptor knockout mice than in wild-type mice. These results demonstrate that global inactivation of A(2A) receptors decreases the intensity of the early vascular response to SAH. Early inhibition of A(2A) receptors after SAH might reduce cerebral injury.

17410718
Acute cerebral vascular injury after subarachnoid hemorrhage and its prevention by administration of a nitric oxide donor.
Structural changes in brain parenchymal vessels occur within minutes after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). These changes include platelet aggregation, activation of vascular collagenases, and destruction of perivascular collagen IV. Because collagen IV is an important component of the basal lamina, the authors attempted to further define changes in vascular structure (length and luminal diameter) and their relationship to vascular permeability immediately after SAH. In addition, the authors explored whether such alterations were attenuated by administration of a nitric oxide (NO) donor. Endovascular perforation was used to induce SAH in rats. Two sets of experiments were performed. The first established changes in vascular structure and permeability (collagen IV and endothelial barrier antigen [EBA] dual immunofluorescence) during the first 24 hours after SAH. In the second, the investigators examined the effects of an NO donor on vascular structure, permeability, and collagenase activity (in situ zymography). In this second study, animals received intravenous infusion of the NO donor S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO, 1 microM/8 microl/min) 15 minutes after induction of SAH and were killed 3 hours after SAH onset. Controls were naive unoperated animals for the first study and saline-infused SAH animals for the second. The authors found a time-dependent decrease in area fraction, length, and luminal diameter of collagen IV- and EBA-immunofluorescent vessels after SAH. The greatest change occurred at 3 hours after onset of SAH. Administration of GSNO was associated with striking preservation of collagen IV and EBA immunofluorescence compared with saline treatment. Zymography indicated decreased collagenase activity in GSNO-treated SAH animals compared with saline-treated SAH animals. These results demonstrate changes in the structure and permeability of brain parenchymal microvessels after SAH and their reversal by treatment with an NO donor.

19861151
Escape of intraluminal platelets into brain parenchyma after subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Platelet aggregates are present in parenchymal vessels as early as 10 min after experimental subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Structural injury to parenchymal vessel walls and depletion of collagen-IV (the major protein of basal lamina) occur in a similar time frame. Since platelets upon activation release enzymes which can digest collagen-IV, we investigated the topographic relationship between platelet aggregates, endothelium, and basal lamina after SAH produced by endovascular perforation, using triple immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy with deconvolution. The location of platelet aggregates in relation to zymography-detected active collagenase was also examined. As reported previously, most cerebral vessels profiles contained platelets aggregates at 10 min after SAH. High-resolution three-dimensional image analysis placed many platelets at the ab-luminal (basal) side of endothelium at 10 min, and others either within the vascular basal lamina or in nearby parenchyma. By 24 h post hemorrhage, large numbers of platelets had entered the brain parenchyma. The vascular sites of platelet movement were devoid of endothelium and collagen-IV. Collagenase activity colocalized with vascular platelet aggregates. Our data demonstrate that parenchymal entry of platelets into brain parenchyma begins within minutes after hemorrhage. Three-dimensional analysis suggests that platelet aggregates initiate or stimulate local disruption of endothelium and destruction of adjacent basal lamina after SAH.

