21601767
Targeted gene therapy for the treatment of heart failure.
Chronic heart failure is one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in Western countries and is a major financial burden to the health care system. Pharmacologic treatment and implanting devices are the predominant therapeutic approaches. They improve survival and have offered significant improvement in patient quality of life, but they fall short of producing an authentic remedy. Cardiac gene therapy, the introduction of genetic material to the heart, offers great promise in filling this void. In-depth knowledge of the underlying mechanisms of heart failure is, obviously, a prerequisite to achieve this aim. Extensive research in the past decades, supported by numerous methodological breakthroughs, such as transgenic animal model development, has led to a better understanding of the cardiovascular diseases and, inadvertently, to the identification of several candidate genes. Of the genes that can be targeted for gene transfer, calcium cycling proteins are prominent, as abnormalities in calcium handling are key determinants of heart failure. A major impediment, however, has been the development of a safe, yet efficient, delivery system. Nonviral vectors have been used extensively in clinical trials, but they fail to produce significant gene expression. Viral vectors, especially adenoviral, on the other hand, can produce high levels of expression, at the expense of safety. Adeno-associated viral vectors have emerged in recent years as promising myocardial gene delivery vehicles. They can sustain gene expression at a therapeutic level and maintain it over extended periods of time, even for years, and, most important, without a safety risk.

21533060
Assessment of cardiovascular fibrosis using novel fluorescent probes.
Cardiovascular fibrosis resulted from pressure overload or ischemia could alter myocardial stiffness and lead to ventricular dysfunction. Fluorescently labeled collagen-binding protein CNA 35, derived from the surface component of Staphylococcus aureus, and a novel synthetic biphenylalanine containing peptide are applied to stain fibrosis associated collagen and myocytes, respectively. Detailed pathological characteristics of cardiovascular fibrosis could be identified clearly in 2 hours. This staining pair requires only simple staining and brief washing, generating less than 10 ml of waste. The image information collected by this novel fluorescent staining pair is compatible with it collected by the traditional Masson's Trichrome and Picrosirius Red staining which are widely used to stain cardiovascular fibrosis and isolated cells.

21513889
A Small Molecule Binding to the Coactivator CREB-Binding Protein Blocks Apoptosis in Cardiomyocytes.
As a master transcription factor in cellular responses to external stress, tumor suppressor p53 is tightly regulated. Excessive p53 activity during myocardial ischemia causes irreversible cellular injury and cardiomyocyte death. p53 activation is dependent on lysine acetylation by the lysine acetyltransferase and transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) and on acetylation-directed CBP recruitment for p53 target gene expression. Here, we report a small molecule ischemin, developed with a structure-guided approach to inhibit the acetyl-lysine binding activity of the bromodomain of CBP. We show that ischemin alters post-translational modifications on p53 and histones, inhibits p53 interaction with CBP and transcriptional activity in cells, and prevents apoptosis in ischemic cardiomyocytes. Our study suggests small molecule modulation of acetylation-mediated interactions in gene transcription as a new approach to therapeutic interventions of human disorders such as myocardial ischemia.

21478152
Resistin Promotes Cardiac Hypertrophy via the AMP-activated Protein Kinase/Mammalian Target of Rapamycin (AMPK/mTOR) and c-Jun N-terminal Kinase/Insulin Receptor Substrate 1 (JNK/IRS1) Pathways.
Resistin has been suggested to be involved in the development of diabetes and insulin resistance. We recently reported that resistin is expressed in diabetic hearts and promotes cardiac hypertrophy; however, the mechanisms underlying this process are currently unknown. Therefore, we wanted to elucidate the mechanisms associated with resistin-induced cardiac hypertrophy and myocardial insulin resistance. Overexpression of resistin using adenoviral vector in neonatal rat ventricular myocytes was associated with inhibition of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activity, activation of tuberous sclerosis complex 2/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, and increased cell size, [(3)H]leucine incorporation (i.e. protein synthesis) and mRNA expression of the hypertrophic marker genes, atrial natriuretic factor, brain natriuretic peptide, and ?-myosin heavy chain. Activation of AMPK with 5-aminoimidazole-4-carbozamide-1-?-d-ribifuranoside or inhibition of mTOR with rapamycin or mTOR siRNA attenuated these resistin-induced changes. Furthermore, resistin increased serine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate (IRS1) through the activation of the apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1/c-Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK) pathway, a module known to stimulate insulin resistance. Inhibition of JNK (with JNK inhibitor SP600125 or using dominant-negative JNK) reduced serine 307 phosphorylation of IRS1. Resistin also stimulated the activation of p70(S6K), a downstream kinase target of mTOR, and increased phosphorylation of the IRS1 serine 636/639 residues, whereas treatment with rapamycin reduced the phosphorylation of these residues. Interestingly, these in vitro signaling pathways were also operative in vivo in ventricular tissues from adult rat hearts overexpressing resistin. These data demonstrate that resistin induces cardiac hypertrophy and myocardial insulin resistance, possibly via the AMPK/mTOR/p70(S6K) and apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1/JNK/IRS1 pathways.

21440552
Cyclosporine attenuates cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by RAF1 mutants in Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes.
RAS activation is implicated in physiologic and pathologic cardiac hypertrophy. Cross-talk between the Ras and calcineurin pathways, the latter also having been implicated in cardiac hypertrophy, has been suspected for pathologic hypertrophy. Our recent discovery that germ-line mutations in RAF1, which encodes a downstream RAS effector, cause Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes with a high prevalence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy provided an opportunity to elaborate the role of RAF1 in cardiomyocyte biology. Here, we characterize the role of RAF1 signaling in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy with an aim of identifying potential therapeutic targets. We modeled hypertrophic cardiomyopathy by infecting neonatal and adult rat cardiomyocytes (NRCMs and ARCMs, respectively) with adenoviruses encoding wild-type RAF1 and three Noonan/LEOPARD syndrome-associated RAF1 mutants (S257L, D486N or L613V). These RAF1 proteins, except D486N, engendered cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Surprisingly, these effects were independent and dependent of mitogen activated protein kinases in NRCMs and ARCMs, respectively. Inhibiting Mek1/2 in RAF1 overexpressing cells blocked hypertrophy in ARCMs but not in NRCMs. Further, we found that endogenous and heterologously expressed RAF1 complexed with calcineurin, and RAF1 mutants causing hypertrophy signaled via nuclear factor of activated T cells (Nfat) in both cell types. The involvement of calcineurin was also reflected by down regulation of Serca2a and dysregulation of calcium signaling in NRCMs. Furthermore, treatment with the calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine blocked hypertrophy in NRCMs and ARCMs overexpressing RAF1. Thus, we have identified calcineurin as a novel interaction partner for RAF1 and established a mechanistic link and possible therapeutic target for pathological cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by mutant RAF1. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 'Possible Editorial'.

21371634
Rescuing the failing heart by targeted gene transfer.
Congestive heart failure is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in the United States. Although progress in conventional treatments is making steady and incremental gains to decrease heart failure mortality, there is a critical need to explore new therapeutic approaches. Gene therapy was initially applied in the clinical setting for inherited monogenic disorders. It is now apparent that gene therapy has broader potential that also includes acquired polygenic diseases, such as congestive heart failure. Recent advances in understanding of the molecular basis of myocardial dysfunction, together with the evolution of increasingly efficient gene transfer technology, have placed heart failure within the reach of gene-based therapy. Furthermore, the recent successful and safe completion of a phase 2 trial targeting the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase pump along with the start of more recent phase 1 trials are ushering in a new era of gene therapy for the treatment of heart failure.

21194040
Method of gene delivery in large animal models of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiovascular disease is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in contemporary societies. While progress in conventional treatment modalities is making steady and incremental gains to reduce this disease burden, there remains a need to explore new and potentially therapeutic approaches. Gene therapy, which was initially envisioned as a treatment strategy for inherited monogenic disorders, has been found to hold broader potential that also includes acquired polygenic diseases, such as atherosclerosis, arrhythmias, and heart failure. Advances in the understanding of the molecular basis of conditions such as these, together with the evolution of increasingly efficient gene transfer technology, have placed some cardiovascular pathophysiologies within the reach of gene-based therapy. In fact, gene therapy holds great promise as a targeted treatment for cardiovascular diseases. One of the major hurdles for effective cardiovascular gene therapy is the delivery of the viral vectors to the heart. In this chapter, we will present the various types of delivery techniques in preclinical, large animal models of cardiovascular diseases.

21170146
Refilling Intracellular Calcium Stores.
Within the cardiac cell, the movements of calcium ions are tightly regulated by a number of regulatory proteins including pumps, and channels. The sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) is in large part responsible for orchestrating these movements for the normal functioning of the cardiomyocyte. Alterations of SR regulatory proteins in failing hearts leads to abnormal Ca(2+) homeostasis and consequently to a deficient contractile state. This review focuses on the roles of SR Ca(2+) regulators in disease states and novel strategies for therapeutic targeting of these pathways.

21164355
Adeno-associated virus serotype 8 ApoA-I gene transfer reduces progression of atherosclerosis in ApoE-KO mice: comparison of intramuscular and intravenous administration.
Apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I)/high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-raising treatments are effective antiatherosclerotic strategies. We have compared the antiatherogenic effects of human ApoA-I (hApoA-I) overexpression by intraportal and intramuscular gene transfer in atherosclerotic ApoE-knockout mice. Atherosclerotic lesions were induced by atherogenic diet. After atherosclerosis induction, a group of animals was killed and served as atherosclerosis baseline-control group. The remaining animals were randomized into the following groups: (1) atherosclerosis-progression-control, (2) intraportal/vector administration, and (3) intramuscular/vector administration. Aortas and hearts were processed for atherosclerotic quantification by en face Sudan IV and Oil Red-O, respectively. Liver and muscle specimens were processed for protein/gene expression analysis. A sustained increase in hApoA-I/HDL plasma levels was observed in both transduced groups. hApoA-I overexpression abolished plaque progression versus progression-control group. hApoA-I overexpression significantly reduced lesion macrophage, feature indicative of plaque stabilization. Scavenger receptor class-B type I (SR-BI), but not ATP-binding cassette, sub-family A (ABCA), member 1 (ABCA-1), was significantly upregulated in treated groups versus progression-controls. The results of this study show a similar effect of hApoA-I/HDL overexpression on plaque progression/stabilization by 2 different routes of administration. Our results showing similar effects using either intramuscular administration and intraportal route of administration may have significant clinical implications, given the reduced medical risk to patient and cost of intramuscular injections.

21092890
Cardiac gene therapy.
Heart failure is a chronic progressive disorder in which frequent and recurrent hospitalizations are associated with high mortality and morbidity. The incidence and the prevalence of this disease will increase with the increase in the number of the aging population of the United States. Understanding the molecular pathology and pathophysiology of this disease will uncover novel targets and therapies that can restore the function or attenuate the damage of malfunctioning cardiomyocytes by gene therapy that becomes an interesting and a promising field for the treatment of heart failure as well as other diseases in the future. Of equal importance are developing vectors and delivery methods that can efficiently transduce most of the cardiomyocytes that can offer a long-term expression and that can escape the host immune response. Recombinant adeno-associated virus vectors have the potential to become a promising novel therapeutic vehicles for molecular medicine in the future.

20981290
Multimodality imaging of chronic ischemia.
Although ischemic cardiomyopathy is commonly caused by chronic obstructive coronary disease, the mechanism of the cause is still under investigation. We present echocardiographic strain, magnetic resonance, and histology findings in a chronic ischemia model in preclinical study. This case illustrates the features of multimodality imaging in chronic obstructive coronary disease and gives us great insight into understanding the mechanism of ischemic cardiomyopathy.

20729750
?2-Adrenergic receptor signaling in the cardiac myocyte is modulated by interactions with CXCR4.
Chemokines are small secreted proteins with chemoattractant properties that play a key role in inflammation, metastasis, and embryonic development. We previously demonstrated a nonchemotactic role for one such chemokine pair, stromal cell-derived factor-1? and its G-protein coupled receptor, CXCR4. Stromal cell-derived factor-1/CXCR4 are expressed on cardiac myocytes and have direct consequences on cardiac myocyte physiology by inhibiting contractility in response to the nonselective ?-adrenergic receptor (?AR) agonist, isoproterenol. As a result of the importance of ?-adrenergic signaling in heart failure pathophysiology, we investigated the underlying mechanism involved in CXCR4 modulation of ?AR signaling. Our studies demonstrate activation of CXCR4 by stromal cell-derived factor-1 leads to a decrease in ?AR-induced PKA activity as assessed by cAMP accumulation and PKA-dependent phosphorylation of phospholamban, an inhibitor of SERCA2a. We determined CXCR4 regulation of ?AR downstream targets is ?2AR-dependent. We demonstrated a physical interaction between CXCR4 and ?2AR as determined by coimmunoprecipitation, confocal microscopy, and BRET techniques. The CXCR4-?2AR interaction leads to G-protein signal modulation and suggests the interaction is a novel mechanism for regulating cardiac myocyte contractility. Chemokines are physiologically and developmentally relevant to myocardial biology and represent a novel receptor class of cardiac modulators. The CXCR4-?2AR complex could represent a hitherto unknown target for therapeutic intervention.

20677926
Amniotic fluid cells are more efficiently reprogrammed to pluripotency than adult cells.
Recently, cultured human adult skin cells were reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, which have characteristics similar to human embryonic stem (hES) cells. Patient-derived iPS cells offer genetic and immunologic advantages for cell and tissue replacement or engineering. The efficiency of generating human iPS cells has been very low; therefore an easily and efficiently reprogrammed cell type is highly desired. Here, we demonstrate that terminally differentiated human amniotic fluid (AF) skin cells provide an accessible source for efficiently generating abundant-induced pluripotent stem (AF-iPS) cells. By induction of pluripotency with the transcription factor quartet (OCT3/4, SOX2, KLF4, and c-MYC) the terminally differentiated, cultured AF skin cells formed iPS colonies approximately twice as fast and yielded nearly a two-hundred percent increase in number, compared to cultured adult skin cells. AF-iPS cells were identical to hES cells for morphological and growth characteristics, antigenic stem cell markers, stem cell gene expression, telomerase activity, in vitro and in vivo differentiation into the three germ layers and for their capacity to form embryoid bodies (EBs) and teratomas. Our findings provide a biological interesting conclusion that these fetal AF cells are more rapidly, easily, and efficiently reprogrammed to pluripotency than neonatal and adult cells. AF-iPS cells may have a "young," more embryonic like epigenetic background, which may facilitate and accelerate pluripotency. The ability to efficiently and rapidly reprogram terminally differentiated AF skin cells and generate induced pluripotent stem cells provides an abundant iPS cell source for various basic studies and a potential for future patient-specific personalized therapies.

20461063
SERCA2a gene transfer enhances eNOS expression and activity in endothelial cells.
Congestive heart failure (HF) is associated with impaired endothelium-dependent nitric oxide-mediated vasodilatation. The aim of this study was to examine the effects of sarco/endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca(2+)-ATPase 2a (SERCA2a) gene transfer on endothelial function in a swine HF model. Two months after the creation of mitral regurgitation to induce HF, the animals underwent intracoronary injection of adeno-associated virus (AAV) carrying SERCA2a (n = 7) or saline (n = 6). At 4 months, coronary flow (CF) was measured in the mid-portion of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery. In the failing animals, CF was decreased significantly; SERCA2a gene transfer rescued CF to levels observed in sham-group [ml/min/g, 0.47 +/- 0.064 saline versus 0.89 +/- 0.116, SERCA2a; P < 0.05; 1.00 +/- 0. 185 sham P = NS (nonsignificant)]. In coronary arteries from HF animals, SERCA2a and endothelial isoform of nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) protein expression were decreased, but restored to normal levels by SERCA2a gene transfer. In human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAECs), SERCA2a overexpression increased eNOS expression, phosphorylation, eNOS promoter activity, Ca(2+) storage capacity, and enhanced histamine-induced calcium oscillations, eNOS activity, and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) production. Thus, SERCA2a gene transfer increases eNOS expression and activity by modulating calcium homeostasis to improve CF. These findings suggest that SERCA2a gene transfer improves vascular reactivity in the setting of HF.

20133817
Effects of CXCR4 gene transfer on cardiac function after ischemia-reperfusion injury.
Acute coronary occlusion is the leading cause of death in the Western world. There is an unmet need for the development of treatments to limit the extent of myocardial infarction (MI) during the acute phase of occlusion. Recently, investigators have focused on the use of a chemokine, CXCL12, the only identified ligand for CXCR4, as a new therapeutic modality to recruit stem cells to individuals suffering from MI. Here, we examined the effects of overexpression of CXCR4 by gene transfer on MI. Adenoviruses carrying the CXCR4 gene were injected into the rat heart one week before ligation of the left anterior descending coronary artery followed by 24 hours reperfusion. Cardiac function was assessed by echocardiography couple with 2,3,5-Triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining to measure MI size. In comparison with control groups, rats receiving Ad-CXCR4 displayed an increase in infarct area (13.5% +/- 4.1%) and decreased fractional shortening (38% +/- 5%). Histological analysis revealed a significant increase in CXCL12 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha expression in ischemic area of CXCR4 overexpressed hearts. CXCR4 overexpression was associated with increased influx of inflammatory cells and enhanced cardiomyocyte apoptosis in the infarcted heart. These data suggest that in our model overexpressing CXCR4 appears to enhance ischemia/reperfusion injury possibly due to enhanced recruitment of inflammatory cells, increased tumor necrosis factor-alpha production, and activation of cell death/apoptotic pathways.

20078230
Sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase as a therapeutic target for heart failure.
The cardiac isoform of the sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)ATPase (SERCA2a) plays a major role in controlling excitation/contraction coupling. In both experimental and clinical heart failure, SERCA2a expression is significantly reduced which leads to abnormal Ca(2+) handling and deficient contractility. A large number of studies in isolated cardiac myocytes and in small and large animal models of heart failure showed that restoring SERCA2a expression by gene transfer corrects the contractile abnormalities and improves energetics and electrical remodeling. Following a long line of investigation, a clinical trial is underway to restore SERCA2a expression in patients with heart failure using adeno-associated virus type 1. This review addresses the following issues regarding heart failure gene therapy: i) new insights on calcium regulation by SERCA2a; ii) SERCA2a as a gene therapy target in animal models of heart failure; iii) advances in the development of viral vectors and gene delivery; and iv) clinical trials on heart failure using SERCA2a. This review focuses on the new advances in SERCA2a- targeted gene therapy made in the last three years. In conclusion, SERCA2a is an important therapeutic target in various cardiovascular disorders. Ongoing clinical gene therapy trials will provide answers on its safety and applicability.

19825979
Mechanoelectrical remodeling and arrhythmias during progression of hypertrophy.
Despite a clear association between left ventricular (LV) mechanical dysfunction in end-stage heart failure and the incidence of arrhythmias, the majority of sudden cardiac deaths occur at earlier stages of disease development. The mechanisms by which structural, mechanical, and molecular alterations predispose to arrhythmias at the tissue level before the onset of LV dysfunction remain unclear. In a rat model of pressure overload hypertrophy (PoH) produced by ascending aortic banding, we correlated mechanical and structural changes measured in vivo with key electrophysiological changes measured ex vivo in the same animals. We found that action potential prolongation, a hallmark of electrical remodeling at the tissue level, is highly correlated with changes in LV wall thickness but not mechanical function. In contrast, conduction delays are not predicted by either mechanical or structural changes during disease development. Moreover, disrupted Cx43 phosphorylation at intermediate (increased) and late (decreased) stages of PoH are associated with moderate and severe conduction delays, respectively. Interestingly, the level of interaction between Cx43 and the cytoskeletal protein ZO-1 is exclusively decreased at the late stage of PoH. Closely coupled action potentials consistent with afterdepolarization-mediated triggered beats were readily observed in 6 of 15 PoH hearts but never in controls. Similarly, PoH (8/15) but not control hearts exhibited sustained episodes of ventricular tachycardia after rapid stimulation. The initiation and early maintenance of arrhythmias in PoH were formed by rapid and highly uniform activation wavefronts emanating from sites distal to the former site of stimulation. In conclusion, repolarization but not conduction delays are predicted by structural remodeling in PoH. Cx43 phosphorylation is disrupted at intermediate (increased) and late (decreased) stages, which are associated with conduction delays. Dephosphorylation of Cx43 is associated with loss of interaction with ZO-1 and severe conduction delays. Remodeling at all stages of PoH predisposes to triggers and focal arrhythmias.

19687154
In vivo myocardial distribution of multipotent progenitor cells following intracoronary delivery in a swine model of myocardial infarction.
There are few data comparing the fate of multipotent progenitor cells (MPCs) used in cardiac cell therapy after myocardial infarction (MI). To document in vivo distribution of MPCs delivered by intracoronary (IC) injection. Using an anterior MI swine model, near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence was used for in vivo tracking of labelled MPCs [mesenchymal stromal (MSCs), bone marrow mononuclear (BMMNCs), and peripheral blood mononuclear (PBMNCs)] cells early after IC injection. Signal intensity ratios (SIRs) of injected over non-injected (reference) zones were used to report NIR fluorescence emission. Following IC injection, significant differences in mean SIR were documented when MSCs were compared with BMMNCs [1.28 +/- 0.10 vs. 0.77 +/- 0.11, P < 0.001; 95% CI (0.219, 0.805), respectively] or PBMNCs [1.28 +/- 0.10 vs. 0.80 +/- 0.14, P = 0.005; 95% CI (0.148, 0.813), respectively]. Differences were maintained during the 60 min tracking period, with only the MSC-injected groups continuously emitting NIR fluorescence (SIR>1). This is correlated with greater cell retention for MSCs relative to mononuclear cells. However, there was evidence of MSC-related vessel plugging in some swine. Our in vivo NIR fluorescence findings suggest that MPC distribution and retention immediately after intracoronary delivery vary depending on cell population and could potentially impact the clinical efficacy of cardiac cell therapy.

19649297
Gene remodeling in type 2 diabetic cardiomyopathy and its phenotypic rescue with SERCA2a.
Diabetes-associated myocardial dysfunction results in altered gene expression in the heart. We aimed to investigate the changes in gene expression profiles accompanying diabetes-induced cardiomyopathy and its phenotypic rescue by restoration of SERCA2a expression. Using the Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima Fatty rat model of type 2 diabetes and the Agilent rat microarray chip, we analyzed gene expression by comparing differential transcriptional changes in age-matched control versus diabetic hearts and diabetic hearts that received gene transfer of SERCA2a. Microarray expression profiles of selected genes were verified with real-time qPCR and immunoblotting. Our analysis indicates that diabetic cardiomyopathy is associated with a downregulation of transcripts. Diabetic cardiomyopathic hearts have reduced levels of SERCA2a. SERCA2a gene transfer in these hearts reduced diabetes-associated hypertrophy, and differentially modulated the expression of 76 genes and reversed the transcriptional profile induced by diabetes. In isolated cardiomyocytes in vitro, SERCA2a overexpression significantly modified the expression of a number of transcripts known to be involved in insulin signaling, glucose metabolism and cardiac remodeling. This investigation provided insight into the pathophysiology of cardiac remodeling and the potential role of SERCA2a normalization in multiple pathways in diabetic cardiomyopathy.

19201995
Mechanical work and energetic analysis of eccentric cardiac remodeling in a volume overload heart failure in rats.
Eccentric cardiac remodeling seen in dilated cardiomyopathy or regurgitant valvular disease is a well-known process of heart failure progression, but its mechanoenergetic profile has not been yet established. We made a volume overload (VO) heart failure model in rats and for the first time investigated left ventricular (LV) mechanical work and energetics in cross-circulated whole heart preparations. Laparotomy was performed in 14 Wistar male rats, and abdominal aortic-inferior vena caval shunt was created in seven rats (VO group). Another seven rats underwent a sham operation without functional shunt (Sham group). LV dimensions changes were followed with weekly transthoracic echocardiography. Three months after surgery, we measured LV pressure and volume and myocardial O(2) consumption in isolated heart cross circulation. LV internal dimensions in both systolic and diastolic phases were significantly increased in the VO group versus the Sham group (P < 0.05). LV pressure was markedly decreased in the VO group versus in the Sham group (P < 0.05). LV end-systolic pressure-volume relation shifted downward, and myocardial O(2) consumption related to Ca(2+) handling significantly decreased. The contractile response to Ca(2+) infusion was attenuated. Nevertheless, the increase in Ca(2+) handling-related O(2) consumption per unit change in LV contractility in the VO group was significantly higher than that in the Sham group (P < 0.05). The levels of sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase 2a protein were reduced in the VO group (P < 0.01). In conclusion, VO failing rat hearts had a character of marked contractile dysfunction accompanied with less efficient energy utilization in the Ca(2+) handling processes. These results suggest that restoring Ca(2+) handling in excitation-contraction coupling would improve the contractility of the myocardium after eccentric cardiac remodeling.

18813212
Interplay between impaired calcium regulation and insulin signaling abnormalities in diabetic cardiomyopathy.
According to the International Diabetes Federation the number of people between the ages of 20 and 79 years diagnosed with diabetes mellitus is projected to reach 380 million worldwide by 2025. Cardiovascular disease, including heart failure, is the major cause of death in patients with diabetes. A contributing factor to heart failure in such patients is the development of diabetic cardiomyopathy--a clinical myocardial condition distinguished by ventricular dysfunction that can present independently of other risk factors such as hypertension or coronary artery disease. This disorder has been associated with both type 1 and type 2 diabetes, and is characterized by early-onset diastolic dysfunction and late-onset systolic dysfunction. The development of diabetic cardiomyopathy and the cellular and molecular perturbations associated with the pathology are complex and multifactorial. Hallmark mechanisms include abnormalities in regulation of calcium homeostasis, and associated abnormal ventricular excitation-contraction coupling, metabolic disturbances, and alterations in insulin signaling. An emerging concept is that disruptions in calcium homeostasis might be linked to diminished insulin responsiveness. An understanding of the cellular effect of these abnormalities on cardiomyocytes should be useful in predicting the maladaptive cardiac structural and functional consequences of diabetes.

18665137
The cardiac sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase: a potent target for cardiovascular diseases.
The cardiac isoform of the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA2a) is a calcium ion (Ca(2+)) pump powered by ATP hydrolysis. SERCA2a transfers Ca(2+) from the cytosol of the cardiomyocyte to the lumen of the sarcoplasmic reticulum during muscle relaxation. As such, this transporter has a key role in cardiomyocyte Ca(2+) regulation. In both experimental models and human heart failure, SERCA2a expression is significantly decreased, which leads to abnormal Ca(2+) handling and a deficient contractile state. Following a long line of investigations in isolated cardiac myocytes and small and large animal models, a clinical trial is underway that is restoring SERCA2a expression in patients with heart failure by use of adeno-associated virus type 1. Beyond its role in contractile abnormalities in heart failure, SERCA2a overexpression has beneficial effects in a host of other cardiovascular diseases. Here we describe the mechanism of Ca(2+) regulation by SERCA2a, examine the beneficial effects as well as the failures, risks and complexities associated with SERCA2a overexpression, and discuss the potential of SERCA2a as a target for the treatment of cardiovascular disease.

18597775
Role of resistin in cardiac contractility and hypertrophy.
Cardiovascular sequelae including diabetic cardiomyopathy constitute the major cause of death in diabetic patients. Although several factors may contribute to the development of this cardiomyopathy, the underlying molecular/cellular mechanisms leading to cardiac dysfunction are still partially understood. Recently, a novel paradigm for the role of the adipocytokine resistin in diabetes has emerged. Resistin has been proposed to be a link between obesity, insulin resistance and diabetes. Using microarray analysis, we have recently found that cardiomyocytes isolated from type 2 diabetic hearts express high levels of resistin. However, the function of resistin with respect to cardiac function is unknown. In this study we show that resistin is not only expressed in the heart, but also promotes cardiac hypertrophy. Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of resistin in cultured neonatal rat ventricular myocytes (NRVM) significantly increased sarcomere organization and cell size, increased protein synthesis and increased the expression of atrial natriuretic factor and beta-myosin heavy chain. Overexpression of resistin in NRVM was also associated with activation of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, ERK1/2 and p38, as well as increased Ser-636 phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), indicating that IRS-1/MAPK pathway may be involved in the observed hypertrophic response. Overexpression of resistin in adult cultured cardiomyocytes significantly altered myocyte mechanics by depressing cell contractility as well as contraction and relaxation velocities. Intracellular Ca(2+) measurements showed slower Ca(2+) transients decay in resistin-transduced myocytes compared to controls, suggesting impaired cytoplasmic Ca(2+) clearing or alterations in myofilament activation. We conclude that resistin overexpression alters cardiac contractility, confers to primary cardiomyocytes all the features of the hypertrophic phenotype and promotes cardiac hypertrophy possibly via the IRS-1/MAPK pathway.

18514926
Design of a phase 1/2 trial of intracoronary administration of AAV1/SERCA2a in patients with heart failure.
Heart failure (HF) remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality in North America. With an aging population and an unmet clinical need by current pharmacologic and device-related therapeutic strategies, novel treatment options for HF are being explored. One such promising strategy is gene therapy to target underlying molecular anomalies in the dysfunctional cardiomyocyte. Prior animal and human studies have documented decreased expression of SERCA2a, a major cardiac calcium cycling protein, as a major defect found in HF. We hypothesize that increasing the activity of SERCA2a in patients with moderate to severe HF will improve their cardiac function, disease status, and quality of life. Gene transfer of SERCA2a will be performed via an adeno-associated viral (AAV) vector, derived from a nonpathogenic virus with long-term transgene expression as well as a clinically established favorable safety profile. We describe the design of a phase 1 clinical trial of antegrade epicardial coronary artery infusion (AECAI) administration of AAVI/SERCA2a (MYDICAR) to subjects with HF divided into 2 stages: in Stage 1, subjects will be assigned open-label MYDICAR in one of up to 4 sequential dose escalation cohorts; in Stage 2, subjects will be randomized in parallel to 2 or 3 doses of MYDICAR or placebo in a double-blinded manner.

20559907
Advances in gene-based therapy for heart failure.
Heart failure is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in western countries. While progress in current treatment modalities is making steady and incremental gains to reduce this disease burden, there remains a need to explore novel therapeutic strategies. Clinicians and researchers alike have thus looked towards novel adjunctive therapeutic strategies, including gene-based therapy for congestive heart failure (CHF). Advances in the understanding of the molecular basis of CHF, combined to the evolution of increasingly efficient gene transfer technology, have placed congestive heart failure within reach of gene-based therapy. This review will discuss issues related to gene vector systems, gene delivery strategies, and gene targets for intervention in the setting of CHF.

18342232
Reversal of cardiac dysfunction after long-term expression of SERCA2a by gene transfer in a pre-clinical model of heart failure.
The aim of this study was to examine the effects of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase (SERCA2a) gene transfer in a swine heart failure (HF) model. Reduced expression and activity of SERCA2a have been documented in HF. Prior studies have reported the beneficial effects of short-term SERCA2a overexpression in rodent models. However, the effects of long-term expression of SERCA2a in pre-clinical large animal models are not known. Yorkshire-Landrace pigs were used (n = 16) to create volume overload by percutaneously severing chordae tendinae of the mitral apparatus with a bioptome to induce mitral regurgitation. At 2 months, pigs underwent intracoronary delivery of either recombinant adeno-associated virus type 1 (rAAV1) carrying SERCA2a under a cytomegalovirus promoter (rAAV1.SERCA2a) (n = 10; group 1) or saline (n = 6; group 2). At 2 months, study animals were found to be in a compensated state of volume-overload HF (increased left ventricular internal diastolic and systolic diameters [LVIDd and LVIDs]). At 4 months, gene transfer resulted in: 1) positive left ventricular (LV) inotropic effects (adjusted peak left ventricular pressure rate of rise (dP/dt)max/P, 21.2 +/- 3.2 s(-1) group 1 vs. 15.5 +/- 3.0 s(-1) group 2; p < 0.01); 2) improvement in LV remodeling (% change in LVIDs -3.0 +/- 10% vs. +15 +/- 11%, respectively; p < 0.01). At follow-up, brain natriuretic peptide levels remained stable in group 1 after gene transfer, in contrast to rising levels in group 2. Further, cardiac SERCA2a expression was significantly decreased in group 2 whereas in group 1 it was restored to normal levels. There was no histopathological evidence of acute myocardial inflammation or necrosis. Using a large-animal, volume-overload model of HF, we report that long-term overexpression of SERCA2a by in vivo rAAV1-mediated intracoronary gene transfer preserved systolic function, potentially prevented diastolic dysfunction, and improved ventricular remodeling.

17220178
Targeted gene transfer increases contractility and decreases oxygen cost of contractility in normal rat hearts.
The aim of this study was to examine how global cardiac gene transfer of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA2a) can influence left ventricular (LV) mechanical and energetic function, especially in terms of O(2) cost of LV contractility, in normal rats. Normal rats were randomized to receive an adenovirus carrying the SERCA2a (SERCA) or beta-galactosidase (beta-Gal) gene or saline by a catheter-based technique. LV mechanical and energetic function was measured in cross-circulated heart preparations 2-3 days after the infection. The end-systolic pressure-volume relation was shifted upward, end-systolic pressure at 0.1 ml of intraballoon water volume was higher, and equivalent maximal elastance, i.e., enhanced LV contractility, was higher in the SERCA group than in the normal, beta-Gal, and saline groups. Moreover, the LV relaxation rate was faster in the SERCA group. There was no significant difference in myocardial O(2) consumption per beat-systolic pressure-volume area relation among the groups. Finally, O(2) cost of LV contractility was decreased to subnormal levels in the SERCA group but remained unchanged in the beta-Gal and saline groups. This lowered O(2) cost of LV contractility in SERCA hearts indicates energy saving in Ca(2+) handling during excitation-contraction coupling. Thus overexpression of SERCA2a transformed the normal energy utilization to a more efficient state in Ca(2+) handling and superinduced the supranormal contraction/relaxation due to enhanced Ca(2+) handling.

21512506
Delivery of gelfoam-enabled cells and vectors into the pericardial space using a percutaneous approach in a porcine model.
Intrapericardial drug delivery is a promising procedure, with the ability to localize therapeutics with the heart. Gelfoam particles are nontoxic, inexpensive, nonimmunogenic and biodegradable compounds that can be used to deliver therapeutic agents. We developed a new percutaneous approach method for intrapericardial injection, puncturing the pericardial sac safely under fluoroscopy and intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) guidance. In a porcine model of myocardial infarction (MI), we deployed gelfoam particles carrying either (a) autologous mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) or (b) an adenovirus encoding enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) 48?h post-MI. The presence of MSCs and viral infection at the infarct zone was confirmed by immunoflourescence and PCR. Puncture was performed successfully in 16 animals. Using IVUS, we successfully determined the size of the pericardial space before the puncture, and safely accessed that space in setting of pericardial effusion and also adhesions induced by the MI. Intrapericardial injection of gelfoam was safe and reliable. Presence of the MSCs and eGFP expression from adenovirus in the myocardium were confirmed after delivery. Our novel percutaneous approach to deliver (stem-) cells or adenovirus was safe and efficient in this pre-clinical model. IVUS-guided delivery is a minimally invasive procedure that seems to be a promising new strategy to deliver therapeutic agents locally to the heart.Gene Therapy advance online publication, 21 April 2011; doi:10.1038/gt.2011.52.

19436992
Apolipoprotein E deficiency abrogates insulin resistance in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Although it is known that lipid metabolism plays a role in insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes and in obesity, the mechanism is still largely unknown. Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) regulates plasma lipid levels and also plays a role in the uptake of lipids into various tissues. To investigate whether the suppression of whole-particle lipoprotein uptake into tissues affects insulin responsiveness and the diabetic condition, we examined the effect of an ApoE (also known as Apoe) gene deletion in MKR mice, a mouse model of type 2 diabetes. ApoE ( -/- ), MKR, ApoE ( -/- )/MKR and control mice were placed on a high-fat, high-cholesterol diet for 16 weeks. Glucose tolerance, serum insulin, blood glucose, insulin tolerance, tissue triacylglycerol content and atherosclerotic lesions were assessed. ApoE ( -/- )/MKR and ApoE ( -/- ) mice showed significantly improved blood glucose, glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. Reduced triacylglycerol content in liver and reduced fat accumulation in liver and adipose tissue were found in ApoE ( -/- )/MKR and ApoE ( -/- ) mice compared with control and MKR mice. ApoE ( -/- ) and ApoE ( -/- )/MKR mice demonstrated similarly large atherosclerotic lesions, whereas MKR and control mice had small atherosclerotic lesions. We demonstrated that ApoE deficiency abrogates insulin resistance in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes, suggesting that lipid accumulation in tissue is a major cause of insulin resistance in this mouse model.

