20878196
Thyroid and parathyroid surgery in pregnancy.
The consideration of surgery during pregnancy requires weighing the benefit of urgent surgery against the risk to mother and fetus. Surgery during pregnancy involves an increase in both maternal and fetal risks. Thyroid and parathyroid surgery involves physiological risks to both mother and fetus specific to the disease and function of these endocrine glands. Evaluation of a thyroid mass is similar in pregnant patients with ultrasound and fine-needle aspiration biopsy providing the most important information, while the use of radiographic imaging is severely constrained except when specifically required. In general, thyroid surgery can be delayed until after delivery except in cases of airway compromise or aggressive cancer. In contrast, parathyroid surgery is recommended during pregnancy to avoid adverse effects to the neonate.

19364696
Excess thyroid hormone and carbohydrate metabolism.
To review the pertinent basic and clinical research describing the complex effects of excess thyroid hormone on carbohydrate metabolism. We performed a MEDLINE search of the English-language literature using a combination of words (ie, "thyrotoxicosis and diabetes," "diabetic ketoacidosis and thyroid storm," "carbohydrate metabolism and hyperthyroid," "glucose homeostasis and thyrotoxicosis") to identify key articles addressing various aspects of the thyroid's influence on carbohydrate metabolism. Thyroid hormone affects glucose homeostasis via its actions on a variety of organs including increased hepatic glucose output, increased futile cycling of glucose degradation products between the skeletal muscle and the liver, decreased glycogen stores in the liver and skeletal muscle, altered oxidative and non-oxidative glucose metabolism, decreased active insulin output from the pancreas, and increased renal insulin clearance. Thyroid hormone also affects adipokines and adipose tissue, further predisposing the patient to ketosis. Thyrotoxicosis can alter carbohydrate metabolism in a type 2 diabetic patient to such an extent that diabetic ketoacidosis develops if untreated. Based on the current understanding of this relationship, all diabetic patients should be screened for thyroid dysfunction because correcting hyperthyroidism can profoundly affect glucose homeostasis. Similarly, patients presenting in diabetic ketoacidosis should undergo a thyroid function assessment.

17964919
Bariatric surgery for morbid obesity--a cure for metabolic syndrome?
At present there is no single medication that targets the metabolic syndrome directly. Bariatric surgery, a treatment option for morbidly obese individuals who fail medical therapy, has been shown to be very effective in treating multiple aspects of the metabolic syndrome. The decrease in insulin resistance is because of significant weight loss and by enhancing secretion of gut hormones such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1).

17964912
Metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes: can we stop the weight gain with diabetes?
Many patients with type 2 diabetes also have the metabolic syndrome with its cardinal features of central adiposity, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and hypertension. Although there is strong evidence for the importance of tight glycemic control in minimizing the microvascular complications of diabetes, many of the current therapies used for optimizing glycemic control also cause weight gain. With this treatment-induced weight gain, there is a risk of worsening the patient's insulin resistance. Physicians need to be aware of this vicious cycle in their overweight type 2 diabetic patients. This article reviews the strategies currently available to achieve glycemic control while at the same time minimizing weight gain and the associated complications.

