21570620
Noncardiac entrapment of a pulmonary artery catheter during heart transplantation: inadvertent cannulation and perforation of the internal thoracic vein.
Placement of a central venous catheter into an internal thoracic vein occurs in approximately 2% of all catheterizations. A case in which a pulmonary artery catheter was trapped within the internal thoracic vein during orthotopic heart transplantation is presented.

19700348
Pheochromocytoma presenting as severe biventricular failure requiring insertion of a biventricular assist device.


19642155
The management of stage D heart failure.


18713914
Successful placement of a right ventricular assist device for treatment of a presumed amniotic fluid embolism.
Amniotic fluid embolism is a rare and often fatal complication of pregnancy. We report the successful multidisciplinary management of a woman who developed a coagulopathy from a presumed amniotic fluid embolism after forceps-assisted vaginal delivery requiring recombinant factor VIIa, and pulmonary arterial hypertension requiring a right ventricular assist device.

18693117
Surgical left atrial appendage occlusion: evaluation of a novel device with magnetic resonance imaging.
Management of the left atrial appendage (LAA) is considered an important adjunct to ablation in cardiac surgical patients with atrial fibrillation (AF). However, current surgical techniques, both cut-and-sew and stapling, have been associated with incomplete LAA occlusion and complications. Using cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), we studied the safety and effectiveness of a new device for LAA occlusion in a primate model. Seven adult baboons underwent off-pump placement of an LAA clip (AtriCure Inc., Westchester, Ohio). LAA occlusion was confirmed intraoperatively by direct incision. All animals had MRI before and after clip placement to assess LAA perfusion, architecture, and overall cardiac function. Pathologic and histological studies were performed at 7, 30 and 180 days. Clip placement was successful in all (n=7) without any clip related complications. Complete LAA occlusion was demonstrated intraoperatively in all subjects. LAA occlusion was confirmed on pre-sacrifice MRI, and left and right ventricular function were unchanged from preoperative studies; however, clip placement caused small reductions in left ventricular end-diastolic, end-systolic, and stroke volumes. At sacrifice, direct inspection confirmed stable location, persistent LAA exclusion, tissue in-growth and homogenous epithelialization without damage to adjacent structures. Histological analysis revealed a regular in-growth pattern in all studied specimens. We demonstrated a safe, straightforward, persistent and effective method for LAA occlusion with this new LAA clip. MRI effectively demonstrated LAA occlusion and only minor changes in left ventricular volumes.

