21511672
Inflammation, neovascularization and intra-plaque hemorrhage are associated with increased reparative collagen content: Implication for plaque progression in diabetic atherosclerosis.
Sustained inflammation may stimulate a reparative process increasing early reparative type III collagen synthesis, promoting atherosclerotic plaque progression. We evaluated inflammation, neovascularization, intra-plaque hemorrhage (IPH), and collagen deposition in human aortic atherosclerotic plaques from patients with and without diabetes mellitus (DM). Plaques were procured at autopsy from lower thoracic and abdominal aorta from DM (n = 20) and non-DM (n = 22) patients. Inflammation and neovascularization were quantified by double-label immunochemistry and the IPH grade was scored using H&E-stained sections. Type I and type III collagens were quantified using Picro-Sirius red stain with polarization microscopy and computerized planimetry. In non-DM plaques, 27%, 40%, and 33% had mild, moderate and severe inflammation in the fibrous cap and shoulder compared with 2%, 30% and 68% in DM plaques (p < 0.001). The geometric mean neovessel count was increased in DM versus non-DM plaques (140 [95% CI: 119-165] versus 59 [95% CI: 51-70]; p < 0.001). The IPH grade was increased in DM verses non-DM plaques (0.82 ± 0.11 versus 0.29 ± 0.11; p < 0.001) (percentage grade). The density of type III was increased in DM plaques (0.16 ± 0.01 versus 0.06 ± 0.01; p < 0.001) with a non-significant reduction in type I density in DM when compared with non-DM (0.28 ± 0.03 versus 0.33 ± 0.03; p = 0.303) (content per mm(2)). The increase in type III collagen content correlated with total neovessel content (r = 0.58; p < 0.001) in DM plaques. In conclusion, our study suggests that enhanced type III collagen deposition was associated with inflammation, neovascularization and IPH, and may be a contributing factor in DM plaque progression.

21481422
Increased macrophage infiltration and neovascularization in congenital bicuspid aortic valve stenosis.
OBJECTIVES: Patients with congenital bicuspid aortic valves have aortic valve stenosis at a relatively young age compared with patients with tricuspid aortic valves. We hypothesize that aortic valve stenosis evolves from a more aggressive inflammatory process, with increased macrophage/T-cell and neovessel content in congenital bicuspid aortic valveswhen compared with that seen in tricuspid valves. METHODS: Fifty-one severely stenotic aortic valves were obtained at the time of aortic valve replacement. A total of 17 bicuspid and 34 tricuspid aortic valves were evaluated. Macrophage/T-cell infiltration (CD68 plus CD3) and neovessel density (CD34) were evaluated with immunohistochemical staining. Leaflet calcification and ossification were also quantified. Real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to assess expression of chondromodulin 1 and vascular endothelial growth factor. RESULTS: The density of macrophages/T cells was greater in congenital bicuspid aortic valves than in tricuspid valves (51 ± 31 vs 23 ± 13 cells/mm(2), P = .002). Neovascularization was more frequently noted in congenital bicuspid aortic valves when compared with tricuspid valves (31 ± 10 vs 21 ± 9 vessels/mm(2), P = .0005), and calcification was more severe (P = .03). Expression of chondromodulin 1 demonstrated a 6-fold downregulation (P = .0003) and expression of vascular endothelial growth factor demonstrated a 2-fold increase (P = .02) in congenital bicuspid aortic valves compared with that seen in tricuspid valves. Multivariable analyses demonstrated significant associations between bicuspid aortic valve anatomy and increased inflammatory cell infiltration (? = 25.8, P = .0007) and neovascularization (? = 9.4, P = .001), despite adjusting for measured covariates. CONCLUSIONS: The pathogenesis of aortic valve stenosis in bicuspid aortic valves is associated with a more aggressive inflammatory process with increased macrophage infiltration and neovascularization when compared with that seen in tricuspid valves.

21413131
A novel clinical prediction rule for 30-day mortality following balloon aortic valuloplasty: The CRRAC the AV score.
Objectives: We seek to identify predictors of 30-day mortality after balloon aortic valvuloplasty (BAV). Background: To date, there is no validated method of predicting patient outcomes after percutaneous aortic valve interventions. Methods: Data for consecutive patients with severe aortic stenosis who underwent BAV at the Mount Sinai Medical Center from January 2001 to July 2007 were retrospectively reviewed. Cox-proportional hazards regression was used to identify significant predictors of 30-day mortality, and the resultant model was compared to the EuroSCORE using Akaike's Information Criterion and area under the receiver-operating curve (AUC). Results: The analysis included 281 patients (age 83 ± 9 years, 61% women, aortic valve area: 0.64 ± 0.2 cm(2) ) and 36 (12.8%) of whom died within 30 days of BAV. With identified risk factors for 30-day mortality, critical status, renal dysfunction, right atrial pressure, and cardiac output, we constructed the CRRAC the AV risk score. Thirty-day survival was 72% in the highest tertile versus 94% in the lower two tertiles of the score. Compared to the additive and logistic EuroSCORE, the risk score demonstrated superior discrimination (AUC = 0.75 vs. 0.60 and 0.63, respectively). Conclusions: We derived a risk score, the CRRAC the AV score that identifies patients at high-risk of 30-day mortality after BAV. Validation of the developed risk prediction score, the CRRAC the AV score, is needed in other cohorts of post-BAV patients and potentially in patients undergoing other catheter-based valve interventions. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

20359599
The year in atherothrombosis.


19962047
Vulnerable plaque: definition, diagnosis, and treatment.
This article provides a systematic approach to vulnerable plaques. It is divided into 4 sections. The first section is devoted to definition, incidence, anatomic distribution, and clinical presentation. The second section is devoted to plaque composition, setting up the foundations to understand plaque vulnerability. The third section relates to invasive plaque imaging. The fourth section is devoted to therapy, from conservative pharmacologic options to aggressive percutaneous coronary intervention alternatives.

19539140
Promoting mechanisms of vascular health: circulating progenitor cells, angiogenesis, and reverse cholesterol transport.
To understand and promote vascular health, we must reduce the aggression to the vessel wall and enhance the physiologic mechanisms leading to restoration of vessel wall function. Three main defense mechanisms are responsible for maintaining cardiovascular homeostasis: the regenerative production of endothelial progenitor cells, vessel wall angiogenesis, and macrophage-mediated reverse cholesterol transport. Endothelial progenitor cells can restore vessel wall function and reduce atherosclerosis. In patients with risk factors, high levels of circulating progenitor cells increase event-free survival from cardiovascular events. Mobilization of progenitor cells includes physical and pharmacological approaches, of which exercise and statin therapy have great potential. Angiogenesis is a pivotal defense mechanism to counteract hypoxia and is needed for plaque regression. However, neovessels are susceptible for intraplaque hemorrhage, particularly in diabetes mellitus. In these patients, the haptoglobin 2-2 genotype is the more affected, and may benefit from an antioxidant approach. Finally, the reverse cholesterol transport system is the main mechanism for plaque regression. In addition to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, apolipoprotein A-I therapies and the promotion of cholesterol efflux from macrophages by the ABCA1 and ABCG1 transporter systems hold great promise and may be available for therapeutic application in the near future.

19358949
The year in atherothrombosis.


18848136
Haptoglobin genotype is a major determinant of the amount of iron in the human atherosclerotic plaque.
We sought to test the hypothesis that haptoglobin (Hp) genotype is a determinant of the amount of iron in the atherosclerotic plaque. In atherosclerotic lesions, intraplaque hemorrhage releases free hemoglobin (Hb), whose incorporated iron can act as an oxidant and inflammatory stimulus. These effects are antagonized by Hp, which binds free Hb and facilitates its clearance from the plaque. The Hp gene has 2 alleles (1 and 2), giving rise to 3 genotypes: Hp 1-1, Hp 2-1, and Hp 2-2. We previously hypothesized that Hp 2-2 individuals with diabetes mellitus (DM) have impaired clearance of Hb and its iron cargo from the plaque. We identified the presence or absence of Perl's iron stain in 189 plaques obtained from 37 decedents at autopsy. Among DM, the prevalence of Perl's iron stain was increased in Hp 2-2 compared with that seen in Hp 1-1 or 2-1 (46.2% vs. 11.8%). After accounting for the within-decedent correlation of plaques, the prevalence ratio of Perl's iron stain associated with Hp 2-2 was 3.97 (95% confidence interval: 1.38 to 11.5; p = 0.025). In non-DM plaques, there was a nonsignificant trend towards a higher prevalence of iron staining in Hp 2-2 compared with that in Hp 1-1 or 2-1 (26.8% vs. 11.1%; prevalence ratio =2.40 [95% confidence interval: 0.81 to 7.09]; p = 0.114). These data support an impaired clearance of Hb from plaques in Hp 2-2 individuals, particularly in DM. The higher prevalence of plaque iron in Hp 2-2 DM individuals may contribute to the increased incidence of atherothrombotic events in these patients.

18760134
Bolus-only versus bolus + infusion of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors during percutaneous coronary intervention.
The present study was done to analyze if glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (GPI) bolus-only will reduce vascular/bleeding complications and cost with similar major adverse cardiac events (MACE) when compared with GPI bolus + infusion. Evidence-based therapy of GPI inhibitors during percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) incorporates intravenous bolus followed by 12 to 18 hours of infusion. However, GPI bolus + infusion may increase vascular/bleeding complications and may not reduce MACE when compared with GPI bolus-only. From January 1, 2003, to December 31, 2004, 2,629 consecutive patients received GPI during PCI at a single center. Of these, 1,064 patients received GPI bolus + infusion in 2003 and were compared with 1,565 patients that received GPI bolus-only in 2004. Baseline characteristics were similar in both groups. Patients receiving GPI bolus-only had reduced vascular/bleeding complications when compared with bolus + infusion (4.9% vs 7%, P < .05, odds ratio 0.62, 95% confidence interval 0.45-0.89). Furthermore, ischemic complications were similar in both groups, including periprocedural creatine kinase-MB enzyme release (12.8% vs 15.3%, P = NS), MACE at 30 days (3.2% vs 3%, P = NS), and death and myocardial infarction at 1 year (7.1% vs 7.8%, P = NS). In addition, GPI bolus-only reduced cost in US dollars ($323 vs $706, P < .001) and increased ambulatory PCI (13.1% vs 3.2%, P < .01), with reduced length of stay (1.1 vs 1.6 days, P < .01), when compared with GPI bolus + infusion. Glycoprotein inhibitor bolus-only reduces vascular/bleeding complications with similar MACE and reduced cost when compared with GPI bolus + infusion. In addition, GPI bolus-only improved ambulatory PCI and reduced length of stay. These results are consistent with a safer and cost-effective strategy for bolus-only when GPI therapy is considered during PCI.

18308164
The year in atherothrombosis.


17938815
Antithrombotic effects of factor Xa inhibition with DU-176b: Phase-I study of an oral, direct factor Xa inhibitor using an ex-vivo flow chamber.
Direct and specific inhibition of factor Xa is an emerging therapeutic strategy for atherothrombotic disease. Parenteral factor Xa inhibitors promise efficacy comparable to standard therapies, which could be extended to ambulatory patients with oral agents. We evaluated the antithrombotic effect of the oral, direct factor Xa inhibitor DU-176b in a phase-I study. Healthy subjects (n = 12) received a single, 60 mg dose of DU-176b. Antithrombotic effects were assessed by comparing ex-vivo thrombus formation at 1.5, 5, and 12 hours post-dose versus baseline, along with factor Xa activity, thrombin generation and clotting parameters. Under venous flow after 1.5 and 5 hours, the thrombus was 28% and 21% smaller versus baseline, respectively (p < 0.05). Under arterial condition, the reduction was 26% and 17% (p < 0.05). Thrombin generation decreased by 28% at 1.5 hours and 10% at 5 hours. Changes in PT and INR correlated well with plasma drug concentrations (R2 = 0.79 and 0.78). Direct and specific inhibition of factor Xa by DU-176b significantly reduced ex-vivo thrombus formation at both venous and arterial rheologies, up to 5 hours post-dose. The effects mirrored changes in clotting parameters, suggesting their potential usefulness for monitoring in a clinical setting.

17448377
The year in atherothrombosis.


17245402
Update on advances in atherothrombosis.
The study of atherothrombosis is a rapidly evolving field, and significant progress was achieved in various aspects of the disease during the past year. In the area of diagnostic imaging, MRI and multidetector CT were actively used to evaluate the characteristics of the arterial wall, including calcified and noncalcified lesions, and both in the coronary and extracoronary vascular territories. There was also extensive research into the application of imaging modalities to visualize cellular or molecular disease processes, known as molecular imaging. Considerable efforts were devoted to the identification of novel biomarkers that reflect different components of atherothrombosis, namely inflammation, thrombogenicity, oxidative stress and reparative ability, predicting the presence of early disease or the risk of clinical events. In the therapeutic arena, substantial evidence accumulated on the beneficial effects of several pharmacologic agents, most significantly statins. Finally, important advances were also made in the understanding of the roles of immunity and neovascularization in atherogenesis, including the development and progression of disease at different stages. Awareness of these recent advances and new lines of active research is fundamental for health professionals involved in the care of patients with atherothrombosis. In this Review we present an overview of data in these areas.

17249334
Atherothrombosis: role of tissue factor; link between diabetes, obesity and inflammation.
Atherothrombotic vascular disease is a complex disorder in which inflammation and coagulation play a pivotal role. Rupture of high-risk, vulnerable plaques with the subsequent tissue factor (TF) exposure is responsible for coronary thrombosis, the main cause of unstable angina, acute myocardial infarction, and sudden cardiac death. Tissue factor (TF), the key initiator of coagulation is an important modulator of inflammation. TF is widely expressed in atherosclerotic plaques and found in macrophages, smooth muscle cells, extracellular matrix and acellular lipid-rich core. TF expression can be induced by various stimulants such as C-reactive protein, oxLDL, hyperglycemia and adipocytokines. The blood-born TF encrypted on the circulating microparticles derived from vascular cells is a marker of vascular injury and a source of procoagulant activity. Another form of TF, called alternatively spliced has been recently identified in human and murine. It is soluble, circulates in plasma and initiates coagulation and thrombus propagation. Evidence indicates that elevated levels of blood-borne or circulating TF has been associated with metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular risk factors and is a candidate biomarker for future cardiovascular events. Therapeutic strategies have been developed to specifically interfere with TF activity in the treatment of cardiovascular disease.

17249333
Inflammation and neovascularization in diabetic atherosclerosis.
Diabetes mellitus, the major cardiovascular risk factor, accentuates the inflammation and neovascularization processes leading to enhanced progression of atherosclerotic complications. Inflammation in diabetes mellitus is the key initiator of atherosclerotic process, which results in acute coronary events. Atherosclerosis evolves from the endothelial cell dysfunction and succeeding entry of hemodynamically derived leukocytes by migration, activation and production of lipid gruel leading to atheromatous plaque progression and subsequent regression. Diabetic plaque progression is associated with increased neovascularization, which is a nature's compliment in the sustenance of plaque growth by its nutrient supply. Neovessels may act as conduit for lipid debridment and alternative channel for inflammatory process. In addition, neovascularization induces intra-plaque hemorrhage due to the fragility of the neovessels and associated inflammation, resulting in plaque instability. The intra-plaque hemorrhage is a detrimental base, which begets the progress of atheroma by inducing oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction. Intra-plaque hemorrhage is increased in diabetes with an associated increase in hemoglobin-haptoglobin complex (Hb-Hp2-2), which further induces oxidative stress and endothelial cell dysfunction. We conclude that inflammation and neovascularization of the plaque may act as major mechanism augmenting plaque instability in diabetes mellitus.

