21555944
Educational needs about cancer family history and genetic counseling for cancer risk among frontline healthcare clinicians in New York city.
PURPOSE:: This study investigated the educational needs of frontline healthcare clinicians about cancer family history and genetic counseling for cancer risk. METHODS:: We conducted a voluntary, anonymous survey among (1) general medicine clinicians, (2) obstetrics/gynecology clinicians, and (3) nurse practitioners at Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York City. RESULTS:: A total of 143 clinicians completed the survey (response rate 81%). The majority of clinicians (77.5%) reported regularly completing family histories on cancer risk for their patients, but only 1.7% considered themselves "experts" in interpreting risk to make prevention, screening, and treatment recommendations. Numerous barriers to cancer family history collection were noted. More than half (55.8%) reported referring patients to genetic counseling, although only 14.3% reported confidence in their ability to make appropriate referrals. The majority reported that they would apply genetic counseling for cancer risk in their practice if they had the skills (84.9%). There was some variability found regarding specialty. CONCLUSION:: Despite widespread use of family histories for cancer risk, barriers remain to appropriate cancer risk management among frontline healthcare clinicians. Development of educational training programs to assist clinicians with collection of cancer family history information, interpretation, and appropriate referral along with teaching direct application of a modified form of genetic counseling for low-medium risk patients and referral of patients at genetic risk is warranted.

20151317
Interest and beliefs about BRCA genetic counseling among at-risk Latinas in New York City.
Latinas are less likely to use genetic services (counseling and testing) for hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer risk compared to other ethnic groups. Meanwhile, little is known about barriers to genetic counseling among Latinas at increased risk of inherited breast cancer. A two-phase pilot study was conducted to examine interest, barriers and beliefs about BRCA genetic counseling among at-risk Latinas in New York City and explore the potential for developing a culturally-tailored narrative educational tool for use in future studies. Phase 1 included quantitative telephone interviews (N = 15) with bilingual participants with a personal diagnosis at a young age and/or family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer. Quantitative results informed development of a narrative prototype educational presentation viewed by a subset of participants (N = 10) in Phase 2 focus groups. Despite barriers, including lack of awareness/knowledge, concerns related to learning cancer risks of family members, and concerns about cost/health insurance, participants reported positive attitudes, beliefs and interest in learning about BRCA genetic counseling. Further, significant increases in knowledge were demonstrated from pre-post presentation (p = 0.04). There is an unmet need to educate at-risk Latinas about BRCA genetic counseling. Culturally-tailored educational materials including narratives may increase knowledge about BRCA genetic counseling among this underserved group. The effectiveness of these approaches should be tested in future research with larger samples.

19090507
The influence of acculturation and breast cancer-specific distress on perceived barriers to genetic testing for breast cancer among women of African descent.
Rising health disparities are increasingly evident in relation to use of genetic services (including genetic counseling and testing) for breast cancer risk, with women of African descent less likely to use genetic services compared with Whites. Meanwhile, little is known regarding potential within-group acculturation and psychological differences underlying perceived barriers to genetic testing among women of African descent. Hypothesized contributions of acculturation factors and breast cancer-specific distress to perceived barriers to genetic testing were examined with a statistical analysis of baseline data from 146 women of African descent (56% US born and 44% foreign born) meeting genetic breast cancer risk criteria and participating in a larger longitudinal study that included the opportunity for free genetic counseling and testing. Perceived barriers assessed included: (1) anticipation of negative emotional reactions, (2) stigma, (3) confidentiality concerns, (4) family-related worry, and (5) family-related guilt associated with genetic testing. In multivariate analyses, being foreign born was a significant predictor of anticipated negative emotional reactions about genetic testing (beta=0.26; SE=0.11; p=0.01). Breast cancer-specific distress scores (avoidance symptoms) were positively related to anticipated negative emotional reactions (beta=0.02; SE=0.005; p=<0.0001), confidentiality concerns (beta=0.02; SE=0.01; p=0.02), and family-related guilt (beta=0.02; SE=0.01; p=0.0009) associated with genetic testing. Results suggest an influence of acculturation and breast cancer-specific distress on perceived barriers to genetic testing among women of African descent. The potential utility of culturally tailored genetic counseling services taking into account such influences and addressing emotional and psychological concerns of women considering genetic testing for breast cancer should be investigated.

18686019
Acculturation and familiarity with, attitudes towards and beliefs about genetic testing for cancer risk within Latinas in East Harlem, New York City.
Recent research underscores the need for increasing use of genetic testing for cancer risk in Latinos. This study examined the influence of acculturation on attitudes, beliefs about and familiarity with genetic testing for cancer risk in a community-based sample of Latinas in East Harlem, New York City (N = 103). Multivariate linear regression models analyzed the relationship of acculturation to: (1) familiarity (2) perceived benefits (3) perceived barriers and (4) concerns about abuses of genetic testing for cancer risk. Controlling for sociodemographic factors, results revealed that with increasing acculturation Latinas were more familiar with genetic testing (beta = 1.62, SE = 0.72, p = 0.03), more likely to cite perceived benefits (beta = 1.67, SE = 0.79, p = 0.04), and less likely to report perceived barriers related to genetic testing (beta = -2.76, SE = 1.64, p = 0.10). Study results may help inform the development of culturally-appropriate health education outreach materials and programs targeted to increase awareness, knowledge and understanding about genetic testing for cancer risk within Latinas.

18479882
Association between temporal orientation and attitudes about BRCA1/2 testing among women of African descent with family histories of breast cancer.
Previous studies have identified specific attitudes (pros and cons) about BRCA testing held by women of African descent that are associated with decisions to participate in testing. These testing attitudes may be determined, in part, by temporal orientation, or how one perceives the significance of events and the consequences of their actions in terms of past, present, and future. The current study explored the relationship between temporal orientation and pros and cons of BRCA testing among 140 women of African descent with a family history suggestive of a genetic mutation predisposing to breast cancer. Participants completed measures of temporal orientation and genetic testing attitudes. Multivariate analyses indicated that future orientation was positively associated with perceived pros of testing. Additional analyses revealed significant associations between temporal orientation and specific item subsets related to the negative and positive impact of testing on family and personal control over one's health. These results support an association between temporal orientation and attitudes about BRCA testing among women of African descent with family histories of breast cancer. Findings support exploration of temporal orientation in future research on BRCA testing decisions among women of African descent and this construct's importance in developing decision aids and tailoring genetic counseling.

17548668
Heightened risk of breast cancer following pregnancy: could lasting systemic immune alterations contribute?
The protective effect of having a first full-term pregnancy (FFTP) at a younger age on women's lifetime risk of breast cancer is well known. Less appreciated is the increased risk seen in the years immediately following pregnancy. This adverse effect is more pronounced and more prolonged in women with later age at FFTP. The mechanisms responsible for this increased risk are still poorly understood. In the present paper, we put forward the hypothesis that the marked peripheral immune changes induced by pregnancy may account for these effects. We highlight immune changes that characterize the unique immune state of pregnancy (a combination of cellular immunosuppression and enhanced inflammatory response), note the resemblance of these changes to cancer escape mechanisms, and discuss why such immune changes may be critical for the development of breast cancer following pregnancy. We further support this idea by initial findings from our own laboratory that the age at FFTP is negatively related to natural killer cell cytotoxicity many years later and propose possible models for the kinetics of the immune changes during and following pregnancy. The effect of age at FFTP on the immune function is currently understudied. Its potential relevance to the development of breast cancer stresses the need for further research.

17029702
Poor sleep the night before an experimental stressor predicts reduced NK cell mobilization and slowed recovery in healthy women.
Sleep is important for health; however, poor sleep is a growing problem in many Western societies, particularly among women. Alterations in immune function following poor sleep (defined by duration and disruption) may be linked to ill health. Not yet investigated are the possible effects on stress-induced mobilization of lymphocytes. As natural killer (NK) cells are particularly responsive to acute stress, the present study examined whether sleep period duration and percentage of time awake after sleep onset (WASO) the night before a laboratory stressor would predict reduced NK cell mobilization. Sleep was monitored by actigraphy in 39 healthy women. NK cell peripheral blood numbers were determined at baseline (post-20 min rest), 4 min into a Stroop task, immediately post-task and 30 min after task completion. Participants with high WASO had significantly less NK cell mobilization to the stressor and failed to return to baseline levels after 30 min compared to women with low WASO. No effects were found for sleep period duration. Findings raise the possibility that inadequate NK cell mobilization to, and poor recovery from acute stress may be one pathway by which sleep could impact health.

17011693
Poor sleep the night before an experimental stress task is associated with reduced cortisol reactivity in healthy women.
Sleep disruption is a growing problem that may have serious health effects. As stress-induced increases in cortisol are thought to be a key adaptive process it is important to examine how this response is affected by sleep. The current study investigated the association of four sleep parameters (objective/subjectively measured sleep quality and quantity) and subsequent salivary cortisol reactivity (maximal change from baseline) to an experimental stressor in 53 healthy women. Objective actigraphy monitoring and self-report diaries were used to assess sleep. Results revealed that individuals with lower objective sleep quality (wake percentage during sleep) had a blunted response to the experimental stressor. No associations were found between cortisol reactivity and actigraphy-derived sleep quantity, or either of the self-reported sleep variables. Results are discussed with regard to the possible adverse health effects that may result from poor sleep quality and a blunted cortisol response to stress.

16859893
Sleep, fatigue, and NK cell activity in healthy volunteers: significant relationships revealed by within subject analyses.
Poor sleep is thought to compromise health partially through its effect on immune function. Although experimental studies have shown that sleep deprivation reduces natural killer cell activity (NKCA) within individuals, cross-sectional studies of individuals in ordinary life have often failed to find such a relationship. The current study compared cross-sectional and longitudinal approaches to explore the association between sleep and NKCA. The relationship between NKCA and fatigue was also studied since individuals who are highly fatigued due to various clinical conditions often exhibit reduced NKCA. In the present study, fatigue and amount of sleep were assessed by self-report, and NKCA was assessed in peripheral blood samples collected from each of 45 healthy women at two time points approximately one month apart. Using cross-sectional analysis for each of the two sessions, sleep was related to NKCA only in the second session. Fatigue was not related to NKCA at either session. A within-subject design, however, revealed that an increase in the amount of sleep and decrease in levels of fatigue were related to an increase in NKCA. The current findings suggest that NKCA varies with amount of sleep or fatigue within an individual, and that this relationship may often be masked by large interpersonal differences in cross-sectional studies.

21540561
Ethnic, Racial and Cultural Identity and Perceived Benefits and Barriers Related to Genetic Testing for Breast Cancer among At-Risk Women of African Descent in New York City.
Background: Due to disparities in the use of genetic services, there has been growing interest in examining beliefs and attitudes related to genetic testing for breast and/or ovarian cancer risk among women of African descent. However, to date, few studies have addressed critical cultural variations among this minority group and their influence on such beliefs and attitudes. Methods: We assessed ethnic, racial and cultural identity and examined their relationships with perceived benefits and barriers related to genetic testing for cancer risk in a sample of 160 women of African descent (49% self-identified African American, 39% Black-West Indian/Caribbean, 12% Black-Other) who met genetic risk criteria and were participating in a larger longitudinal study including the opportunity for free genetic counseling and testing in New York City. All participants completed the following previously validated measures: (a) the multi-group ethnic identity measure (including ethnic search and affirmation subscales) and other-group orientation for ethnic identity, (b) centrality to assess racial identity, and (c) Africentrism to measure cultural identity. Perceived benefits and barriers related to genetic testing included: (1) pros/advantages (including family-related pros), (2) cons/disadvantages (including family-related cons, stigma and confidentiality concerns), and (3) concerns about abuses of genetic testing. Results: In multivariate analyses, several ethnic identity elements showed significant, largely positive relationships to perceived benefits about genetic testing for breast and/or ovarian cancer risk, the exception being ethnic search, which was positively associated with cons/disadvantages, in general, and family-related cons/disadvantages. Racial identity (centrality) showed a significant association with confidentiality concerns. Cultural identity (Africentrism) was not related to perceived benefits and/or barriers. Conclusions: Ethnic and racial identity may influence perceived benefits and barriers related to genetic testing for breast and/or ovarian cancer risk among at-risk women of African descent. Genetic counseling services may want to take into account these factors in the creation of culturally-appropriate services which best meet the needs of this heterogenous population.

