20881774
Development of a novel scoring tool for the identification of large ?5 cm abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Current screening recommendations for abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) target >3-cm diameter aneurysms in ever-smoking 65- to 75-year-old males. However, more than 50% of AAA ruptures occur in individuals outside this patient cohort, and only a subset of AAAs detected are large enough to warrant surgery. In this analysis, we evaluated more than 3 million screened individuals and developed a scoring tool to identify ?5-cm diameter AAAs in the entire population at risk. Between 2003 and 2008, demographics and risk factors were collected from 3.1 million people undergoing ultrasound screening for AAA by Life Line Screening, Inc. Using multivariable logistic regression analysis, we identified risk factors and developed a scoring system to predict the presence of ?5-cm diameter AAAs. Smoking had a profound influence on the risk of AAA, which increased with number of cigarettes smoked and years of smoking, and decreased following smoking cessation. Novel findings included a protective effect of exercise, normal weight, and Black/Hispanic race/ethnicity. Using these and other factors, the scoring system provided good predictive accuracy (C-statistic = 0.82), when tested against the validation subset of the study cohort. The model predicts the presence of 121,000 ?5 cm AAA in the US population (prevalence: 0.14%). Demonstrating the inadequacy of the current screening recommendations, only 35% of these aneurysms were among males aged 65 to 75 years. Based on the largest cohort of patients ever screened for AAA, we developed a screening strategy that can identify large AAAs in a broad population of individuals at risk.

19782526
Defining high-risk patients for endovascular aneurysm repair.
Endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) is commonly used as a minimally invasive technique for repairing infrarenal aortic aneurysms. There have been recent concerns that a subset of high-risk patients experience unfavorable outcomes with this intervention. To determine whether such a high-risk cohort exists and to identify the characteristics of these patients, we analyzed the outcomes of Medicare patients treated with EVAR from 2000-2006. We identified 66,943 patients who underwent EVAR from Inpatient Medicare database. The overall 30-day mortality was 1.6%. A risk model for perioperative mortality was developed by randomly selecting 44,630 patients; the other one third of the dataset was used to validate the model. The model was deemed reliable (Hosmer-Lemeshow statistics were P = .25 for the development, P = .24 for the validation model) and accurate (c = 0.735 and c = 0.731 for the development and the validation model, respectively). In our scoring system, where scores ranged between 1 and 7, the following were identified as significant baseline factors that predict mortality: renal failure with dialysis (score = 7); renal failure without dialysis (score = 3); clinically significant lower extremity ischemia (score = 5); patient age >or=85 years (score = 3), 75-84 years (score = 2), 70-74 years (score = 1); heart failure (score = 3); chronic liver disease (score = 3); female gender (score = 2); neurological disorders (score = 2); chronic pulmonary disease (score = 2); surgeon experience in EVAR <3 procedures (score = 1); and hospital annual volume in EVAR <7 procedures (score = 1). The majority of Medicare patients who were treated (96.6%, n = 64,651) had a score of 9 or less, which correlated with a mortality <5%. Only 3.4% of patients had a mortality >or=5% and 0.8% of patients (n = 509) had a score of 13 or higher, which correlated with a mortality >10%. We conclude that there is a high-risk cohort of patients that should not be treated with EVAR because of prohibitively high mortality; however, this cohort is small. Our scoring system, which is based on patient and institutional factors, provides criteria that can be easily used by clinicians to quantify perioperative risk for EVAR candidates.

20840476
Process of care events in transplantation: effects on the cost of hospitalization.
Deviations in the processes of healthcare delivery that affect patient outcomes are recognized to have an impact on the cost of hospitalization. Whether deviations that do not affect patient outcome affects cost has not been studied. We have analyzed process of care (POC) events that were reported in a large transplantation service (n = 3,012) in 2005, delineating whether or not there was a health consequence of the event and assessing the impact on hospital resource utilization. Propensity score matching was used to adjust for patient differences. The rate of POC events varied by transplanted organ: from 10.8 per 1000 patient days (kidney) to 17.3 (liver). The probability of a POC event increased with severity of illness. The majority (81.5%) of the POC events had no apparent effect on patients' health (63.6% no effect and 17.9% unknown). POC events were associated with longer length of stay (LOS) and higher costs independent of whether there was a patient health impact. Multiple events during the same hospitalization were associated with the highest impact on LOS and cost. POC events in transplantation occur frequently, more often in sicker patients and, although the majority of POC events do not harm the patient, their effect on resource utilization is significant.

