21396640
The detection of premalignant colon polyps during colonoscopy is stable throughout the workday.
BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that colonoscopic polyp detection decreases as the workday progresses. This may reflect time-dependent factors such as colonoscopist fatigue and decreased colon cleanliness, which can be addressed through adaptations in colonoscopy practice. OBJECTIVE: To test for time-of-day differences in adenomatous polyp (AP) and sessile serrated polyp (SSP) detection in a practice that uses split-dose bowel preparation and moderated daily colonoscopist procedure loads. DESIGN: Retrospective chart review. SETTING: Community-based, group gastroenterology practice. PATIENTS: This study involved 2439 patients undergoing surveillance or screening colonoscopy. INTERVENTION: Colonoscopy. MAIN OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: Detection rate of all premalignant polyps (PMPs), and of APs and SSPs, individually. RESULTS: A total of 1183 PMPs were identified in 1486 eligible patients (mean PMP/colonoscopy = 0.80; PMP detection rate = 47%). In univariate and multivariate analyses, PMP detection as well as detection of APs or SSPs individually did not vary significantly in relation to the hour of the day. In a binary comparison of morning (am) versus afternoon (pm) procedures, the total polyp detection rate was 67% and 66%, respectively. For PMPs, APs, SSPs, and hyperplastic polyps (HPs), the am and pm detection rates were 46% and 47%, 41% and 44%, 8% and 8%, and 27% and 24%, respectively. Bowel preparation quality was independent of time of day and was rated excellent or good in 86% to 87% of cases. LIMITATIONS: Retrospective, nonrandomized study. CONCLUSION: Stable PMP, AP, SSP, and HP detection rates throughout the workday occur under certain practice conditions, including the use of split-dose bowel preparation and/or moderated daily colonoscopist procedure loads.

20889067
Sedation issues in quality colonoscopy.
The subject of endoscopic sedation for colonoscopy remains controversial because of unresolved questions concerning the relative benefits, risks, and cost of service. There is also disagreement about the most appropriate sedation drug(s), delegation of responsibility for drug administration, and patient monitoring. This article examines recent trends in endoscopic sedation; the impact of sedation on the quality, safety, and patient tolerability of colonoscopy; and reviews the economic implications of current sedation practices.

20717045
Is gastroduodenal biopsy safe in patients receiving aspirin and clopidogrel?: a prospective, randomized study involving 630 biopsies.
To assess prospectively the bleeding risk attributable to gastroduodenal biopsy in subjects taking antiplatelet medications. No prospective data exist regarding the bleeding risk attributable to endoscopic biopsy in patients taking antiplatelet agents. A majority of Western endoscopists withdraw antiplatelet agents before upper endoscopy, despite expert guidelines to the contrary. We performed a prospective, single-blind, randomized study in healthy volunteers participating in a larger study regarding the effect of antiplatelet agents on gastroduodenal mucosal healing. Multiple gastroduodenal biopsies were performed during 2 esophagogastroduodenoscopy in subjects dosed with aspirin enteric-coated 81 mg once daily or clopidogrel 75 mg once daily. Data for endoscopic bleeding, clinical bleeding, blood vessel size, and depth of biopsy in histology specimens were collected. Four hundred and five antral biopsies and 225 duodenal biopsies were performed during 90 esophagogastroduodenoscopy in 45 subjects receiving aspirin or clopidogrel. Median maximum blood vessel diameter per biopsy was 31.9 ? (range: 9.2 to 133.8). About 50.8% of biopsy specimens breached the muscularis mucosa. In the clopidogrel group, no bleeding events were noted after 350 biopsies [upper confidence limit (UCL) for probability of bleeding=0.0085]. In the aspirin group, there were no clinical events (UCL=0.0106) and one minor endoscopic bleeding event (UCL=0.0169). Consistent with expert guidelines, the absolute risk attributable to gastroduodenal biopsy in adults taking antiplatelet agents seems to be low. Half of routine biopsies enter submucosa. The largest blood vessels avulsed during biopsy correspond to midsized and large arterioles and venules.

20682228
Endoscopic sedation of patients with chronic liver disease.
Endoscopic procedures are often necessary in patients with chronic liver disease. The preprocedure evaluation of such patients should include an assessment of hepatic synthetic function and identification of neuropsychiatric findings suggestive of hepatic encephalopathy. It may be possible, in some cases, to perform diagnostic esophagogastroduodenoscopy without administration of sedation; this is desirable to eliminate the risks of sedation, especially encephalopathy. Nonetheless, most patients undergoing upper and lower endoscopy require sedation. Currently, the use of propofol is preferred to benzodiazepines and opioids for endoscopic sedation of patients with advanced liver disease due to its short biologic half-life and low risk of provoking hepatic encephalopathy. In appropriately selected patients, gastroenterologist-directed propofol administration seems safe.

20678015
The changing faces of endoscopic sedation.
The practice of sedation for digestive endoscopy continues to evolve throughout the world. In many countries, there is a trend for increased utilization of sedation during routine endoscopic procedures. Sedation improves patient satisfaction with endoscopy and the willingness to comply with screening guidelines and it improves the quality of examination. Moderate sedation, using a benzodiazepine and an opioid, remains the standard method of sedation in most areas of the world, although propofol, a short-acting hypnotic agent, is being used increasingly in some countries. Controversy regarding the feasibility of endoscopist-directed propofol administration continues, in spite of overwhelming evidence supporting this practice. In the USA, recent revisions in policy by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services may threaten the practice of endoscopist-directed propofol administration. In this article, future trends in sedation practice, including fospropofol and computer-assisted personalized sedation, are discussed.

20579994
Split dosing of bowel preparations for colonoscopy: an analysis of its efficacy, safety, and tolerability.


19092792
Nurse-administered propofol sedation for upper endoscopic ultrasonography: not yet ready for prime time.
In nurse-administered propofol sedation (NAPS), a nurse working under the supervision of an endoscopist is delegated responsibility for administration of propofol to a patient and monitoring their sedation during endoscopy. Nursing personnel and endoscopists involved in NAPS receive specialized training, and more than 400,000 reported procedures (mostly esophagogastroduodenoscopies and colonoscopies) have used NAPS. The safety record of NAPS is comparable if not superior to that of standard sedation using an opioid and a benzodiazepine. A study by Fatima et al. attempts to expand the breadth of NAPS applications by testing the safety of the procedure in endoscopic ultrasonographies. This commentary discusses the results reported by Fatima et al., and urges clinicians to interpret this study's findings with caution. Further evidence that NAPS can be implemented for endoscopic ultrasonography in settings other than major hospitals with a full complement of services is necessary before its use can be recommended to community-based practices.

18957928
Key opinion leader interview. Fospropofol disodium: new perspectives on endoscopic procedures.


18922417
Human patient simulation and its role in endoscopic sedation training.
Patient simulation is now considered to be a valid method for the education and evaluation of providers of sedation. Using full-scale human simulators to provide a realistic setting, participants can acquire skills for patient monitoring, administration of sedation medications, and the recognition and management of critical events. Although obstacles to its implementation exist, it appears likely that simulation training will become an integral part of training for providers of procedural sedation.

18922405
Patient monitoring during gastrointestinal endoscopy: why, when, and how?
Patient monitoring is intended to reduce the risk of sedation-related cardiopulmonary complications. Physiological monitoring and visual assessment by a qualified individual should be routine during endoscopic procedures. Additionally, ventilatory monitoring should be considered for high-risk patients and those receiving sedation with propofol.

18224442
Primary prevention of adverse gastroduodenal effects from short-term use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs by omeprazole 20 mg in healthy subjects: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
The effectiveness of low-dose omeprazole as primary prevention of gastrointestinal adverse events due to episodic use of non-selective NSAIDs was evaluated. Healthy adults aged 50-75 who did not take chronic NSAIDs were randomized to a 6.5-day treatment of naproxen 500 mg twice daily plus omeprazole 20 mg daily or naproxen 500 mg twice daily plus placebo. Seventy subjects were enrolled (mean age 58.6 years, proportion >60 = 41.4%). Subjects receiving naproxen plus omeprazole developed fewer gastroduodenal ulcers compared to subjects receiving naproxen plus placebo (11.8% vs. 46.9%, P = 0.002). Likewise, naproxen plus omeprazole was associated with a decreased risk of ulceration and/or >5 erosions (38.2% vs. 81.3%, P < or = 0.001), and a smaller change in dyspepsia score. Considering their relatively low cost, ready availability, and favorable safety profile, low-dose PPI co-prescription in healthy adults requiring short-term therapy with non-selective NSAIDs may be reasonable.

17681185
AGA Institute review of endoscopic sedation.


17397402
Propofol use under the direction of trained gastroenterologists: an analysis of the medicolegal implications.


