21184507
An Endothelial Cell Niche Induces Hepatic Specification Through Dual Repression of Wnt and Notch Signaling.
Complex cross-talk between endoderm and the microenvironment is an absolute requirement to orchestrate hepatic specification and expansion. In the mouse, the septum transversum and cardiac mesoderm, through secreted BMPs and FGFs, respectively, instruct the adjacent ventral endoderm to become hepatic endoderm. Consecutively, endothelial cells promote expansion of the specified hepatic endoderm. Using a mouse reporter embryonic stem (ES) cell line in which hCD4 and hCD25 were targeted to the Foxa2 and Foxa3 loci, we reconstituted an in vitro culture system in which committed endoderm cells co-expressing hCD4-Foxa2 and hCD25-Foxa3 were isolated, and co-cultured with endothelial cells in the presence of BMP4 and bFGF. In this culture setting, we provide mechanistic evidence that endothelial cells function not only to promote hepatic endoderm expansion, but are also required at an earlier step for hepatic specification, at least in part through regulation of the Wnt and Notch pathways. Activation of Wnt and Notch by chemical or genetic approaches increases endoderm cell numbers but inhibits hepatic specification, and conversely, chemical inhibition of both pathways enhances hepatic specification and reduces proliferation. Using identical co-culture conditions, we defined a similar dependence of endoderm harvested from embryos on endothelial cells to support their growth and hepatic specification. Our findings (1) confirm a conserved role of Wnt repression for mouse hepatic specification, (2) uncover a novel role for Notch repression in the hepatic fate decision, and (3) demonstrate that repression of Wnt and Notch signaling in hepatic endoderm is controlled by the endothelial cell niche.

19761992
In vivo detection of embryonic stem cell-derived cardiovascular progenitor cells using Cy3-labeled Gadofluorine M in murine myocardium.
The aim of the current study is to test the ability to label and detect murine embryonic stem cell-derived cardiovascular progenitor cells (ES-CPC) with cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) using the novel contrast agent Gadofluorine M-Cy3 (GdFM-Cy3). Cell therapy shows great promise for the treatment of cardiovascular disease. An important limitation to previous clinical studies is the inability to accurately identify transplanted cells. GdFM-Cy3 is a lipophilic paramagnetic contrast agent that contains a perfluorinated side chain and an amphiphilic character that allows for micelle formation in an aqueous solution. Previous studies reported that it is easily taken up and stored within the cytosol of mesenchymal stem cells, thereby allowing for paramagnetic cell labeling. Investigators in our laboratory have recently developed techniques for the robust generation of ES-CPC. We reasoned that GdFM-Cy3 would be a promising agent for the in vivo detection of these cells after cardiac cell transplantation. ES-CPC were labeled with GdFM-Cy3 by incubation. In vitro studies were performed to assess the impact of GdFM-Cy3 on cell function and survival. A total of 500,000 GdFM-Cy3-labeled ES-CPC or control ES-CPC were injected into the myocardium of mice with and without myocardial infarction. Mice were imaged (9.4-T) before and over a 2-week time interval after stem cell transplantation. Mice were then euthanized, and their hearts were sectioned for fluorescence microscopy. In vitro studies demonstrated that GdFM-Cy3 was easily transfectable, nontoxic, stayed within cells after labeling, and could be visualized using CMR and fluorescence microscopy. In vivo studies confirmed the efficacy of the agent for the detection of cells transplanted into the hearts of mice after myocardial infarction. A correspondence between CMR and histology was observed. The results of the current study suggest that it is possible to identify and potentially track GdFM-Cy3-labeled ES-CPC in murine infarct models via CMR.

18799543
Numb mediates the interaction between Wnt and Notch to modulate primitive erythropoietic specification from the hemangioblast.
During embryonic development, the establishment of the primitive erythroid lineage in the yolk sac is a temporally and spatially restricted program that defines the onset of hematopoiesis. In this report, we have used the embryonic stem cell differentiation system to investigate the regulation of primitive erythroid development at the level of the hemangioblast. We show that the combination of Wnt signaling with inhibition of the Notch pathway is required for the development of this lineage. Inhibition of Notch signaling at this stage appears to be mediated by the transient expression of Numb in the hemangioblast-derived blast cell colonies. Activation of the Notch pathway was found to inhibit primitive erythropoiesis efficiently through the upregulation of inhibitors of the Wnt pathway. Together, these findings demonstrate that specification of the primitive erythroid lineage is controlled, in part, by the coordinated interaction of the Wnt and Notch pathways, and position Numb as a key mediator of this process.

18432194
Human cardiovascular progenitor cells develop from a KDR+ embryonic-stem-cell-derived population.
The functional heart is comprised of distinct mesoderm-derived lineages including cardiomyocytes, endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle cells. Studies in the mouse embryo and the mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation model have provided evidence indicating that these three lineages develop from a common Flk-1(+) (kinase insert domain protein receptor, also known as Kdr) cardiovascular progenitor that represents one of the earliest stages in mesoderm specification to the cardiovascular lineages. To determine whether a comparable progenitor is present during human cardiogenesis, we analysed the development of the cardiovascular lineages in human embryonic stem cell differentiation cultures. Here we show that after induction with combinations of activin A, bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF, also known as FGF2), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF, also known as VEGFA) and dickkopf homolog 1 (DKK1) in serum-free media, human embryonic-stem-cell-derived embryoid bodies generate a KDR(low)/C-KIT(CD117)(neg) population that displays cardiac, endothelial and vascular smooth muscle potential in vitro and, after transplantation, in vivo. When plated in monolayer cultures, these KDR(low)/C-KIT(neg) cells differentiate to generate populations consisting of greater than 50% contracting cardiomyocytes. Populations derived from the KDR(low)/C-KIT(neg) fraction give rise to colonies that contain all three lineages when plated in methylcellulose cultures. Results from limiting dilution studies and cell-mixing experiments support the interpretation that these colonies are clones, indicating that they develop from a cardiovascular colony-forming cell. Together, these findings identify a human cardiovascular progenitor that defines one of the earliest stages of human cardiac development.

