18533395
Ultrasound detection of nonpalpable mammographically occult malignancy.
To evaluate the prevalence of occult malignancy with screening breast ultrasound. All ultrasound-guided core needle breast biopsies performed between January 1, 1999, and June 30, 2001, were retrospectively reviewed. Lesions were identified during screening breast ultrasound in high-risk women with no mammographic or palpable abnormality in either breast, a unilateral mammographic or palpable abnormality in the contralateral breast, or a unilateral mammographic or palpable abnormality in a different quadrant of the same breast. All ultrasound-detected lesions were histologically verified. Six hundred and fifty-two women with a mean age of 49 years underwent 698 biopsies during the study period. Three hundred and forty-nine of these lesions were detected at screening breast ultrasound. Out of 349, 11 (3.2%) had a mammographically and clinically occult malignancy. Nine cancers were found in women with no mammographic or palpable abnormality. Two cancers were found in the same breast as the mammographic or palpable abnormality. None were found in the breast contralateral to a palpable or mammographic abnormality. Screening breast ultrasound of high-risk women has a similar detection rate for occult carcinoma as screening mammography, but has a low positive predictive value in cases where biopsy is performed.

18259746
Ossifying chondroid lipoma.
Chondroid lipoma is a rare variant of lipoma that pathologically can mimic liposarcoma or possibly other sarcomas. Variants of lipoma, including chondroid lipoma, may demonstrate radiological evidence of fat within the tumor, but often display heterogeneous features on imaging studies, making a clinical diagnosis difficult. A large collective experience with the imaging characteristics of chondroid lipoma is lacking due to the rarity of this tumor. We present a case of chondroid lipoma of the upper thigh in a 37-year-old woman who had regions of metaplastic bone formation within the tumor. Radiologically, the tumor presented as a large soft tissue mass with calcification and ossification. Although metaplastic bone formation in conventional lipoma is well described, it has been rarely reported to occur in chondroid lipoma and has not been pathologically documented or illustrated. The imaging findings and histopathology of this unusual tumor are presented, along with a review of the literature.

17437100
Giant cell tumor complicating Paget disease of long bone.
Giant cell tumor (GCT) is a rare complication of Paget disease of bone. It usually occurs in the skull or pelvic bones of patients with long-standing polyostotic disease. This report describes a 62-year-old patient who presented with monostotic Paget disease of the distal femur complicated by GCT. He had a 2-year history of discomfort and pain in his left knee. Conventional plain films and MRI demonstrated the characteristic bone changes of Paget disease and an associated lytic lesion involving the epiphyseal and metaphyseal regions of the distal femur. A diagnostic curettage showed the characteristic histopathologic features of Paget disease and GCT. There was no evidence of malignancy. The clinicopathologic features of this rare lesion are described and correlated with a review of the literature.

18769011
Unusual presentation of sarcoidosis of the breast.
We report a case of sarcoidosis with an unusual radiological appearance. The patient was a 41-year-old asymptomatic woman who presented for a baseline screening mammogram, which revealed an asymmetric, slightly increased density in the upper outer quadrant of her left breast. Ultrasonography failed to demonstrate any mass. Her past medical history was remarkable for sarcoidosis. Stereotactic core biopsy revealed sarcoidosis diffusely infiltrating the breast parenchyma.

