21596780
Structures of apo IRF-3 and IRF-7 DNA binding domains: effect of loop L1 on DNA binding.
Interferon regulatory factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 are transcription factors essential in the activation of interferon-? (IFN-?) gene in response to viral infections. Although, both proteins recognize the same consensus IRF binding site AANNGAAA, they have distinct DNA binding preferences for sites in vivo. The X-ray structures of IRF-3 and IRF-7 DNA binding domains (DBDs) bound to IFN-? promoter elements revealed flexibility in the loops (L1-L3) and the residues that make contacts with the target sequence. To characterize the conformational changes that occur on DNA binding and how they differ between IRF family members, we have solved the X-ray structures of IRF-3 and IRF-7 DBDs in the absence of DNA. We found that loop L1, carrying the conserved histidine that interacts with the DNA minor groove, is disordered in apo IRF-3 but is ordered in apo IRF-7. This is reflected in differences in DNA binding affinities when the conserved histidine in loop L1 is mutated to alanine in the two proteins. The stability of loop L1 in IRF-7 derives from a unique combination of hydrophobic residues that pack against the protein core. Together, our data show that differences in flexibility of loop L1 are an important determinant of differential IRF-DNA binding.

21354175
Role of human DNA polymerase ? in extension opposite from a cis-syn thymine dimer.
Exposure of DNA to UV radiation causes covalent linkages between adjacent pyrimidines. The most common lesion found in DNA from these UV-induced linkages is the cis-syn cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer. Human DNA polymerase ? (Pol?), a member of the Y-family of DNA polymerases, is unable to insert nucleotides opposite the 3'T of a cis-syn T-T dimer, but it can efficiently extend from a nucleotide inserted opposite the 3'T of the dimer by another DNA polymerase. We present here the structure of human Pol? in the act of inserting a nucleotide opposite the 5'T of the cis-syn T-T dimer. The structure reveals a constrained active-site cleft that is unable to accommodate the 3'T of a cis-syn T-T dimer but is remarkably well adapted to accommodate the 5'T via Watson-Crick base pairing, in accord with a proposed role for Pol? in the extension reaction opposite from cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers in vivo.

21167175
DNA synthesis across an abasic lesion by yeast REV1 DNA polymerase.
Abasic (apurinic/apyrimidinic) sites are among the most abundant DNA lesions in humans, and they present a strong block to replication. They are also highly mutagenic because when replicative DNA polymerases manage to insert a nucleotide opposite the lesion, they prefer to insert an A. Rev1, a member of Y-family DNA polymerases, does not obey the A-rule. This enzyme inserts a C opposite an abasic lesion with much greater catalytic efficiency than an A, G, or T. We present here the structure of yeast Rev1 in ternary complex with DNA containing an abasic lesion and with dCTP as the incoming nucleotide. The structure reveals a mechanism of synthesis across an abasic lesion that differs from that in other polymerases. The lesion is driven to an extrahelical position, and the incorporation of a C is mediated by an arginine (Arg324) that is conserved in all known orthologs of Rev1, including humans. The hydrophobic cavity that normally accommodates the unmodified G is instead filled with water molecules. Since Gs are especially prone to depurination through a spontaneous hydrolysis of the glycosidic bond, the ability of Rev1 to stabilize an abasic lesion in its active site and employ a surrogate arginine to incorporate a C provides a unique means for the "error-free" bypass of this noninstructional lesion.

21070945
Structural basis for error-free replication of oxidatively damaged DNA by yeast DNA polymerase ?.
7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) adducts are formed frequently by the attack of oxygen-free radicals on DNA. They are among the most mutagenic lesions in cells because of their dual coding potential, where, in addition to normal base-pairing of 8-oxoG(anti) with dCTP, 8-oxoG in the syn conformation can base pair with dATP, causing G to T transversions. We provide here for the first time a structural basis for the error-free replication of 8-oxoG lesions by yeast DNA polymerase ? (Pol?). We show that the open active site cleft of Pol? can accommodate an 8-oxoG lesion in the anti conformation with only minimal changes to the polymerase and the bound DNA: at both the insertion and post-insertion steps of lesion bypass. Importantly, the active site geometry remains the same as in the undamaged complex and provides a basis for the ability of Pol? to prevent the mutagenic replication of 8-oxoG lesions in cells.

20833632
Asymmetric DNA recognition by the OkrAI endonuclease, an isoschizomer of BamHI.
Restriction enzymes share little or no sequence homology with the exception of isoschizomers, or enzymes that recognize and cleave the same DNA sequence. We present here the structure of a BamHI isoschizomer, OkrAI, bound to the same DNA sequence (TATGGATCCATA) as that cocrystallized with BamHI. We show that OkrAI is a more minimal version of BamHI, lacking not only the N- and C-terminal helices but also an internal 3(10) helix and containing ?-strands that are shorter than those in BamHI. Despite these structural differences, OkrAI recognizes the DNA in a remarkably similar manner to BamHI, including asymmetric contacts via C-terminal 'arms' that appear to 'compete' for the minor groove. However, the arms are shorter than in BamHI. We observe similar DNA-binding affinities between OkrAI and BamHI but OkrAI has higher star activity (at 37°C) compared to BamHI. Together, the OkrAI and BamHI structures offer a rare opportunity to compare two restriction enzymes that work on exactly the same DNA substrate.

20577207
Structural basis for the suppression of skin cancers by DNA polymerase eta.
DNA polymerase eta (Poleta) is unique among eukaryotic polymerases in its proficient ability for error-free replication through ultraviolet-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers, and inactivation of Poleta (also known as POLH) in humans causes the variant form of xeroderma pigmentosum (XPV). We present the crystal structures of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Poleta (also known as RAD30) in ternary complex with a cis-syn thymine-thymine (T-T) dimer and with undamaged DNA. The structures reveal that the ability of Poleta to replicate efficiently through the ultraviolet-induced lesion derives from a simple and yet elegant mechanism, wherein the two Ts of the T-T dimer are accommodated in an active site cleft that is much more open than in other polymerases. We also show by structural, biochemical and genetic analysis that the two Ts are maintained in a stable configuration in the active site via interactions with Gln 55, Arg 73 and Met 74. Together, these features define the basis for Poleta's action on ultraviolet-damaged DNA that is crucial in suppressing the mutagenic and carcinogenic consequences of sun exposure, thereby reducing the incidence of skin cancers in humans.

20406818
Negative role of RIG-I serine 8 phosphorylation in the regulation of interferon-beta production.
RIG-I (retinoic acid-inducible gene I) and TRIM25 (tripartite motif protein 25) have emerged as key regulatory factors to induce interferon (IFN)-mediated innate immune responses to limit viral replication. Upon recognition of viral RNA, TRIM25 E3 ligase binds the first caspase recruitment domain (CARD) of RIG-I and subsequently induces lysine 172 ubiquitination of the second CARD of RIG-I, which is essential for the interaction with downstream MAVS/IPS-1/CARDIF/VISA and, thereby, IFN-beta mRNA production. Although ubiquitination has emerged as a major factor involved in RIG-I activation, the potential contribution of other post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation, to the regulation of RIG-I activity has not been addressed. Here, we report the identification of serine 8 phosphorylation at the first CARD of RIG-I as a negative regulatory mechanism of RIG-I-mediated IFN-beta production. Immunoblot analysis with a phosphospecific antibody showed that RIG-I serine 8 phosphorylation steady-state levels were decreased upon stimulation of cells with IFN-beta or virus infection. Substitution of serine 8 in the CARD RIG-I functional domain with phosphomimetic aspartate or glutamate results in decreased TRIM25 binding, RIG-I ubiquitination, MAVS binding, and downstream signaling. Finally, sequence comparison reveals that only primate species carry serine 8, whereas other animal species carry an asparagine, indicating that serine 8 phosphorylation may represent a primate-specific regulation of RIG-I activation. Collectively, these data suggest that the phosphorylation of RIG-I serine 8 operates as a negative switch of RIG-I activation by suppressing TRIM25 interaction, further underscoring the importance of RIG-I and TRIM25 connection in type I IFN signal transduction.

19818796
Structural insights into yeast DNA polymerase delta by small angle X-ray scattering.
DNA polymerase delta (Poldelta) is a multisubunit polymerase that plays an indispensable role in replication from yeast to humans. Poldelta from Saccharomyces cerevisiae is composed of three subunits: Pol3, Pol31, and Pol32. Despite the elucidation of the structures and models of the individual subunits (or portions, thereof), the nature of their assembly remains unclear. We present here a small-angle X-ray scattering analysis of a yeast Poldelta complex (Poldelta(T)) composed of Pol3, Pol31, and Pol32N (amino acids 1-103 of Pol32). From the small angle X-ray scattering global parameters and reconstructed envelopes, we show that Poldelta(T) adopts an elongated conformation with a radius of gyration (R(g)) of approximately 52 A and a maximal dimension of approximately 190 A. We also propose an orientation for the accessory Pol31-Pol32N subunits relative to the Pol3 catalytic core that best agrees with the experimental scattering profile. The analysis also points to significant conformational variability that may allow Poldelta to better coordinate its action with other proteins at the replication fork.

19718023
Structural basis of high-fidelity DNA synthesis by yeast DNA polymerase delta.
DNA polymerase delta (Pol delta) is a high-fidelity polymerase that has a central role in replication from yeast to humans. We present the crystal structure of the catalytic subunit of yeast Pol delta in ternary complex with a template primer and an incoming nucleotide. The structure, determined at 2.0-A resolution, catches the enzyme in the act of replication, revealing how the polymerase and exonuclease domains are juxtaposed relative to each other and how a correct nucleotide is selected and incorporated. The structure also reveals the 'sensing' interactions near the primer terminus, which signal a switch from the polymerizing to the editing mode. Taken together, the structure provides a chemical basis for the bulk of DNA synthesis in eukaryotic cells and a framework for understanding the effects of cancer-causing mutations in Pol delta.

19604477
Replication across template T/U by human DNA polymerase-iota.
Human DNA polymerase-iota (Poliota) incorporates correct nucleotides opposite template purines with a much higher efficiency and fidelity than opposite template pyrimidines. In fact, the fidelity opposite template T is so poor that Poliota inserts an incorrect dGTP approximately 10 times better than it inserts the correct dATP. We determine here how a template T/U is accommodated in the Poliota active site and why a G is incorporated more efficiently than an A. We show that in the absence of incoming dATP or dGTP (binary complex), template T/U exists in both syn and anti conformations, but in the presence of dATP or dGTP (ternary complexes), template T/U is predominantly in the anti conformation. We also show that dATP and dGTP insert differently opposite template T/U, and that the basis of selection of dGTP over dATP is a hydrogen bond between the N2 amino group of dGTP and Gln59 of Poliota.

19492058
Structure of human DNA polymerase kappa inserting dATP opposite an 8-OxoG DNA lesion.
Oxygen-free radicals formed during normal aerobic cellular metabolism attack bases in DNA and 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) is one of the major lesions formed. It is amongst the most mutagenic lesions in cells because of its dual coding potential, wherein 8-oxoG(syn) can pair with an A in addition to normal base pairing of 8-oxoG(anti) with a C. Human DNA polymerase kappa (Polkappa) is a member of the newly discovered Y-family of DNA polymerases that possess the ability to replicate through DNA lesions. To understand the basis of Polkappa's preference for insertion of an A opposite 8-oxoG lesion, we have solved the structure of Polkappa in ternary complex with a template-primer presenting 8-oxoG in the active site and with dATP as the incoming nucleotide. We show that the Polkappa active site is well-adapted to accommodate 8-oxoG in the syn conformation. That is, the polymerase and the bound template-primer are almost identical in their conformations to that in the ternary complex with undamaged DNA. There is no steric hindrance to accommodating 8-oxoG in the syn conformation for Hoogsteen base-paring with incoming dATP. The structure we present here is the first for a eukaryotic translesion synthesis (TLS) DNA polymerase with an 8-oxoG:A base pair in the active site. The structure shows why Polkappa is more efficient at inserting an A opposite the 8-oxoG lesion than a C. The structure also provides a basis for why Polkappa is more efficient at inserting an A opposite the lesion than other Y-family DNA polymerases.

19464298
Structure of the human Rev1-DNA-dNTP ternary complex.
Y-family DNA polymerases have proven to be remarkably diverse in their functions and in strategies for replicating through DNA lesions. The structure of yeast Rev1 ternary complex has revealed the most radical replication strategy, where the polymerase itself dictates the identity of the incoming nucleotide, as well as the identity of the templating base. We show here that many of the key elements of this highly unusual strategy are conserved between yeast and human Rev1, including the eviction of template G from the DNA helix and the pairing of incoming deoxycytidine 5'-triphosphate with a surrogate arginine residue. We also show that the catalytic core of human Rev1 is uniquely augmented by two large inserts, I1 and I2, wherein I1 extends >20 A away from the active site and may serve as a platform for protein-protein interactions specific for Rev1's role in translesion DNA synthesis in human cells, and I2 acts as a "flap" on the hydrophobic pocket accommodating template G. We suggest that these novel structural features are important for providing human Rev1 greater latitude in promoting efficient and error-free translesion DNA synthesis through the diverse array of bulky and potentially carcinogenic N(2)-deoxyguanosine DNA adducts in human cells.

19372537
Co-occupancy of two Pumilio molecules on a single hunchback NRE.
Pumilio controls a number of processes in eukaryotes, including the translational repression of hunchback (hb) mRNA in early Drosophila embryos. The Pumilio Puf domain binds to a pair of 32 nucleotide (nt) Nanos response elements (NRE1 and NRE2) within the 3' untranslated region of hb mRNA. Despite the elucidation of structures of human Pumilio Puf domain in complex with hb RNA elements, the nature of hb mRNA recognition remains unclear. In particular, the site that mediates regulation in vivo is significantly larger than the 8-10-nt RNA elements bound to single Puf molecules in crystal structures. Here we present biophysical and biochemical data that partially resolve the paradox. We show that each NRE is composed of two binding sites (Box A and Box B) and that two Puf domains can co-occupy a single NRE. The Puf domains have a higher affinity for the 3' Box B site than the 5' Box A site; binding to the intact NRE appears to be cooperative (at least in some experiments). We suggest that the 2 Pumilio:1 NRE complex is the functional regulatory unit in vivo.

19368886
DNA synthesis across an abasic lesion by human DNA polymerase iota.
Abasic sites are among the most abundant DNA lesions formed in human cells, and they present a strong block to replication. DNA polymerase iota (Poliota) is one of the few DNA Pols that does not follow the A-rule opposite an abasic site. We present here three structures of human Poliota in complex with DNAs containing an abasic lesion and dGTP, dTTP, or dATP as the incoming nucleotide. The structures reveal a mechanism of translesion synthesis across an abasic lesion that differs from that in other Pols. Both the abasic lesion and the incoming dNTPs are intrahelical and are closely apposed across a constricted active site cleft. The dNTPs partake in distinct networks of hydrogen bonds in the "void" opposite the lesion. These different patterns of hydrogen bonds, as well as stacking interactions, may underlie Poliota's small preference for insertion of dGTP over other nucleotides opposite this common lesion.

18328718
Structures of human Pumilio with noncognate RNAs reveal molecular mechanisms for binding promiscuity.
Pumilio is a founder member of the evolutionarily conserved Puf family of RNA-binding proteins that control a number of physiological processes in eukaryotes. A structure of human Pumilio (hPum) Puf domain bound to a Drosophila regulatory sequence showed that each Puf repeat recognizes a single nucleotide. Puf domains in general bind promiscuously to a large set of degenerate sequences, but the structural basis for this promiscuity has been unclear. Here, we describe the structures of hPum Puf domain complexed to two noncognate RNAs, CycB(reverse) and Puf5. In each complex, one of the nucleotides is ejected from the binding surface, in effect, acting as a "spacer." The complexes also reveal the plasticity of several Puf repeats, which recognize noncanonical nucleotides. Together, these complexes provide a molecular basis for recognition of degenerate binding sites, which significantly increases the number of mRNAs targeted for regulation by Puf proteins in vivo.

18275815
Protein-template-directed synthesis across an acrolein-derived DNA adduct by yeast Rev1 DNA polymerase.
Acrolein is generated as the end product of lipid peroxidation and is also a ubiquitous environmental pollutant. Its reaction with the N2 of guanine leads to a cyclic gamma-HOPdG adduct that presents a block to normal replication. We show here that yeast Rev1 incorporates the correct nucleotide C opposite a permanently ring-closed form of gamma-HOPdG (PdG) with nearly the same efficiency as opposite an undamaged G. The structural basis of this action lies in the eviction of the PdG adduct from the Rev1 active site, and the pairing of incoming dCTP with a "surrogate" arginine residue. We also show that yeast Polzeta can carry out the subsequent extension reaction. Together, our studies reveal how the exocyclic PdG adduct is accommodated in a DNA polymerase active site, and they show that the combined action of Rev1 and Polzeta provides for accurate and efficient synthesis through this potentially carcinogenic DNA lesion.

17560375
Structure of IRF-3 bound to the PRDIII-I regulatory element of the human interferon-beta enhancer.
Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) is a key transcription factor in the assembly of the mammalian interferon-beta (IFN-beta) enhanceosome. We present here the structure of IRF-3 DNA binding domain in complex with the complete PRDIII-I regulatory element of the human IFN-beta enhancer. We show that four IRF-3 molecules bind in tandem to, variably spaced, consensus and nonconsensus IRF sites on the composite element. The ability of IRF-3 to bind these variable sites derives in part from two nonconserved arginines (Arg78 and Arg86) that partake in alternate protein-DNA contacts. We also show that the protein-DNA contacts are highly overlapped and that all four IRF sites are required for gene activation in vivo. In addition, we show that changing the nonconsensus IRF sites to consensus sites creates a more efficient enhancer in vivo. Together, the structure and accompanying biological data provide insights into the assembly of the IFN-beta enhanceosome in mammals.

17524420
An EM view of the FokI synaptic complex by single particle analysis.
FokI is a type IIS restriction endonuclease that recognizes the 5'-GGATG-3' sequence and cleaves non-specifically at 9 and 13 base-pairs away on the top and bottom strands, respectively, to produce a 5' overhang. FokI is a bipartite endonuclease with separate recognition and cleavage domains. Because of its bipartite nature, FokI has received considerable interest in generating chimeric nucleases for use in biotechnology, and recently as possible therapeutic agents in gene therapy by initiating homologous gene recombination and repair. Here we show, using single-particle electron microscopic studies, that the FokI active complex prefers a single conformation in which the subunits are arranged in a doughnut shape complex with protein-protein and possibly protein-DNA interactions stabilizing the cleavage complex. Our electron microscopy (EM) model provides new insights into the activation mechanism of FokI and how non-specific cleavage is avoided.

17437717
BstYI bound to noncognate DNA reveals a "hemispecific" complex: implications for DNA scanning.
DNA recognition by proteins is essential for specific expression of genes in a living organism. En route to a target DNA site, a protein will often sample noncognate DNA sites through nonspecific protein-DNA interactions, resulting in a variety of conformationally different binding states. We present here the crystal structure of endonuclease BstYI bound to a noncognate DNA. Surprisingly, the structure reveals the enzyme in a "hemispecific" binding state on the pathway between nonspecific and specific recognition. A single base pair change in the DNA abolishes binding of only one monomer, with the second monomer bound specifically. We show that the enzyme binds essentially as a rigid body, and that one end of the DNA is accommodated loosely in the binding cleft while the other end is held tightly. Another intriguing feature of the structure is Ser172, which has a dual role in establishing nonspecific and specific contacts. Taken together, the structure provides a snapshot of an enzyme in a "paused" intermediate state that may be part of a more general mechanism of scanning DNA.

17317631
Human DNA polymerase kappa encircles DNA: implications for mismatch extension and lesion bypass.
Human DNA polymerase kappa (Pol kappa) is a proficient extender of mispaired primer termini on undamaged DNAs and is implicated in the extension step of lesion bypass. We present here the structure of Pol kappa catalytic core in ternary complex with DNA and an incoming nucleotide. The structure reveals encirclement of the DNA by a unique "N-clasp" at the N terminus of Pol kappa, which augments the conventional right-handed grip on the DNA by the palm, fingers, and thumb domains and the PAD and provides additional thermodynamic stability. The structure also reveals an active-site cleft that is constrained by the close apposition of the N-clasp and the fingers domain, and therefore can accommodate only a single Watson-Crick base pair. Together, DNA encirclement and other structural features help explain Pol kappa's ability to extend mismatches and to promote replication through various minor groove DNA lesions, by extending from the nucleotide incorporated opposite the lesion by another polymerase.

