21610689
AGE restriction in diabetes mellitus: a paradigm shift.
Persistently elevated oxidative stress and inflammation precede or occur during the development of type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus and precipitate devastating complications. Given the rapidly increasing incidence of diabetes mellitus and obesity in the space of a few decades, new genetic mutations are unlikely to be the cause, instead pointing to environmental initiators. A hallmark of contemporary culture is a preference for thermally processed foods, replete with pro-oxidant advanced glycation endproducts (AGEs). These molecules are appetite-increasing and, thus, efficient enhancers of overnutrition (which promotes obesity) and oxidant overload (which promotes inflammation). Studies of genetic and nongenetic animal models of diabetes mellitus suggest that suppression of host defenses, under sustained pressure from food-derived AGEs, may potentially shift homeostasis towards a higher basal level of oxidative stress, inflammation and injury of both insulin-producing and insulin-responsive cells. This sequence promotes both types of diabetes mellitus. Reducing basal oxidative stress by AGE restriction in mice, without energy or nutrient change, reinstates host defenses, alleviates inflammation, prevents diabetes mellitus, vascular and renal complications and extends normal lifespan. Studies in healthy humans and in those with diabetes mellitus show that consumption of high amounts of food-related AGEs is a determinant of insulin resistance and inflammation and that AGE restriction improves both. This Review focuses on AGEs as novel initiators of oxidative stress that precedes, rather than results from, diabetes mellitus. Therapeutic gains from AGE restriction constitute a paradigm shift.

21150875
Increased susceptibility to acute kidney injury due to endoplasmic reticulum stress in mice lacking tumor necrosis factor-? and its receptor 1.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is actively involved in acute organ injury. Since tumor necrosis factor ? (TNF?) plays a role in acute kidney injury, and induces ER stress and cell death in vitro, we examined the contribution of TNF? to acute kidney ER stress induced by tunicamycin. Contrary to expectation, tunicamycin caused much more severe kidney injury in TNF?-/- than in wild-type mice. The major site of kidney injury in TNF?-/- mice was proximal tubules, which showed extensive cell vacuolation, lipid accumulation, and apoptosis. Reconstitution of TNF?-/- mice with TNF? 24?h before tunicamycin injection reversed the susceptibility. When TNF?-receptor-deficient mice were treated with tunicamycin, severe renal injury developed in TNFR1-/- but not TNFR2-/- mice, suggesting this aspect of TNF? action was through TNF receptor-1 (TNFR1). In response to tunicamycin-induced acute ER stress, kidneys from neither TNF?-/- nor TNFR1-/- mice showed a significant increase in phosphorylated eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2? (eIF2?), a key step in ER stress regulation. Moreover, proximal tubular cells from TNFR1-/- mice did not show increased eIF2? phosphorylation in response to tunicamycin and were susceptible to ER stress-induced cell death. Finally, treatment of proximal tubule cells isolated from TNFR1-/- mice with an inhibitor of eIF2? phosphatase increased the levels of phosphorylated eIF2? and substantially reduced tunicamycin-induced cell death. Thus, disruption of TNFR1 signaling leads to dysregulation of eIF2? and increased susceptibility to acute ER stress injury in the kidney.

20497781
Advanced glycation end products in foods and a practical guide to their reduction in the diet.
Modern diets are largely heat-processed and as a result contain high levels of advanced glycation end products (AGEs). Dietary advanced glycation end products (dAGEs) are known to contribute to increased oxidant stress and inflammation, which are linked to the recent epidemics of diabetes and cardiovascular disease. This report significantly expands the available dAGE database, validates the dAGE testing methodology, compares cooking procedures and inhibitory agents on new dAGE formation, and introduces practical approaches for reducing dAGE consumption in daily life. Based on the findings, dry heat promotes new dAGE formation by >10- to 100-fold above the uncooked state across food categories. Animal-derived foods that are high in fat and protein are generally AGE-rich and prone to new AGE formation during cooking. In contrast, carbohydrate-rich foods such as vegetables, fruits, whole grains, and milk contain relatively few AGEs, even after cooking. The formation of new dAGEs during cooking was prevented by the AGE inhibitory compound aminoguanidine and significantly reduced by cooking with moist heat, using shorter cooking times, cooking at lower temperatures, and by use of acidic ingredients such as lemon juice or vinegar. The new dAGE database provides a valuable instrument for estimating dAGE intake and for guiding food choices to reduce dAGE intake.

20363923
Induction of diabetes in aged C57B6 mice results in severe nephropathy: an association with oxidative stress, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and inflammation.
Kidney aging is a slowly progressive process that is postulated to be accelerated by intervening diseases, such as diabetes, due in part to the addition of excessive stress and inflammation from the intervening disease to the underlying aging process. This hypothesis was tested by inducing diabetes with streptozotocin in 18-month-old, aging mice. After 4 months of diabetes, these mice developed severe albuminuria, elevated creatinine levels, and renal lesions including extensive apoptotic cell death, glomerulosclerosis, afferent and efferent hyalinosis, and tubulointerstitial inflammation and fibrosis. These symptoms were associated with elevated oxidative stress. The presence of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in 22-month-old diabetic kidneys resulted in up-regulation of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), which may play a role in increasing kidney lesions because CHOP-deficient proximal tubular cells were resistant to ER stress-induced cell death, and CHOP-deficient mice were protected from diabetic nephropathy. Moreover, CHOP-deficient mice did not develop albuminuria as they aged. Inflammation, another key component of progressive diabetic nephropathy, was prominent in 22-month-old diabetic kidneys. The expression of tumor-necrosis factor-alpha in 22-month-old diabetic kidneys may play a role in inflammation, ER stress, and apoptosis. Thus, diabetes may accelerate the underlying kidney aging process present in old mice.

20006791
Identifying advanced glycation end products as a major source of oxidants in aging: implications for the management and/or prevention of reduced renal function in elderly persons.
Aging is characterized by increasing inflammation and oxidant stress (OS). Reduced renal function was present in more than 20% of normal-aged individuals sampled in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) cross-sectional study of the US population. Longitudinal studies in the United States and Italy showed that renal function does not decline in some individuals, suggesting that a search for causes of the loss of renal function in some persons might be indicated and interventions to reduce this outcome should be sought. Because advanced glycation end products (AGEs) induce both inflammation and OS, accumulate with age, and primarily are excreted by the kidney, one outcome of reduced renal function in aging could be decreased AGE disposal. The build-up of AGEs with reduced renal function could contribute to inflammation, increased oxidant stress, and accumulation of AGEs in aging. In fact, results from a longitudinal study of normal aging adults in Italy showed that the most significant correlation with mortality was the level of renal function. A clear link between inflammation, OS, AGEs, and chronic disease was shown in studies of mice that showed that reduction of AGE levels by drugs or decreased intake of AGEs reduces chronic kidney disease (CKD) and cardiovascular disease of aging. The data support a role for AGEs in the development of renal lesions in aging mice and reveal that AGEs in the diet are very important contributors to renal and cardiovascular lesions. AGEs signal through two receptors, one of which is anti-inflammatory (AGER1) and the other is proinflammatory (RAGE). Overexpression of AGER1 protects against OS and acute vascular injury. The reduction of AGEs in the diet is as efficient in preventing aging-related cardiovascular and renal lesions in mice as that seen with calorie restriction. Studies in normal adults of all ages and those with CKD suggest that the findings in mice may be directly applicable to both aging and CKD. Namely, the dietary content of AGEs determines the serum levels of AGEs and inflammatory mediators and urine AGE levels in both normal subjects and CKD patients. Importantly, reduction of AGEs controls these changes in both normal subjects and CKD patients, and the phenotypic changes in AGER1 are reduced in CKD patients by decreasing the amount of AGEs consumed with the diet. These data suggest that the changes in renal function in normal aging may be subject to control and this subject deserves renewed attention.

20006785
Aging and the kidney: introduction.


19955485
AGER1 regulates endothelial cell NADPH oxidase-dependent oxidant stress via PKC-delta: implications for vascular disease.
Advanced glycated end-product receptor 1 (AGER1) protects against vascular disease promoted by oxidants, such as advanced glycated end products (AGEs), via inhibition of reactive oxygen species (ROS). However, the specific AGEs, sources, and pathways involved remain undefined. The mechanism of cellular NADPH oxidase (NOX)-dependent ROS generation by defined AGEs, N(epsilon)-carboxymethyl-lysine- and methylglyoxal (MG)-modified BSA, was assessed in AGER1 overexpressing (AGER1(+) EC) or knockdown (sh-mRNA-AGER1(+) EC) human aortic endothelial (EC) and ECV304 cells, and aortic segments from old (18 mo) C57BL6-F(2) mice, propagated on low-AGE diet (LAGE), or LAGE supplemented with MG (LAGE+MG). Wild-type EC and sh-mRNA-AGER1(+) EC, but not AGER1(+) EC, had high NOX p47(phox) and gp91(phox) activity, superoxide anions, and NF-kappaB p65 nuclear translocation in response to MG and N(epsilon)-carboxymethyl-lysine. These events involved epidermal growth factor receptor-dependent PKC-delta redox-sensitive Tyr-311 and Tyr-332 phosphorylation and were suppressed in AGER1(+) ECs and enhanced in sh-mRNA-AGER1(+) ECs. Aortic ROS, PKC-delta Tyr-311, and Tyr-332 phosphorylation, NOX expression, and nuclear p65 in older LAGE+MG mice were significantly increased above that in age-matched LAGE mice, which had higher levels of AGER1. In conclusion, circulating AGEs induce NADPH-dependent ROS generation in vascular aging in both in vitro and in vivo models. Furthermore, AGER1 provides protection against AGE-induced ROS generation via NADPH.

19946325
Role of oxidants/inflammation in declining renal function in chronic kidney disease and normal aging.
Oxidant stress (OS) and inflammation increase in normal aging and in chronic kidney disease (CKD), as observed in human and animal studies. In cross-sectional studies of the US population, these changes are associated with a decrease in renal function, which is exhibited by a significant proportion of the population. However, since many normal adults have intact renal function, and longitudinal studies show that some persons maintain normal renal function with age, the link between OS, inflammation, and renal decline is not clear. In aging mice, greater oxidant intake is associated with increased age-related CKD and mortality, which suggests that interventions that reduce OS and inflammation may be beneficial for older individuals. Both OS and inflammation can be readily lowered in normal subjects and patients with CKD stage 3-4 by a simple dietary modification that lowers intake and results in reduced serum and tissue levels of advanced glycation end products. Diabetic patients, including those with microalbuminuria, have a decreased ability to metabolize and excrete oxidants prior to observable changes in serum creatinine. Thus, OS and inflammation may occur in the diabetic kidney at an early time. We review the evidence that oxidants in the diet directly lead to increased serum levels of OS and inflammatory mediators in normal aging and in CKD. We also discuss a simple dietary intervention that helps reduce OS and inflammation, an important and achievable therapeutic goal for patients with CKD and aging individuals with reduced renal function.

19946321
Beyond phosphate binding: the effect of binder therapy on novel biomarkers may have clinical implications for the management of chronic kidney disease patients.


19820033
Protection against loss of innate defenses in adulthood by low advanced glycation end products (AGE) intake: role of the antiinflammatory AGE receptor-1.
Increased oxidant stress and inflammation (OS/infl) are linked to both aging-related diseases and advanced glycation end products (AGEs). Whereas AGE receptor-1 (AGER1) reduces OS/infl in animals, this has not been assessed in normal humans. The objectives of the study were to determine whether AGER1 correlates with AGEs and OS/infl and a reduction of dietary AGEs (dAGEs) lowers OS/infl in healthy adults and chronic kidney disease (CKD-3) patients. This study was cross-sectional with 2-yr follow-up studies of healthy adults and CKD-3 patients, a subset of which received a reduced AGE or regular diet. The study was conducted at general community and renal clinics. Participants included 325 healthy adults (18-45 and >60 yr old) and 66 CKD-3 patients. An isocaloric low-AGE (30-50% reduction) or regular diet was given to 40 healthy subjects for 4 months and to nine CKD-3 patients for 4 wk. Relationships between age, dAGEs, serum AGEs, peripheral mononuclear cell AGE-receptors, and OS/Infl before and after reduction of dAGE intake were measured. AGEs, oxidant stress, receptor for AGE, and TNFalpha were reduced in normal and CKD-3 patients after the low-AGE diet, independently of age. AGER1 levels in CKD-3 patients on the low-AGE diet resembled 18- to 45-yr-old normal subjects. Dietary, serum, and urine AGEs correlated positively with peripheral mononuclear cell AGER1 levels in healthy participants. AGER1 was suppressed in CKD-3 subjects, whereas receptor for AGE and TNFalpha were increased. Reduction of AGEs in normal diets may lower oxidant stress/inflammation and restore levels of AGER1, an antioxidant, in healthy and aging subjects and CKD-3 patients. AGE intake has implications for health outcomes and costs and warrants further testing.

19776174
Oxidative stress-induced JNK activation contributes to proinflammatory phenotype of aging diabetic mesangial cells.
Chronic inflammation and increased oxidative stress (OS) play an important role in diabetic nephropathy progression. Herein, we show that mesangial cells from streptozotocin-induced aging diabetic mice, a model of progressive diabetic nephropathy, exhibited increased OS and a proinflammatory phenotype characterized by elevated chemokines and ICAM-1 expression. This phenotypic change was consistent with the extensive inflammatory lesions present in aging diabetic kidneys and was not found in mesangial cells from old and young controls or young diabetic mice. Activation of the c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway was a likely contributor to the proinflammatory phenotype of aging diabetic mesangial cells since 1) phosphorylated JNK levels and JNK kinase activity were increased in these cells, 2) suppression of JNK significantly decreased monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) production in these cells, and 3) activation of JNK in normal mesangial cells induced inflammation. Elevated OS in aging diabetic mesangial cells may be a cause of JNK activation and inflammation, because antioxidant treatment decreased JNK phosphorylation and MCP-1 production. Additionally, decreased expression of mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 5 (MKP5) may also contribute to increased JNK and inflammation in aging diabetic mesangial cells since overexpression of MKP5 in these cells normalized phosphorylated JNK levels and reversed the proinflammatory phenotype. Moreover, knocking down of MKP5 expression in old control mesangial cells resulted in JNK activation and MCP-1 production, a phenotype seen in aging diabetic mesangial cells. Interestingly, MKP5 phosphatase activity was diminished by free radicals in vitro. Thus, OS may induce inflammation in mesangial cells by activating JNK through either a direct activation of JNK or indirectly by suppression of MKP5 activity. Proinflammatory phenotype of mesangial cells may contribute to chronic inflammatory lesions and disease progression of aging diabetic mice.

18032526
AGE-receptor-1 counteracts cellular oxidant stress induced by AGEs via negative regulation of p66shc-dependent FKHRL1 phosphorylation.
Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) promote reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation and oxidant stress (OS) in diabetes and aging-related diseases. AGE-induced OS is suppressed by AGER1, an AGE-receptor that counteracts receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mediated Shc/Ras signal activation, resulting in decreased OS. Akt, FKHRL1, and antioxidants; e.g., MnSOD, regulate OS. Serine phosphorylation of p66(shc) also promotes OS. We examined the effects of two defined AGEs N(epsilon)-carboxy-methyl-lysine (CML) and methyl-glyoxal derivatives (MG) on these cellular pathways and their functional relationship to AGER1 in human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293). Stimulation of HEK293 cells with either AGE compound increased phosphorylation of Akt and FKHRL1 by approximately threefold in a redox-dependent manner. The use of p66(shc) mutants showed that the AGE-induced effects required Ser-36 phosphorylation of p66(shc). AGE-induced phosphorylation of FKHRL1 led to a 70% downregulation of MnSOD, an effect partially blocked by a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor (LY-294002) and strongly inhibited by an antioxidant (N-acetylcysteine). These pro-oxidant responses were suppressed in AGER1 overexpressing cells and reappeared when AGER1 expression was reduced by small interfering RNA (siRNA). These studies point to a new pathway for the induction of OS by AGEs involving FKHRL1 inactivation and MnSOD suppression via Ser-36 phosphorylation of p66(shc) in human kidney cells. This represents a key mechanism by which AGER1 maintains cellular resistance against OS. Thus the decrease of AGER1 noted in aging and diabetes may further enhance OS and reduce innate antioxidant defenses.

17525257
Reduced oxidant stress and extended lifespan in mice exposed to a low glycotoxin diet: association with increased AGER1 expression.
Aging is accompanied by increased oxidative stress (OS) and accumulation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs). AGE formation in food is temperature-regulated, and ingestion of nutrients prepared with excess heat promotes AGE formation, OS, and cardiovascular disease in mice. We hypothesized that sustained exposure to the high levels of pro-oxidant AGEs in normal diets (Reg(AGE)) contributes to aging via an increased AGE load, which causes AGER1 dysregulation and depletion of anti-oxidant capacity, and that an isocaloric, but AGE-restricted (by 50%) diet (Low(AGE)), would decrease these abnormalities. C57BL6 male mice with a life-long exposure to a Low(AGE) diet had higher than baseline levels of tissue AGER1 and glutathione/oxidized glutathione and reduced plasma 8-isoprostanes and tissue RAGE and p66(shc) levels compared with mice pair-fed the regular (Reg(AGE)) diet. This was associated with a reduction in systemic AGE accumulation and amelioration of insulin resistance, albuminuria, and glomerulosclerosis. Moreover, lifespan was extended in Low(AGE) mice, compared with Reg(AGE) mice. Thus, OS-dependent metabolic and end organ dysfunction of aging may result from life-long exposure to high levels of glycoxidants that exceed AGER1 and anti-oxidant reserve capacity. A reduced AGE diet preserved these innate defenses, resulting in decreased tissue damage and a longer lifespan in mice.

