20194963
Transformation/transcription domain-associated protein (TRRAP)-mediated regulation of Wee1.
The G2 DNA damage checkpoint inhibits Cdc2 and mitotic entry through the dual regulation of Wee1 and Cdc25 by the Chk1 effector kinase. Upregulation of Chk1 by mutation or overexpression bypasses the requirement for upstream regulators or DNA damage to promote a G2 cell cycle arrest. We screened in fission yeast for mutations that rendered cells resistant to overexpressed chk1(+). We identified a mutation in tra1, which encodes one of two homologs of transformation/transcription domain-associated protein (TRRAP), an ATM/R-related pseudokinase that scaffolds several histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complexes. Inhibition of histone deacetylases reverts the resistance to overexpressed chk1(+), suggesting this phenotype is due to a HAT activity, although expression of checkpoint and cell cycle genes is not greatly affected. Cells with mutant or deleted tra1 activate Chk1 normally and are checkpoint proficient. However, these cells are semi-wee even when overexpressing chk1(+) and accumulate inactive Wee1 protein. The changed division response (Cdr) kinases Cdr1 and Cdr2 are negative regulators of Wee1, and we show that they are required for the Tra1-dependent alterations to Wee1 function. This identifies Tra1 as another component controlling the timing of entry into mitosis via Cdc2 activation.

17584602
Organ transplantation in rodents: novel applications of long-established methods.
Rodent models of solid organ transplantation have been used for many decades. Standardized operative techniques resulting in highly reproducible survival rates have been developed for several organs. This allowed scientists to investigate many clinically relevant problems, test new drugs and establish novel treatment regimens. Recently, many studies used these models to explore novel issues such as graft modification by pharmaceutical, surgical or genetic engineering methods, post-transplant regeneration, leukocyte trafficking or interactions between the innate and allo-specific arms of the immune response. The results from these studies clearly facilitate a more complex and comprehensive understanding of existing problem. The long-established methods of rodent organ transplantation, combined with the newest achievements in surgical techniques, biotechnology and imaging, will remain indispensable tools of transplantation biology.

17200718
Monocyte subsets differentially employ CCR2, CCR5, and CX3CR1 to accumulate within atherosclerotic plaques.
Monocytes participate critically in atherosclerosis. There are 2 major subsets expressing different chemokine receptor patterns: CCR2(+)CX3CR1(+)Ly-6C(hi) and CCR2(-)CX3CR1(++)Ly-6C(lo) monocytes. Both C-C motif chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) and C-X(3)-C motif chemokine receptor 1 (CX3CR1) are linked to progression of atherosclerotic plaques. Here, we analyzed mouse monocyte subsets in apoE-deficient mice and traced their differentiation and chemokine receptor usage as they accumulated within atherosclerotic plaques. Blood monocyte counts were elevated in apoE(-/-) mice and skewed toward an increased frequency of CCR2(+)Ly-6C(hi) monocytes in apoE(-/-) mice fed a high-fat diet. CCR2(+)Ly-6C(hi) monocytes efficiently accumulated in plaques, whereas CCR2(-)Ly-6C(lo) monocytes entered less frequently but were more prone to developing into plaque cells expressing the dendritic cell-associated marker CD11c, indicating that phagocyte heterogeneity in plaques is linked to distinct types of entering monocytes. CCR2(-) monocytes did not rely on CX3CR1 to enter plaques. Instead, they were partially dependent upon CCR5, which they selectively upregulated in apoE(-/-) mice. By comparison, CCR2(+)Ly-6C(hi) monocytes unexpectedly required CX3CR1 in addition to CCR2 and CCR5 to accumulate within plaques. In many other inflammatory settings, these monocytes utilize CCR2, but not CX3CR1, for trafficking. Thus, antagonizing CX3CR1 may be effective therapeutically in ameliorating CCR2(+) monocyte recruitment to plaques without impairing their CCR2-dependent responses to inflammation overall.

