18306248
The success of recruiting minorities, women, and elderly into a randomized controlled effectiveness trial.
Heart failure, a leading cause of hospitalization among elderly people, disproportionately afflicts African-American and other non-White populations. Studies of health care interventions often do not include these groups in proportion to numbers in the patient population. Our objective was to assess whether a randomized controlled effectiveness trial enrolled patients by ethnicity/race, gender, and age in proportion to those eligible. We conducted a randomized controlled trial comparing nurse management and usual care among ambulatory heart failure patients at the four hospitals in East and Central Harlem, New York. We incorporated culturally sensitive and age-appropriate strategies to enroll a demographically representative group into the trial. Recruitment proceeded in several steps: identifying patients with billing code and visit criteria, documenting systolic dysfunction, obtaining clinician permission and correct addresses, contacting patients, and enrolling eligible patients. We assessed differences by ethnicity/race and gender at successive steps in the recruitment process, and differences between enrollees and refusals regarding overall health, evaluation of medical care, and difficulty receiving care. We enrolled 406 ambulatory patients by ethnicity/race and gender in proportion to the numbers eligible to be contacted (46% African-American/Black, 33% Hispanic, and 47% female). Among patients contacted, however, those 18 through 74 years were 2.0 to 3.3 times more likely than those > or = 75 years to enroll (p < 0.001). The recruitment strategy successfully enrolled patients by ethnicity/race, gender, and age through 74 years, but not those > or = 75 years. Registries of patients who refuse to enroll in trials could provide guidance for clinical and public policy.

17577028
Lost opportunities: physicians' reasons and disparities in breast cancer treatment.
Women with breast cancer do not consistently receive adjuvant treatments that have been shown to increase survival. Acquiring an understanding of the reasons for these lost opportunities may inform strategies for quality improvement. Interviews were conducted with surgeons treating 119 women who did not receive guideline-recommended adjuvant therapy to ascertain reasons underlying treatment omission. Primary reason for underuse was categorized as not recommended, recommended but declined, or system failure (treatment recommended, not refused but did not ensue). Logistic regression identified patient characteristics, and surgeons' practice and referral patterns associated with underuse. Surgeons did not recommend adjuvant treatment for 41 (34%) of 119 women, most often because perceived risks exceeded benefits (37 of 119; 31%); unawareness of treatment benefits was rare (four of 119; 3%). Among the 78 (66%) of 119 for whom surgeons recommended treatment, 37 (31%) declined therapy; 41 (34%) system failures occurred. System failures occurred more commonly among minority than white women (73% v 54%; P < .01), and more commonly in women who were receiving Medicaid or were uninsured than those with Medicare or commercial insurance (54% v 19%; P < .01). Women treated by a surgeon who works closely with oncologists were less likely to experience a system failure (84% v 68%; P < .05). One third of underuse episodes were attributable to surgeons' perceptions that treatment was not indicated, one third because women did not accept recommendations, and one third were the result of system failures. Reasons for underuse of adjuvant breast cancer treatments appear multifactorial and this heterogeneity suggests the need for simultaneous development of different strategies to improve care.

