20386867
Identification and characterization of eight novel SMPD1 mutations causing types A and B Niemann-Pick disease.
Types A and B Niemann-Pick disease (NPD) result from the deficient activity of acid sphingomyelinase (ASM), due to mutations in the sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase 1 (SMPD1) gene. Here we report the identification, characterization and genotype/phenotype correlations of eight novel mutations in six unrelated NPD patients. These mutations included seven missense mutations: c.631T>C (p.W211R), c.757G>C (p.D253H), c.940G>A (p.V314M), c.1280A>G (p.H427R), c.1564A>G (p.N522S), c.1575G>C (p.Q525H) and c.1729A>G (p.H577R), and a novel frameshift mutation, c.1657delACCGCCT (fsT553). Each missense mutation was expressed in 293T or COS-7 cells; mutant enzymes p.W211R, p.D253H, p.H427R and p.H577R had <1% of expressed wild-type activity, whereas p.V314M, p.N522S and p.Q525H had 21.7%, 10.1% and 64% of expressed wild-type activity, respectively. The c.1564A>G mutation obliterated a known N-glycosylation site and its p.N522S mutant enzyme had ~10% of expressed wild-type activity. Western blot analysis revealed that each mutant protein was expressed at near wild-type amounts, despite their differences in residual activity. The novel seven-base deletion occurred at codon 553, leading to a premature truncation after residue 609. The expression studies predicted the clinical phenotypes of the six patients: two type A patients had genotypes with only type A alleles [c.631T>C (p.W211R), c.757G>C (p.D253H) and c.1729A>G (p.H577R)], and the other four type B disease patients had at least one neuroprotective mutant type B allele [c.940G>A (p.V314M), c.1280A>G (p.H427R), c.1564A>G (p.N522S) and c.1575G>C (p.Q525H)] that expressed >5% residual ASM activity. Thus, these new mutations provide novel genotype/phenotype correlations and further document the genetic heterogeneity in types A and B NPD.

20028884
Imaging manifestations of Niemann-Pick disease type B.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this article is to illustrate the various imaging manifestations of Niemann-Pick disease type B using various imaging techniques emphasizing cross-sectional imaging. CONCLUSION: Niemann-Pick disease type B is a multisystem disease that affects the pulmonary, cardiovascular, abdominal, and skeletal systems. Cross-sectional imaging is well suited for detecting and assessing the various manifestations of this disease, which can be highly suggestive of the diagnosis when seen in combination.

19836982
Newborn screening and early biochemical follow-up in combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria, cblC type, and utility of methionine as a secondary screening analyte.
Combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria, cobalamin C (cblC) type, is an inherited disorder of vitamin B(12) metabolism caused by mutations in MMACHC. CblC typically presents in the neonatal period with neurological deterioration, failure to thrive, cytopenias, and multisystem pathology including renal and hepatic dysfunction. Rarely, affected individuals present in adulthood with gait ataxia and cognitive decline. Treatment with hydroxocobalamin may ameliorate the clinical features of early-onset disease and prevent clinical late-onset disease. Propionic acidemia (PA), methylmalonic acidemia (MMA), and various disorders of cobalamin metabolism are characterized by elevated propionylcarnitine (C3) on newborn screening (NBS). Distinctions can be made between these disorders with secondary analyte testing. Elevated methionine is already routinely used as a NBS marker for cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency. We propose that low methionine may be useful as a secondary analyte for specific detection of cbl disorders among a larger pool of infants with elevated C3 on NBS. Retrospective analysis of dried blood spot (DBS) data in patients with molecularly confirmed cblC disease. Nine out of ten patients with confirmed cblC born in New York between 2005 and 2008 had methionine below 13.4mumol/L on NBS. Elevated C3, elevated C3:C2 ratio, and low methionine were incorporated into a simple screening algorithm that can be used to improve the specificity of newborn screening programs and provide a specific and novel method of distinguishing cblC from other disorders of propionate metabolism prior to recall for confirmatory testing. It is anticipated that this algorithm will aid in early and specific detection of cobalamin C, D, and F diseases, with no additional expense to NBS laboratories screening for organic acidemias and classical homocystinuria.

19830091
Resolution of cor pulmonale after medical management in a patient with cblC-type methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria: a case report.
We describe a 3-year-old Hispanic male with cblC-type methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria who presented to the emergency department with progressive tachypnea, vomiting, and edema secondary to pulmonary embolism and cor pulmonale. With aggressive medical management, there was complete resolution of right heart failure and pulmonary hypertension after 3 months. Pulmonary embolism is rare in the pediatric population. Children with cblC-type methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria may be at increased risk for thrombus formation and pulmonary embolism due to chronic hyperhomocystinemia, a risk factor for thrombus formation in the adult population. Aspirin therapy may be indicated in children with inborn errors of metabolism that predispose to hyperhomocystinemia.

19767224
High prevalence of structural heart disease in children with cblC-type methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria.
To characterize the frequency and nature of cardiovascular defects in patients with CblC-type methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria (cblC), an inborn error of cobalamin (vitamin B12) metabolism resulting in accumulation of methylmalonic acid and homocysteine. A retrospective observational study was conducted investigating 10 patients with cblC ranging in age from 2 weeks to 24 years (mean 4.4 years +/- 7.5 years, median 0.6 years). All patients underwent a complete 2-D echocardiogram including quantitative assessment of left ventricular systolic function. Structural heart defects were detected in 50% of patients with cblC. Heart defects included left ventricular (LV) non-compaction (3), secundum atrial septal defect (2), muscular ventricular septal defect (1), dysplastic pulmonary valve without pulmonary stenosis (1) and mitral valve prolapse with mild mitral regurgitation (1). One patient had resolved cor pulmonale and right heart failure secondary to pulmonary embolism. All patients had quantitatively normal LV systolic function. Diverse and clinically significant structural heart defects appear to be highly prevalent in cblC, perhaps due to abnormal DNA and histone methylation during embryogenesis. The specific cardiac defects detected in our cohort were variable, and studies with a larger number of patients are needed to establish which forms are most common. Routine and periodic cardiovascular evaluation may be indicated in patients with cblC.

