17621627
KLF6 allelic loss is associated with tumor recurrence and markedly decreased survival in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
The Krüppel-like transcription factor (KLF6) gene is a tumor suppressor gene (TSG) reported to be dysregulated and inactivated through loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and/or somatic mutation in a number of major human cancers. The aim of the present study was to examine KLF6 gene status and expression in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). A collection of 81 well-characterized oral and oropharyngeal HNSCC samples were analyzed for evidence of KLF6 LOH and mutation and differences in expression patterns between normal and cancerous tissues and these findings were correlated with clinicopathological variables. We also tested the effect of KLF6 inhibition in HNSCC cell lines on proliferation and p21 expression. LOH was found in approximately 30% of cases and was strongly correlated with cancer progression, tumor recurrence and decreased patient survival. Overall, median survival of patients with LOH was less than half (19 vs. 41 months, p=0.036, stratified on stage) than those without loss. Risk of death for patients with LOH was 8 times greater independent of tumor size, nodal status, tobacco smoking or treatment modality (HR 7.89, 95% CI: 1.9-32.4). Subsequent analyses revealed KLF6 mutations in only 2 of 20 samples, but altered subcellular protein localization in 64% of tumors. Targeted stable reduction of KLF6 in HNSCC cell lines increased cellular proliferation while decreasing p21 expression. Taken together, these findings suggest that KLF6 LOH represents a clinically-relevant biomarker predicting patient survival and tumor recurrence and that dysregulation of KLF6 function plays an important role in HNSCC progression.

17514651
Functional inactivation of the KLF6 tumor suppressor gene by loss of heterozygosity and increased alternative splicing in glioblastoma.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary brain tumor and possesses a high incidence of 10p loss. The KLF6 (Kruppel-like transcription factor) tumor suppressor gene on 10p15 is inactivated by loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and/or somatic mutation in a number of human cancers and forced expression of KLF6 in GBM lines inhibits their growth and transformation. In addition, increased expression of its alternatively spliced, cytoplasmic isoform KLF6-SV1 has now been shown to play a role in cancer pathogenesis. On the basis of these findings we examined the role of KLF6 and KLF6-SV1 in the development and progression of GBM. LOH analysis of 17 primary GBM patient samples using KLF6-specific microsatellite markers revealed that 88.2% (15/17) had LOH of the KLF6 locus. Interestingly, no KLF6 somatic mutations were identified. RNA analysis revealed concomitant decreases in all primary GBM tumors (n = 11) by approximately 80% in KLF6 expression (p < 0.001) coupled with increased KLF6-SV1 expression (p < 0.001) when compared to normal astrocytes. To determine the biological relevance of these findings, we examined the effect of KLF6 expression and KLF6-SV1 knockdown in A235 and CRL2020 cell lines. Reconstitution of KLF6 decreased cell proliferation by almost 50%, whereas targeted KLF6 reduction increased cell proliferation 2.5-4.5 fold. Conversely, targeted KLF6-SV1 reduction decreased cell proliferation by 50%. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that KLF6 allelic imbalance and decreased KLF6 and increased KLF6-SV1 expression are common findings in primary GBM tumors, and these changes have antagonistic effects on the regulation of cellular proliferation in GBM cell lines.

