21259263
Environmental neurotoxicants and developing brain.
The brain of infants and children is uniquely sensitive to environmental neurotoxicants at levels far below those that are known to harm adults. There are multiple windows of vulnerability during which environmental exposures can interfere with normal development. The timing and duration of neurotoxicant exposures during development can give rise to a broad spectrum of structural and functional deficits. Only about 200 chemicals out of more than 80,000 registered with the United States Environmental Protection Agency have undergone extensive neurotoxicity testing, and many chemicals found in consumer goods are not required to undergo any neurodevelopmental testing. The cumulative effects of co-contaminants and the difficulties in analyzing biomarkers of exposure in human tissues have complicated comprehensive risk assessment. Furthermore, population-based studies that measure subtle effects on neurobehavioral outcomes are challenging to interpret and costly to conduct. Despite the fact that developmental neurotoxicity may be more severe and irreversible compared with adult toxicity, there is a relative paucity of toxicological data on developing systems for many high-production chemicals. This article provides an overview of the adverse neurological, cognitive, and behavioral outcomes associated with environmental exposures, with an emphasis on human studies.

21259259
Children's health and the environment: an overview.
Environmental pediatrics, the branch of pediatric medicine that studies the influence of the environment on children's health, has in the past decade grown exponentially. Rising rates of pediatric chronic disease and growing recognition of children's extensive exposures and great vulnerabilities to toxic hazards in the environment have catalyzed this expansion. New scientific initiatives have resulted. They include 14 Centers for Children's Environmental Health and Disease Prevention Research supported by the US National Institutes of Health and the US Environmental Protection Agency; a global network of Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Units supported by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; new postdoctoral training programs in pediatric environmental medicine; and the National Children's Study, the largest prospective epidemiological study of children's health ever undertaken in the United States, which launched in 2009 and will follow 100,000 children from conception to age 21 to assess environmental influences on health and development. These research initiatives have delineated the exquisite vulnerability of fetuses, infants, and children to toxic hazards in the environment. They have led to discovery of new environmental causes of disease and disability in children. This issue of The Mount Sinai Journal of Medicine focuses on children's health and the environment. We have brought together thought leaders in children's environmental health to critically examine new research findings, to explore new opportunities for translating research to treatment and prevention, and to offer a vision for the future of this rapidly expanding field.

21182865
Endocrine disruptors and childhood social impairment.
Prenatal exposure to endocrine disruptors has the potential to impact early brain development. Neurodevelopmental toxicity in utero may manifest as psychosocial deficits later in childhood. This study investigates prenatal exposure to two ubiquitous endocrine disruptors, the phthalate esters and bisphenol A (BPA), and social behavior in a sample of adolescent inner-city children. Third trimester urines of women enrolled in the Mount Sinai Children's Environmental Health Study between 1998 and 2002 (n=404) were analyzed for phthalate metabolites and BPA. Mother-child pairs were asked to return for a follow-up assessment when the child was between the ages of 7 and 9 years. At this visit, mothers completed the Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) (n=137), a quantitative scale for measuring the severity of social impairment related to Autistic Spectrum Disorders (ASD) in the general population. In adjusted general linear models increasing log-transformed low molecular weight (LMW) phthalate metabolite concentrations were associated with greater social deficits (?=1.53, 95% CI 0.25-2.8). Among the subscales, LMWP were also associated with poorer Social Cognition (?=1.40, 95% CI 0.1-2.7); Social Communication (?=1.86, 95% CI 0.5-3.2); and Social Awareness (?=1.25, 95% CI 0.1-2.4), but not for Autistic Mannerisms or Social Motivation. No significant association with BPA was found (?=1.18, 95% CI -0.75, 3.11). Prenatal phthalate exposure was associated with childhood social impairment in a multiethnic urban population. Even mild degrees of impaired social functioning in otherwise healthy individuals can have very important adverse effects over a child's lifetime. These results extend our previous finding of atypical neonatal and early childhood behaviors in relation to prenatal phthalate exposure.

20106747
Prenatal phthalate exposure is associated with childhood behavior and executive functioning.
Experimental and observational studies have reported biological consequences of phthalate exposure relevant to neurodevelopment. Our goal was to examine the association of prenatal phthalate exposure with behavior and executive functioning at 4-9 years of age. The Mount Sinai Children's Environmental Health Study enrolled a multiethnic prenatal population in New York City between 1998 and 2002 (n = 404). Third-trimester maternal urines were collected and analyzed for phthalate metabolites. Children (n = 188, n = 365 visits) were assessed for cognitive and behavioral development between the ages of 4 and 9 years. In multivariate adjusted models, increased loge concentrations of low molecular weight (LMW) phthalate metabolites were associated with poorer scores on the aggression [beta = 1.24; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.15- 2.34], conduct problems (beta = 2.40; 95% CI, 1.34-3.46), attention problems (beta = 1.29; 95% CI, 0.16- 2.41), and depression (beta = 1.18; 95% CI, 0.11-2.24) clinical scales; and externalizing problems (beta = 1.75; 95% CI, 0.61-2.88) and behavioral symptom index (beta = 1.55; 95% CI, 0.39-2.71) composite scales. Increased loge concentrations of LMW phthalates were also associated with poorer scores on the global executive composite index (beta = 1.23; 95% CI, 0.09-2.36) and the emotional control scale (beta = 1.33; 95% CI, 0.18- 2.49). Behavioral domains adversely associated with prenatal exposure to LMW phthalates in our study are commonly found to be affected in children clinically diagnosed with conduct or attention deficit hyperactivity disorders.

19654907
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration risk assessment on lead in women's and children's vitamins is based on outdated assumptions.
Following a recent report of lead in certain commercial vitamin products, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) conducted a nationwide survey to determine the Pb content in 324 multivitamin/mineral products labeled for use by women and children. The FDA compared estimated Pb exposures from each product with safe/tolerable exposure levels, termed provisional total tolerable intake (PTTI) levels, previously developed for at-risk population groups in 1992. We investigated the FDA's conclusions that Pb concentrations in all vitamin products examined do not pose a hazard to health because they are below the PTTI levels for all groups considered. For their initial estimations of PTTI levels, the FDA used a blood lead level (BLL) of 10 microg/dL as the threshold for adverse effects in children and in pregnant or lactating women. Studies have repeatedly linked chronic exposure to BLLs < 10 microg/dL with impairments in cognitive function and behavior in young children despite the absence of overt signs of toxicity. The FDA analysis also omitted any consideration of nonfood sources of Pb exposure, which is inconsistent with our current understanding of how most children develop elevated BLLs. We feel that based on these oversights, the FDA's conclusions are unduly reassuring and that reconsideration of their current recommendations appears warranted.

19375452
Prenatal phthalate exposure and performance on the Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale in a multiethnic birth cohort.
We investigated the relationship between prenatal maternal urinary concentrations of phthalate metabolites and neonatal behavior in their 295 children enrolled in a multiethnic birth cohort between 1998 and 2002 at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York City. Trained examiners administered the Brazelton Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale (BNBAS) to children within 5 days of delivery. We measured metabolites of 7 phthalate esters in maternal urine that was collected between 25 and 40 weeks' gestation. All but two phthalate metabolites were over 95% detectable. We summed metabolites on a molar basis into low and high molecular weight phthalates. We hypothesized the existence of sex-specific effects from phthalate exposure a priori given the hormonal activity of these chemicals. Overall we found few associations between individual phthalate metabolites or their molar sums and most of the BNBAS domains. However, we observed significant sex-phthalate metabolite interactions (p<0.10) for the Orientation and Motor domains and the overall Quality of Alertness score. Among girls, there was a significant linear decline in adjusted mean Orientation score with increasing urinary concentrations of high molecular weight phthalate metabolites (B=-0.37, p=0.02). Likewise, there was a strong linear decline in their adjusted mean Quality of Alertness score (B=-0.48, p<0.01). In addition, boys and girls demonstrated opposite patterns of association between low and high molecular weight phthalate metabolite concentrations and motor performance, with some indication of improved motor performance with increasing concentration of low molecular weight phthalate metabolites among boys. This is the first study to report an association between prenatal phthalate exposure and neurological effects in humans or animals, and as such requires replication.

