20826270
Protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPN14 is a regulator of lymphatic function and choanal development in humans.
The lymphatic vasculature is essential for the recirculation of extracellular fluid, fat absorption, and immune function and as a route of tumor metastasis. The dissection of molecular mechanisms underlying lymphangiogenesis has been accelerated by the identification of tissue-specific lymphatic endothelial markers and the study of congenital lymphedema syndromes. We report the results of genetic analyses of a kindred inheriting a unique autosomal-recessive lymphedema-choanal atresia syndrome. These studies establish linkage of the trait to chromosome 1q32-q41 and identify a loss-of-function mutation in PTPN14, which encodes a nonreceptor tyrosine phosphatase. The causal role of PTPN14 deficiency was confirmed by the generation of a murine Ptpn14 gene trap model that manifested lymphatic hyperplasia with lymphedema. Biochemical studies revealed a potential interaction between PTPN14 and the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 (VEGFR3), a receptor tyrosine kinase essential for lymphangiogenesis. These results suggest a unique and conserved role for PTPN14 in the regulation of lymphatic development in mammals and a nonconserved role in choanal development in humans.

20691869
Enhancement of IVF in the mouse by zona-drilling.
Cryopreservation of mouse sperm has become an essential method for the long-term storage of novel, genetically modified mouse lines. Cryopreserved sperm from most hybrid lines can be effectively used for in vitro fertilization (IVF) of mouse oocytes. Unfortunately, IVF recovery with cryopreserved sperm from inbred lines is very inefficient. This is especially troublesome since many transgenic lines are created on the popular C57Bl/6 inbred strain. Cryopreserved sperm from C57Bl/6 inbred and genetically modified lines is generally very inefficient when used in standard IVF recovery experiments, with fertilization rates that can be lower than 10%. Assisted reproductive techniques have been developed to improve the IVF efficiencies of cryopreserved inbred sperm. These techniques include zona-drilling, which introduces a hole into the zona pellucida (ZP) surrounding mouse oocytes, using a chemical solution (acid Tyrode's), mechanical disruption (partial zona dissection or piezo-driven micropipette drilling), or laser photoablation. By allowing direct access of the sperm to the cytoplasmic membrane, zona-drilling can improve the efficiency of IVF fertilization rates with inbred sperm to greater than 90%, thus improving the chances of recovering mouse lines on inbred backgrounds that are maintained with cryopreserved sperm. The technique described in this chapter makes use of a piezo controller to mechanically disrupt the ZP, resulting in dramatic increases in the fertilization efficiency of cryopreserved sperm.

20691858
Transport of mouse lines by shipment of live embryos.
Advances in techniques for the genetic manipulation of the laboratory mouse have resulted in a vast array of novel mouse lines for research. One challenge facing researchers is the ability to rapidly share genetically modified mouse lines with collaborators at other institutions. The standard method of shipping live animals has its share of problems, including the acceptability of the mice at the receiving institution based on health status, as well as the length of time that mice are maintained in quarantine at the receiving institution. Transfer of mouse lines between institutions can also be accomplished by shipment of cryopreserved embryos or sperm. This option, however, is limited by the availability of properly trained staff at the shipping institution who can prepare the cryopreserved materials, as well as staff at the receiving institution who can recover live animals from the transferred samples. Overnight shipment of live, preimplantation mouse embryos circumvents many of the issues involved with shipping live animals or cryopreserved samples. The technique described in this chapter for shipping live embryos provides a simple method for transferring mouse lines between institutions.

