20868461
Family-focused treatment for caregivers of patients with bipolar disorder.
Family members of patients with bipolar disorder experience high rates of subjective and objective burden which place them at risk for adverse physical health and mental health outcomes. We present preliminary efficacy data from a novel variation of Family Focused Treatment [Miklowitz DJ. Bipolar Disorder: A Family-Focused Treatment Approach (2(nd) ed.). New York: The Guilford Press, 2008] that aimed to reduce symptoms of bipolar disorder by working with caregivers to enhance illness management skills and self-care. The primary family caregivers of 46 patients with bipolar I (n = 40) or II (n = 6) disorder, diagnosed by the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders, were assigned randomly to receive either: (i) a 12-15-session family-focused, cognitive-behavioral intervention designed to provide the caregiver with skills for managing the relative's illness, attaining self-care goals, and reducing strain, depression, and health risk behavior [Family-Focused Treatment-Health Promoting Intervention (FFT-HPI)]; or (ii) an 8- to 12-session health education (HE) intervention delivered via videotapes. We assessed patients pre- and post-treatment on levels of depression and mania and caregivers on levels of burden, health behavior, and coping. Randomization to FFT-HPI was associated with significant decreases in caregiver depressive symptoms and health risk behavior. Greater reductions in depressive symptoms among patients were also observed in the FFT-HPI group. Reduction in patients' depression was partially mediated by reductions in caregivers' depression levels. Decreases in caregivers' depression were partially mediated by reductions in caregivers' levels of avoidance coping. Families coping with bipolar disorder may benefit from family interventions as a result of changes in the caregivers' ability to manage stress and regulate their moods, even when the patient is not available for treatment.

19864114
Impact of antipsychotic medication on family burden in schizophrenia: longitudinal results of CATIE trial.
This study evaluated the effectiveness of first- and second-generation antipsychotics in reducing family burden associated with schizophrenia. The family caregivers of 623 SCID-diagnosed patients enrolled in the Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) randomly assigned to a first-generation antipsychotic (perphenazine) or one of four second-generation drugs (olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone or ziprasidone) were interviewed about resources provided and stresses experienced at baseline and followed for 18 months. Patient symptoms, side effects and service use were assessed as well. Hierarchical regression analyses evaluated the effect of treatment assignment on four burden factors: problem behavior, resource demands and disruption, impairment in activities of daily living and patient helpfulness. Intention-to-treat analyses with all available observations classified based on initial treatment assignment, including observations after medications changed were followed by secondary analyses excluding observations after the first medication change, i.e. only considering initial medication. Despite significant reductions on the problem behavior and resource demands/disruption factors, there were no significant differences between perphenazine and any of the second-generation medications. When only initial treatment period observations were included, patients were perceived as more helpful when medicated with perphenazine as compared to risperidone. In comparisons between second-generation drugs, patients on quetiapine were perceived as more helpful than those on risperidone (p=0.004). In this 18-month randomized trial, there was no evidence of superiority of second-generation antipsychotics in relieving family burden.

18552626
Caregiver burden and health in bipolar disorder: a cluster analytic approach.
To identify caregivers at risk for adverse health effects associated with caregiving, the stress, coping, health and service use of 500 primary caregivers of patients with bipolar disorder were assessed at baseline, 6, and 12 months. K-means cluster analysis and ANOVA identified and characterized groups with differing baseline stress/coping profiles. Mixed effects models examined the effects of cluster, time, and covariates on health outcomes. Three groups were identified. Burdened caregivers had higher burden and avoidance coping levels, and lower mastery and social support than effective and stigmatized caregivers; stigmatized caregivers reported the highest perceived stigma (p < 0.05). Effective and stigmatized groups had better health outcomes and less service use than the burdened group over time; stigmatized caregivers had poorer self-care than effective caregivers. Cluster analysis is a promising method for identifying subgroups of caregivers with different stress and coping profiles associated with different health-related outcomes.

