21563323
The "drunken honeycomb" feature of pulmonary mucinous adenocarcinoma: A diagnostic pitfall of bronchial brushing cytology.
Pulmonary mucinous adenocarcinoma (PMA) is the terminology recently proposed in the new International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society (IASLC/ATS/ERS) International Multidisciplinary Classification of Lung Adenocarcinoma Guidelines for most tumors previously classified as mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinomas (mBACs). PMA is histologically characterized by lepidic growth and at least some degree of invasive growth of goblet or columnar neoplastic cells with abundant intracytoplasmic mucin. We report here the cytologic features of PMA in a bronchial brushing specimen. The patient is an 84-year-old woman with a persistent dense consolidation in the right middle lobe of the lung found on non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan. Bronchial brushing smears showed a monotonous population of columnar neoplastic cells forming "drunken honeycomb"-like cell clusters. The neoplastic cells displayed inconspicuous cytologic atypia. The concurrent transbronchial tissue biopsy and the resection specimen confirmed the diagnosis of PMA. Due to the bland nuclear features, the neoplastic cells in the bronchial brushing specimen were interpreted as benign at the time of the initial diagnosis, demonstrating a diagnostic pitfall of bronchial brushing cytology. A high index of suspicion is recommended when a lung lesion with "drunken honeycomb"-like cell clusters is encountered in bronchial brushing specimens. The review of the literature regarding the recently designated PMA is presented. Diagn. Cytopathol. 2011. © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

20949461
Primary CNS plasmablastic lymphoma: Report of a case with CSF cytology, flow cytometry, radiology, histological correlation, and review of the literature.
Plasmablastic lymphoma (PBL) is a rare subtype of diffuse large B cell lymphoma and commonly presents as an oral mass in HIV patients. Extraoral PBL has been reported, including one case of primary central nervous system PBL (PCNSPBL). The cytological features of PBL have been described, including cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytology findings for secondary CNS involvement by PBL. The etiology of PCNSPBL is still unknown. We report here the CSF cytology of a PCNSPBL, which shows a hypercellular specimen composed of markedly atypical, singly dispersed plasmacytoid cells with frequent abnormal mitoses and binucleation. The neoplastic cells are positive for CD138. Flow cytometry of the CSF specimen demonstrates a monoclonal neoplastic cell population, which is CD138 positive, kappa light chain positive, lambda light chain negative, and CD19 negative. Molecular analysis and immunohistochemical stains on a tissue biopsy confirmed the diagnosis and reveal concurrent infections with Epstein-Barr virus and human polyomavirus JC virus. Clinical and radiological correlations are reported, and the literature is reviewed. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case report for CSF cytology of a PCNSPBL, demonstrating the utility of the cytological examination in the triage and diagnosis of this disease. Because of its dismal prognosis, it is critical for cytopathologists to be aware of the entity and recognize the neoplastic cells in CSF specimen. This report also emphasizes the importance of clinical and radiological correlation in the diagnosis of this lethal disease. Diagn. Cytopathol. 2010. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

19582809
Metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma presenting as a pancreatic mass by computed tomography scan and mimicking a primary neuroendocrine tumor: a potential pitfall in aspiration cytology.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly malignant neoplasm, often presenting at late stage and portending a poor prognosis for the patient. The peripancreatic fat is a rare site of extrahepatic metastasis, and metastatic HCC can mimic primary pancreatic neoplasms, even in this location. It is crucial to be aware of this pitfall in the evaluation of aspiration cytology of pancreatic neoplasms and to develop a strategy to reach the correct diagnosis. We present an endoscopic ultrasound fine-needle aspiration diagnosis of metastatic HCC presenting as a pancreatic mass radiologically that had neuroendocrine features on various cytological and histological preparations. The metastatic lesions were located surgically in the peripancreatic adipose tissue with involvement of one peripancreatic lymph node. This case illustrates the utility of FNA for diagnosing uncommon presentations of HCC and the importance of clinical history, cell block, and an immunocytochemical panel in determining the origin of the tumor.

19526573
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of granular cell tumor of the tongue: a technique for the aspiration of oral lesions.
Granular cell tumor is most commonly located in the tongue. Despite this common location, there are few reports of fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of the tongue, likely because this is a sensitive area for most patients, and many cytopathologists do not have experience aspirating oral lesions. We report a case of FNAB of a granular cell tumor of the tongue in a 29-year-old man with an unusual presenting history and without symptoms. The diagnosis was made based on the cytomorphology of the direct smears and immunohistochemistry on cell block material. We will also describe cytologic features of the neoplasm, differential diagnosis, and our technique for obtaining the material, as we feel this can be repeated by experienced cytopathologists.

19405113
Mycobacterium avium complex infection in a neck abscess: a diagnostic pitfall in fine-needle aspiration biopsy of head and neck lesions.
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) is a useful tool in the diagnosis of mycobacterial disease, especially Mycobacterium tuberculosis. However, nontuberculous mycobacterial infection diagnosed with FNAB material is much rarer, with Mycobacterium avium complex being the most common. In this report, we present the case of a 21-year-old HIV positive man, who presented with a unilateral, tender, enlarging cervical neck mass. FNAB had revealed acute inflammation. Mycobacterium avium complex grew in culture from the material that was aspirated and was confirmed by DNA probe. Because of the paucity of articles on this subject in the cytology literature, it is important to reiterate the value of the material aspirated at the bedside and the clinic in the diagnosis of infectious disease. When faced with antibiotic-resistant cellulitis and abscesses, the FNAB material must be sent for acid fast bacteria smears and culture.

19373915
Adrenal histoplasmosis.


