21496574
Neuroacanthocytosis.
The term "neuroacanthocytosis" describes a heterogeneous group of molecularly-defined disorders which result in progressive neurodegeneration, predominantly of the basal ganglia, and erythrocyte acanthocytosis. The clinical presentation of neuroacanthocytosis syndromes typically involves chorea and dystonia, but a range of other movement disorders may be seen. Psychiatric and cognitive symptoms may be prominent. There can be considerable phenotypic overlap; however, features of inheritance, age of onset, neuroimaging and laboratory findings, in addition to the spectrum of central and peripheral neurological abnormalities and extraneuronal involvement, can help to distinguish the specific syndromes. The two core neuroacanthocytosis syndromes, in which acanthocytosis is a typical, although not invariable finding, are autosomal recessive chorea-acanthocytosis and X-linked McLeod syndrome. Acanthocytes are found in a smaller proportion of patients with Huntington's disease-like 2 and pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration. Additionally, acanthocytosis has been reported in a few patients with other neurological disorders. The causative genes do not appear to be linked by a specific function or pathway, although abnormalities of membrane processing may be implicated. The connection between the erythrocyte membrane abnormality, which results in the characteristic "thorny" protrusions, the vulnerability of the basal ganglia, and the respective genetic mutations, is obscure.

21376239
Astrocyte-neuron lactate transport is required for long-term memory formation.
We report that, in the rat hippocampus, learning leads to a significant increase in extracellular lactate levels that derive from glycogen, an energy reserve selectively localized in astrocytes. Astrocytic glycogen breakdown and lactate release are essential for long-term but not short-term memory formation, and for the maintenance of long-term potentiation (LTP) of synaptic strength elicited in vivo. Disrupting the expression of the astrocytic lactate transporters monocarboxylate transporter 4 (MCT4) or MCT1 causes amnesia, which, like LTP impairment, is rescued by L-lactate but not equicaloric glucose. Disrupting the expression of the neuronal lactate transporter MCT2 also leads to amnesia that is unaffected by either L-lactate or glucose, suggesting that lactate import into neurons is necessary for long-term memory. Glycogenolysis and astrocytic lactate transporters are also critical for the induction of molecular changes required for memory formation, including the induction of phospho-CREB, Arc, and phospho-cofilin. We conclude that astrocyte-neuron lactate transport is required for long-term memory formation.

17541893
Obsessive-compulsive disorders due to neuroacanthocytosis treated with citalopram.


