21572265
Hepatocellular Carcinoma Arising in a Pigmented Telangiectatic Adenoma With Nuclear ?-catenin and Glutamine Synthetase Positivity: Case Report and Review of the Literature.
Telangiectatic hepatocellular adenoma is a rare, recently recognized subtype of hepatocellular adenoma that is often underrecognized by pathologists. We report a case of hepatocellular carcinoma arising within a pigmented telangiectatic hepatocellular adenoma in a noncirrhotic man with diffuse glutamine synthetase and nuclear ?-catenin positivity. This case highlights malignant transformation of telangiectatic adenomas, and describes a previously unreported association between pigment deposition and telangiectatic adenoma. Radiology, gross pathology, and histopathology are shown. Review of the literature with attention to ?-catenin and glutamine synthetase staining, malignant transformation, patient characteristics, the presence of Dubin-Johnson-like pigment, and genetic characteristics of telangiectatic adenomas are discussed.

20960381
Primary hepatic signet ring cell neuroendocrine tumor: a case report with literature review.
Primary hepatic signet ring cell neuroendocrine tumor is extremely rare and is characterized by distinct intracytoplasmic hyaline vacuoles that are mucin negative and cytokeratin positive. The unique histological features may cause difficulty in diagnosis and delay patient care. Here the authors report a 49-year-old man with an incidental finding of a 2.7 cm liver mass in the absence of chronic liver disease. The resected tumor was grossly unencapsulated but well demarcated with friable tissue texture. Microscopically, the entire tumor consisted of sheets of monotonous cells separated by delicate microvasculature. The tumor cells had granular chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, and eosinophilic cytoplasm. Many of the tumor cells had eccentric, pale intracytoplasmic vacuoles resembling signet ring cells in adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical studies showed that the tumor cells were positive for neuroendocrine markers and that the intracytoplasmic vacuoles were negative for mucin but strongly positive for cytokeratins. Careful systemic search including OctreoScan scintigraphy (Mallinckrodt Medical, Inc., St. Louis, MO) and capsule endoscopy failed to reveal any other tumors. A diagnosis of primary hepatic signet ring cell neuroendocrine tumor was established. Ten months after surgery, the patient is well without any other detectable tumor on radiology. Serological neuroendocrine markers are also within normal limits.

19938116
Plasma cell hepatitis in hepatitis C virus patients post-liver transplantation: case-control study showing poor outcome and predictive features in the liver explant.
Plasma cell hepatitis (PCH) is characterized by plasma cell infiltration seen in allografts of patients who underwent liver transplantation (LT) for conditions other than autoimmune hepatitis. We identified 40 PCH patients who underwent LT for hepatitis C virus (HCV) by searching our pathology database (1994-2006) for the keywords liver allograft, lymphoplasmacytic, and plasma cell(s). We selected 2 control patients who received LT for HCV for each PCH case. The control patients were matched according to date of LT and availability of biopsy material at the time interval to development of PCH in PCH patients. Explant and post-LT biopsy slides were blindly reviewed by 2 liver pathologists and the severity of the plasma cell infiltrate was scored. A score of 3 (plasma cells composing >30% of the infiltrate) defined PCH in allograft biopsies. Five random areas of dense inflammation were also examined in explant livers and the highest score was used. Poor outcome was defined as death or advanced fibrosis (stage >or= 4 of 6). We found that PCH patients were more likely to have worse outcomes than control patients (65% versus 40%, P < 0.01), including increased mortality (50% versus 30%, P < 0.05). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed significantly worse survival for PCH patients from 4 to 10 years post-LT (P < 0.05). Explants from 40% of PCH patients had a score of 3 compared to 18% of control patients (P < 0.01). We found that the development of PCH is associated with poor outcome in patients undergoing LT for HCV. The association of significant plasma cell infiltrates in native livers of HCV patients developing PCH suggests that some patients may have a predisposition to developing PCH.

19826976
Drug-induced steatohepatitis leading to cirrhosis: long-term toxicity of amiodarone use.
Nonalcoholic steatosis/steatohepatitis is the most common cause for abnormal liver chemistries. Apart from metabolic syndrome, drugs may also lead to development of steatohepatitis that may, rarely, progress to cirrhosis and portal hypertension. We discuss a case of amiodarone-induced steatohepatitis with advanced fibrosis, presenting with hepatic decompensation and portal hypertension manifesting as ascites and recurrent esophageal variceal hemorrhage. Amiodarone is a lipophilic drug that concentrates in the liver and usually, over a period of time, leads to toxicity related to drug accumulation. There is marked histological similarity between amiodarone-induced liver disease and alcoholic and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. The clinical manifestations of amiodarone-induced hepatotoxicity and the mechanism of toxicity are also discussed.

19793197
Hepatic progenitor cells in liver cancers from Asian children.
Hepatoblastoma (HB) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are the two most common primary malignant liver tumours in children. Hepatic progenitor cells have been described and can be stained with K19, EpCAM and CD117. We investigated the morphology and staining patterns of primary liver tumours in Asian children. Four pathologists studied slides from 39 paediatric patients from Vietnam and Korea aged 8 months to 16 years. We performed immunohistochemical stains for K19, EpCAM and CD117, and polymerase chain reaction for tissue hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA and hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA. There was agreement on the diagnosis of 24 cases of HCC and 10 cases of HB (one recurrent case). The diagnosis was split for six cases (HCC/HB). All 20 cases of HCC tested were HBV DNA+ and HCV RNA-. All nine cases of HB tested were HBV DNA-, while one was HCV RNA+. Of four HCC/HB cases tested, three were HBV DNA+ and all were HCV RNA-. By immunohistochemistry, 8/24 (33%) cases of HCC were K19+ and 18/24 (75%) were EpCAM+, 5/10 (50%) cases of HB were K19+ and 7/10 (70%) were EpCAM+ and 3/6 (50%) cases of HCC/HB were K19+ and 5/6 (83%) were EpCAM+. CD117 was negative in all 38 cases tested. Paediatric HCC has a morphology different from adult HCC, sometimes resembling HB, and a larger proportion of paediatric tumours have progenitor cell features. HB and HCC in children may represent malignant transformation at an early stage in the cellular lineage and often arise from hepatic progenitor cells.

19524573
A system of classifying microvascular invasion to predict outcome after resection in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) recurs in approximately 70% of cases after resection. Vascular invasion by tumor cells can be classified as gross or microscopic (microvascular invasion [mVI]) and is a risk factor for recurrence. We examined a large cohort of patients with HCC who were treated by resection to identify features of mVI that correlated with recurrence and survival. We reviewed the records of all HCC resections performed at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine between January 1990 and March 2006 to identify those with mVI, established by histologic analysis. The numbers and sizes of vessels invaded, invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall, distance from the tumor, and satellite nodules were recorded. Of the 384 patients who underwent resection for HCC, 131 (34.1%) met the entry criteria. The median follow-up period was 28.9 months. There were 68 recurrences and 54 deaths. In multivariate analysis, invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall predicted recurrence (hazard ratio, 1.8; P = .02), and invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall (hazard ratio, 2.2; P = .018) and invasion of a vessel that was more than 1 cm from the tumor (hazard ratio, 2.1; P = .015) predicted survival. A risk score that assigned points for the presence of each variable correlated with recurrence (P = .028) and survival (P < .0001). A novel classification system that includes invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall and invasion of a vessel that is more than 1 cm from the tumor can accurately predict risk of recurrence and survival of patients with mVI after resection of HCC.

18627270
Liver fibrosis during an outbreak of acute hepatitis C virus infection in HIV-infected men: a prospective cohort study.
Outbreaks of acute hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection are occurring in HIV-infected men who have sex with men. We evaluated risk factors and liver histopathology in 11 consecutively enrolled men with newly acquired HCV infection that was diagnosed on the basis of antibody seroconversion, new elevations in alanine aminotransferase level, and wide fluctuations in HCV RNA level. Ten patients reported unprotected anal intercourse, and 7 reported "club-drug" use, including methamphetamine. Liver biopsy showed moderately advanced fibrosis (Scheuer stage 2) in 9 patients (82%). No cause of liver damage other than acute HCV infection was identified. The specific pathways leading to periportal fibrosis in HIV-infected men with newly acquired HCV infection require investigation.

18508382
Posttransplant plasma cell hepatitis (de novo autoimmune hepatitis) is a variant of rejection and may lead to a negative outcome in patients with hepatitis C virus.
De novo autoimmune hepatitis has been described in both pediatric and adult liver transplantation (LT) recipients. Studies of small numbers of patients have proposed it to be an alloimmune hepatitis or form of chronic rejection. We have recently noted an increasing number of patients with post-LT recurrent hepatitis C virus (HCV) developing this, with an apparent negative impact on outcome and survival. We term this entity posttransplant plasma cell hepatitis (PCH). A search of our institution's pathology database was performed with the terms "plasma cell(s)," "lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate," and "liver allograft." A histological scoring system was devised to more reliably diagnose PCH in the setting of recurrent HCV. Thirty-eight patients were identified, and their clinical data were analyzed. Sixty percent had a negative outcome as defined by the development of cirrhosis, need for retransplantation, or death. Eighty-two percent had recent lowering of immunosuppression or subtherapeutic calcineurin inhibitor levels; 58% developed PCH within 2 years post-LT. Histologic resolution of PCH was associated with good outcome (P < 0.001). Patients not receiving treatment had a negative outcome (P = 0.007) as did patients receiving corticosteroids as therapy (P = 0.02). Persistence (P = 0.007) or recurrence of PCH was associated with negative outcome. In conclusion, PCH is a histologic variant of rejection. On liver biopsy, PCH can at times be difficult to diagnose, and the use of a standardized scoring system is recommended to differentiate it from other forms of allograft dysfunction. Treatment by optimization of immunosuppression without the use of corticosteroids appears effective. The development of PCH in the setting of recurrent HCV is a negative prognostic factor for patient outcome and allograft failure.

17979078
Hepatocellular carcinoma and congenital absence of the portal vein in a child receiving growth hormone therapy for turner syndrome.
Turner syndrome patients are reported to have no increase in the relative risk of cancer, and hepatocellular carcinoma in particular has never been reported in this syndrome. However, Turner syndrome patients are known to have an increased prevalence of liver lesions, some of which, like focal nodular hyperplasia, are related to vascular anomalies. We report the case of a young patient with Turner syndrome, treated with recombinant human growth hormone, who was found to have absence of the portal vein, focal nodular hyperplasia, and hepatic adenoma and who developed a large hepatocellular carcinoma requiring liver transplant.

17682978
Bile duct paucity in infancy.


17414109
Liver failure and need for liver transplantation in patients with advanced hepatoportal sclerosis.
Hepatoportal sclerosis (HPS) is one of the causes of noncirrhotic portal hypertension. In general, hepatic synthetic function is preserved and treatment is aimed at relief of the portal hypertension. In this study, we present the clinical and pathologic features of HPS cases who underwent liver transplantation (LT). LT cases with confirmed gross and microscopic diagnosis of HPS are included. Weight of the explanted liver, presence of thrombi in the main blood vessels, and gross and microscopic characteristics were assessed. Clinical information was gathered from chart review. From 1995 to 2004, 8 LT patients were diagnosed with HPS. Cirrhosis resulting from alcohol (2), autoimmune hepatitis (2), and hepatitis B (1), or cryptogenic cirrhosis (3) was the presumed diagnoses pre-LT. Seven patients presented with bleeding varices and 5 had concomitant ascites. At the time of LT, mean values were: prothrombin time of 15.2 seconds, serum albumin 3.2 g/dL, serum bilirubin 3.5 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase 140 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase 39.4 IU/L, and alanine aminotransferase 34.7 IU/L. Explanted livers were shrunken, with weights ranging from 715 to 1199 g (mean 934). Nonocclusive portal vein thrombosis was present in 2 patients. On histologic examination, there was dense portal fibrosis, marked phlebosclerosis, and presence of variable degrees of megasinusoid formation. Four livers also had features of incomplete septal cirrhosis. None showed histologic features of the presumed underlying liver disease. In conclusion, HPS can cause hepatic synthetic dysfunction that may necessitate LT. Small liver volume, significant portal fibrosis, and phlebosclerosis may contribute to hepatic parenchymal loss and subsequent synthetic compromise.

17406346
Metabolic basis of sexual dimorphism in PKU mice after genome-targeted PAH gene therapy.
We have previously reported a transgene delivery system based on phiBT1 bacteriophage integrase that results in targeted insertion of transgenes into mammalian genomes, and its use in the delivery of murine phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) complementary DNA (cDNA) into the hepatocytes of male phenylketonuria (PKU) mice, leading to a complete and permanent correction of their hyperphenylalaninemic phenotype. In this study, we report only partial phenotypic correction in female PKU mice, even though hepatic PAH activities in both sexes after gene treatment were similar. Daily injections of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), an essential co-factor for phenylalanine hydroxylation, in the gene-treated females led to complete correction of their PKU phenotype. After gonadectomy, serum phenylalanine levels in the gene-treated females were reduced to normal, whereas those in the gene-treated males remained unchanged. The sterile gene-treated PKU mice were subjected to daily sex hormone injections. Whereas the estradiol-treated sterile males developed hyperphenylalaninemia, the dihydrotestosterone-treated sterile females remained normal phenylalaninemic. The results indicate that it is estrogen that suppresses the steady-state levels of BH4 in mouse hepatocytes that became limiting, which is the underlying mechanism for the observed sexual dimorphism in PKU mice after PAH gene treatment. Livers of the PAH gene-corrected PKU mice also appeared normal and without apparent pathologies.

17295181
Hepatocellular carcinoma associated with an atypical presentation of Wilson's disease.


17222534
T cell targeting and phagocytosis of apoptotic biliary epithelial cells in primary biliary cirrhosis.
Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is characterized by loss of tolerance against ubiquitously expressed mitochondrial autoantigens followed by biliary and salivary gland epithelial cell (BEC and SGEC) destruction by autoreactive T cells. It is unclear why BECs and SGECs are targeted. Previous work demonstrated that the reduced form of the major PBC autoantigen predominated in apoptotic BECs and SGECs as opposed to an oxidized form in other apoptotic cells. This led to the hypothesis that presentation of novel self-peptides from phagocytosed apoptotic BECs might contribute to BEC targeting by autoreactive T cells. The effect of autoantigen redox status on self-peptide formation was examined along with the phagocytic ability of BECs. Oxidation of PBC autoantigens first was shown to be due to protein S-glutathionylation of lipoyllysine residues. Absence of protein S-glutathionylation generated novel self-peptides and affected T cell recognition of a lipoyllysine containing peptide. Liver biopsy staining revealed BEC phagocytosis of apoptotic BECs (3.74+/-2.90% of BEC) was present in PBC (7 of 7 cases) but not in normal livers (0 of 3). BECs have the ability to present novel mitochondrial self-peptides derived from phagocytosed apoptotic BECs. Apoptotic cell phagocytosis by non-professional phagocytes may influence the tissue specificity of autoimmune diseases.

17196295
Downregulation of KLF6 is an early event in hepatocarcinogenesis, and stimulates proliferation while reducing differentiation.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has the most rapidly rising cancer incidence in the US and Europe. The KLF6 tumor suppressor is frequently inactivated in HCC by loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) and/or mutation. Here we have analyzed 33 HBV- and 40 HCV-related HCCs for mRNA expression of wildtype KLF6 (wtKLF6) as well as the KLF6 variant 1 (SV1), a truncated, growth-promoting variant that antagonizes wtKLF6 function. The HCV-related tumors analyzed represented the full histologic spectrum from cirrhosis and dysplasia to metastatic cancer. Expression of KLF6 mRNA is decreased in 73% of HBV-associated HCCs compared to matched surrounding tissue (ST), with reductions of approximately 80% in one-third of the patients. KLF6 mRNA expression is also reduced in dysplastic nodules from patients with HCV compared to cirrhotic livers (p<0.005), with an additional, marked decrease in the very advanced, metastatic stage (p<0.05). An increased ratio of KLF6SV1/wt KLF6 is present in a subset (6/33, 18%) of the HBV-related HCCs compared to matched ST. Reconstituting KLF6 in HepG2 cells by retroviral infection decreased proliferation and related markers including cyclin D1 and beta-catenin, increased cellular differentiation based on induction of albumin, E-cadherin, and decreased alpha fetoprotein. We conclude that reduced KLF6 expression is common in both HBV- and HCV-related HCCs and occurs at critical stages during cancer progression. Effects of KLF6 are attributable to regulation of genes controlling hepatocyte growth and differentiation.

18589139
Effect of ischemia-reperfusion on the incidence of acute cellular rejection and timing of histologic hepatitis C virus recurrence after liver transplantation.
Because of a critical shortage of deceased donor (DD) livers, more extended criteria allografts are being utilized; these allografts are at increased risk for ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI). We assessed whether, in a large cohort of patients transplanted for hepatitis C virus (HCV) either via a DD or live donor (LD), there was a relationship between the degree of IRI and the frequency and timing of acute cellular rejection (ACR) and histologic HCV recurrence. During an 8-year study, patients were separated into four groups based on peak alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels and three groups based on severity of IRI on postreperfusion liver biopsy. The mean follow-up time of 433 DD and 44 LD recipients was 1212 days. We noted a strong correlation in DD between peak ALT and the histologic degree of IRI (P = .01). There was no difference in the incidence or grade of ACR among the four groups. There was no correlation between the severity of IRI and the incidence or time to histologic recurrence of HCV. The magnitude of peak ALT correlated with the severity of IRI on postreperfusion liver biopsy. Among this large HCV cohort, there was no correlation between the severity of IRI and the incidence or timing of histologic HCV recurrence or incidence of ACR.

