21071023
Parental karyotype may reveal the source of a pregnancy loss even in the presence of a reportedly euploid fetal karyotype.
To present a case of a fetal loss in which a normal fetal karyotype was obtained by banding studies. Identification of an abnormal maternal karyotype prompted subsequent reanalysis using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Case report. University-affiliated IVF center. A 32-year-old woman, G1 P0, underwent a fetal loss at 8 weeks, and a suction curettage was performed. The patient had a previous first-trimester loss. The fetal tissue was evaluated by banding studies and found to be normal. Parental karyotyping was performed, and the fetal tissue was reanalyzed by FISH. Analysis of fetal karyotype by targeted FISH. Maternal karyotype demonstrated a translocation [46,XX, t(8;10)(q24.3:q25.2)]. The fetal tissue was reanalyzed by FISH, and a segment of chromosome 10 was found on chromosome 8. A normal fetal karyotype, as measured by banding, does not exclude a genetic etiology for pregnancy loss. In this case, maternal translocation prompted the genetics laboratory to search for a small segment of translocated extra chromosomal material. This demonstrated that despite the finding of a normal fetal karyotype, in some cases parental karyotyping may have value.

20014419
Advances and controversies in assisted reproductive technology.
As the incidence and awareness of infertility have increased in the last decades, reproductive endocrinologists and scientists have striven to improve the therapeutic options being offered to patients. One of the most advanced and efficient technologies currently being offered is assisted reproductive technology. Among the various techniques that are comprised by assisted reproductive technology, in vitro fertilization is the most widely studied and used, being responsible for approximately 1% of all live births in the United States. As this technology has evolved, many controversies have arisen, and it is the purpose of this article to review what in the authors' opinion are the most current and controversial aspects of the whole process of in vitro fertilization and its related techniques.

19539905
Paternal age and assisted reproductive technology outcome in ovum recipients.
This study suggests that paternal age may be inversely associated with reproductive outcome, as demonstrated by a decline in fertilization, blastocyst formation, implantation and cryopreservation rates with advancing age.

17903078
Patients' return to referring physicians and its relation to their infertility duration.
To determine if length of patient-reported infertility prior to referral to a specialist is related to the likelihood that the patient will return to the referring physician for obstetrical care. A review of our medical record database identified 430 consecutive pregnant patients, discharged between January 1, 2003, and March 1, 2004. The name of the referring and discharge obstetrician(s), duration of infertility, prior use of clomiphene citrate, and number of previous clomiphene treatment cycles were recorded. Of the 430 patients, 305 (71%) had information about the referring and discharge obstetrician(s) and complete records regarding prior treatment. Median duration of infertility was 1.3 years (range 0.2-12 years). Fifty-five percent (167 of 305) of patients returned to their referring physician for obstetrical care. If patients were referred prior to 6 months of treatment by the referring obstetrician, 76% (35 of 46) returned. If patients were referred after 6 months to 1 year of treatment, 67% (82 of 122) returned. If after 1-2 years, 35% (33 of 94), and after more than 2 years, 40% (10 of 25) returned to their referring physician. Overall, 25% of patients (77 of 305) patients had preliminary treatment with clomiphene citrate. If the referring physician did not give the patient clomiphene citrate, 55% (128 of 232) returned to that physician; if the patient had been given one to four clomiphene cycles, 54% (37 of 69) returned, and if given more than four cycles, 25% (2 of 8) returned. Although many factors may affect a patient's decision to return to the referring doctor, patient satisfaction with the referring physician may be related to timely referral to a specialist.

17880948
Redefining in vitro fertilization success: should triplets be considered failures?
To evaluate how the ranking of IVF programs changes if high-order multiple pregnancies (HOMPs) are considered negative outcomes. Retrospective analysis. The 2004 Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology Clinic Outcome Reporting System. Two hundred seven programs that performed >50 IVF cycles were analyzed, and only patients <or=35 years of age were included. Program size, success rate, and number of embryos transferred were recorded for each program. All programs were ranked in accordance to these variables. The programs were re-ranked after considering HOMPs as negative, rather than as positive, outcomes. High-order multiple pregnancies were more abundant as the number of embryos replaced increased. The live birth rate, after excluding HOMPs, significantly decreased as the number of embryos transferred increased. The lowest ranked programs performed transfers with the greatest number of embryos (2.4-4.5). After HOMP exclusion, the rank of programs that transferred >2.4 embryos decreased, as opposed to the programs that transferred fewer embryos (1.8-2.4). Reclassifying HOMPs as failed cycles will result in a reduced rank in programs that maintain high embryo replacements. Redefining success as a singleton or twin birth significantly changes the ranking order of programs and, potentially, how programs are perceived.

17531231
Human blastocyst morphological quality is significantly improved in embryos classified as fast on day 3 (>or=10 cells), bringing into question current embryological dogma.
To evaluate developmental potential of fast cleaving day 3 embryos. Retrospective analysis. Academic reproductive center. Three thousand five hundred twenty-nine embryos. Day 3 embryos were classified according to cell number: slow cleaving: <or=6 cells, intermediate cleaving: 7-9 cells, and fast cleaving: >or=10 cells, and further evaluated on day 5. The preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) results of 43 fast cleaving embryos were correlated to blastocyst formation. Clinical outcomes of transfers involving only fast cleaving embryos (n = 4) were evaluated. Blastocyst morphology correlated to day 3 blastomere number. Relationship between euploidy and blastocyst formation of fast cleaving embryos. Implantation, pregnancy (PR), and birth rates resulting from fast embryo transfers. Blastocyst formation rate was significantly greater in the intermediate cleaving (72.7%) and fast cleaving (54.2%) groups when compared to the slow cleaving group (38%). Highest quality blastocysts were formed significantly more often in the fast cleaving group. Twenty fast cleaving embryos that underwent PGD, formed blastocysts, of which 45% (9/20) were diagnosed as euploid. Aneuploidy was diagnosed in 82.6% (19/23) of arrested embryos. A 50% implantation and 100% PR and birth rate were achieved with embryo transfers involving fast cleaving embryos. Fast cleaving embryos not only reach the blastocyst stage at a similar rate to intermediate cleaving embryos, but also exceed morphological quality criteria on day 5. Fast cleaving embryo transfers demonstrated a high clinical potential.

17207802
Moderately elevated levels of basal follicle-stimulating hormone in young patients predict low ovarian response, but should not be used to disqualify patients from attempting in vitro fertilization.
To evaluate and compare IVF outcomes of patients within different age categories who had a normal basal FSH level with outcomes of patients with an elevated day 3 FSH level. Retrospective analysis. Large, private IVF center. We analyzed 2,708 patients. Of these, 2,477 had normal basal FSH levels, and 231 had elevated basal FSH levels (> or =13.03 IU/L). Patients were segregated into various age groups. Follow-up. Outcomes of IVF overall, including cancellation rates, oocyte yield, and fertilization, implantation, and clinical pregnancy rates (PRs). Cancellation rates were significantly higher in patients with elevated day 3 FSH levels compared with patients with normal FSH levels in all age groups. A significantly lower oocyte yield was observed in patients with elevated basal FSH. Fertilization rates were not affected by FSH levels. A significant decrease in the number of embryos available for transfer in patients > or =38 with an elevated day 3 FSH level was found. Implantation and clinical PRs were lower in patients >40 years of age who had an elevated day 3 FSH level when compared to same age patients with a normal day 3 FSH level. Loss rates were not significantly different. Young women with an elevated basal FSH level should be counseled differently than older women, and should be given adequate counseling and granted the opportunity to undergo an IVF cycle.

