21190174
Anxiety in anorexia nervosa and its management using family-based treatment.
Anorexia nervosa (AN) is characterized by its similarity to anxiety disorders, especially obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Family-based treatment (FBT) has shown promising initial results for treatment of AN in adolescents, yet the precise mechanisms of action are unknown. We present a theoretical argument and model, suggesting that FBT may work via exposure (and habituation) to food and its consumption. First, we review the evidence for pathological anxiety in AN, and suggest a framework for identifying specific anxious triggers, emotions (fear and worry) and avoidance strategies. Second, we briefly review evidence indicating that cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) and specifically exposure in its various forms is most effective for treating anxiety disorders in youth. Third, we consider distinct approaches to exposure therapy based on the pattern of triggers, anxious emotions and avoidance. We conclude that the interventions utilized in FBT share clear similarities to exposure with response prevention, a type of exposure therapy commonly used with OCD, and may work via facilitating habituation to food and eating in one's natural environment. We also highlight how parents facilitate this process in between sessions by effectively coaching their children and facilitating naturalistic exposure to food and related triggers. Options for future research are considered. Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd and Eating Disorders Association.

17581443
Open trial of family-based treatment for full and partial anorexia nervosa in adolescence: evidence of successful dissemination.
There is a paucity of evidence-based interventions for anorexia nervosa (AN). An innovative family-based treatment (FBT), developed at the Maudsley Hospital and recently put in manual form, has shown great promise for adolescents with AN. Unlike traditional treatment approaches, which promote sustained autonomy around food, FBT temporarily places the parents in charge of weight restoration. This aim of this open trial was to investigate the feasibility and effectiveness of delivering FBT at a site beyond the treatment's origin and manualization. Twenty adolescents (ages 12-17) with AN or subthreshold AN were treated with up to 1 year of FBT using the published treatment manual. Outcome indices included the percentage of ideal body weight, menstrual status, the Eating Disorder Examination (EDE) subscales scores, and the Children's Depression Rating Scale-Revised score. Of the 20 patients recruited, 15 (75%) completed a full course of treatment. Intent-to-treat analyses showed significant improvement over time in the percentage of ideal body weight (t = -4.46, p =.000), menstrual status (p =.002), EDE Restraint (z = -3.02, p =.003), EDE Eating Concern (z = -2.10, p =.04), but not in EDE Shape Concern or Weight Concern subscales or Children's Depression Rating Scale-Revised score. This open trial provides evidence that FBT can be successfully disseminated, replicating the high retention rates and significant improvement in the psychopathology of adolescent AN seen at the original sites.

18227630
Anterior cingulate activity in bulimia nervosa: a fMRI case study.
Eating disordered patients (EDp) who binge-eat appear to present impulse control deficits that influence treatment outcome. The present bulimia nervosa (BN) study tests the function of brain areas involved in top-down control of behavior, associated with the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), at the individual level. ACC activity was analyzed in two women with BN and one matched control with a reliable and simple cue imperative target paradigm for response anticipation and response conflict processing using an event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) design. Patients showed meaningful ACC patterns of activation, less recruitment for response anticipation, and abnormal for response conflict, when they had to suppress an inappropriate response. Preliminary evidence suggests a BN neurocognitive model of impaired executive control-related brain activity. Reliable fMRI paradigms may be clinically useful to determine ACC dysfunction in EDp, to inform treatment and track changes.

