21425269
Progressive multiple sclerosis and gray matter pathology: an MRI perspective.
The evidence suggesting a role of extensive cortical demyelization and atrophy in progressive multiple sclerosis is rapidly increasing. Although conventional magnetic resonance imaging has had a huge impact on multiple sclerosis by enabling an earlier diagnosis, and by providing surrogate markers for monitoring disease response to anti-inflammatory/immunomodulatory treatments, it is limited by the low pathological specificity and the low sensitivity to both diffuse damage in normal-appearing white matter and focal and diffuse damage in gray matter. Advanced magnetic resonance imaging techniques can partially overcome these limitations by providing markers more specific to the underlying pathologic substrates and more sensitive to the structural and functional "occult" brain tissue damage in patients with multiple sclerosis. This review describes brain and spinal cord imaging studies of multiple sclerosis with particular emphasis on gray matter imaging in both secondary progressive and primary progressive multiple sclerosis, discusses the clinical implications of gray matter damage, and outlines current magnetic resonance imaging developments at high and ultrahigh magnetic field strength.

21425267
Axonal damage in multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis is a debilitating disease of the central nervous system that has been characteristically classified as an immune-mediated destruction of myelin, the protective coating on nerve fibers. Although the mechanisms responsible for the immune attack to central nervous system myelin have been the subject of intense investigation, more recent studies have focused on the neurodegenerative component, which is cause of clinical disability in young adults and appears to be only partially controlled by immunomodulatory therapies. Here, we review distinct, but not mutually exclusive, mechanisms of pathogenesis of axonal damage in multiple sclerosis patients that are either consequent to long-term demyelination or independent from it. We propose that the complexity of axonal degeneration and the heterogeneity of the underlying pathogenetic mechanisms should be taken into consideration for the design of targeted therapeutic intervention.

