21504717
Development of t(8;21) and RUNX1-RUNX1T1 in the Philadelphia-positive clone of a patient with chronic myelogenous leukemia: additional evidence for multiple steps involved in disease progression.
A 65-year-old patient with a high hemoglobin and hematocrit was treated for 14 months with therapeutic phlebotomy when cytogenetics of bone marrow revealed 100% cells with the Ph chromosome and 45% of the Ph+ cells contained trisomy 8. Treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors did not reduce the BCR-ABL1 fusion positive clone. Instead, the Ph positive cells acquired further the t(8;21)/RUNX1-RUNX1T1, del(4q) and trisomy 15 chromosomal abnormalities which were resistant to further treatment. Literature review revealed eight other patients who either had t(9;22) and t(8;21) simultaneously or developed t(8;21) in the Ph positive clone. We conclude that there are rare patients with CML who either present in blast crisis with coexistence of t(9;22) and t(8;21) with or without +8, or progress to blast crisis with acquiring RUNX1-RUNX1T1 in the BCR-ABL1 clone which may or may not be therapy related and represent a later event in a multistep pathogenesis.

21355091
The dominant negative {beta} isoform of the glucocorticoid receptor is uniquely expressed in erythroid cells expanded from polycythemia vera patients.
Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) agonists increase erythropoiesis in-vivo and in-vitro. To clarify the effect of the dominant negative GR? isoform (unable to bind STAT-5) on erythropoiesis, erythroblast (EB) expansion cultures of mononuclear cells (MNC) from 18 normal donors (ND) and 16 polycythemia vera patients (PV) were studied. GR? was expressed in all PV EBs but in EBs from only 1 ND. The A3669G polymorphism which stabilizes GR? mRNA had great frequency in PV (55%, n=22, p=0.0028) and myelofibrosis (35%, n=20) patients than in ND (9%, n=22) or essential thrombocythemia patients (6%, n=15). Dexamethasone (DXM) stimulation of ND cultures increased the number of immature EBs characterized by low GATA1 and ?-globin expression but PV cultures generated great numbers of immature EBs with low levels of GATA1 and ?-globin irrespective of DXM stimulation. In ND EBs, STAT-5 was not phosphorylated after DXM+erythropoietin treatment and did not form transcriptionally active complexes with GR? while in PV EBs STAT-5 was constitutively phosphorylated but the formation of GR/STAT-5 complexes was prevented by expression of GR?. These data indicate that GR? expression and the presence of A3669G likely contribute to development of erythrocytosis in PV and provide a potential target for identification of novel therapeutic agents.

21355088
Chromatin-modifying agents promote the ex vivo production of functional human erythroid progenitor cells.
Presently, blood transfusion products (TPs) are composed of terminally differentiated cells with a finite life span. We have developed an ex vivo-generated TP composed of erythroid progenitor cells (EPCs) and precursors cells. Several histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) were used in vitro to promote the preferential differentiation of cord blood (CB) CD34(+) cells to EPCs. A combination of cytokines and valproic acid (VPA): (1) promoted the greatest degree of EPC expansion, (2) led to the generation of EPCs which were capable of differentiating into the various stages of erythroid development, (3) led to epigenetic modifications (increased H3 acetylation) of promoters for erythroid-specific genes, which resulted in the acquisition of a gene expression pattern characteristic of primitive erythroid cells, and (4) promoted the generation of a TP that when infused into NOD/SCID mice produced mature RBCs containing both human adult and fetal globins as well Rh blood group Ag which persisted for 3 weeks and the retention of human EPCs and erythroid precursor cells within the BM of recipient mice. This ex vivo-generated EPC-TP likely represents a paradigm shift in transfusion medicine because of its potential to continue to generate additional RBCs after its infusion.

21105128
Myeloproliferative neoplasms: new translational therapies.
The myeloproliferative neoplasms represent a diverse group of hematologic malignancies that have been the subject of intense investigation over the last decade. Although clinical trials of the much anticipated small molecule inhibitors of Janus kinase 2 have shown that these experimental agents are successful in palliating many of the symptoms associated with the myeloproliferative neoplasms, they have not been reported to affect the disease initiating hematopoietic stem cell population or to alter the natural history of these disorders. Investigators remain optimistic that new information about the genetic and cellular origins gained from the efforts of numerous laboratories will ultimately translate in to the identification of new drug targets and more effective therapies. We hypothesize that ultimately, the use of combinations of drugs including chromatin modifying agents, immunomodulatory agents, anti-apoptotic agents, cellular therapies and monoclonal antibodies will be required to effectively treat patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms.

20858855
Sequential treatment of CD34+ cells from patients with primary myelofibrosis with chromatin-modifying agents eliminate JAK2V617F-positive NOD/SCID marrow repopulating cells.
Because primary myelofibrosis (PMF) originates at the level of the pluripotent hematopoietic stem cell (HSC), we examined the effects of various therapeutic agents on the in vitro and in vivo behavior of PMF CD34(+) cells. Treatment of PMF CD34(+) cells with chromatin-modifying agents (CMAs) but not hydroxyurea, Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) inhibitors, or low doses of interferon-? led to the generation of greater numbers of CD34(+) chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor (CXCR)4(+) cells, which were capable of migrating in response to chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand (CXCL)12 and resulted in a reduction in the proportion of hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) that were JAK2V617F(+). Furthermore, sequential treatment of PMF CD34(+) cells but not normal CD34(+) cells with decitabine (5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine [5azaD]), followed by suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA; 5azaD/SAHA), or trichostatin A (5azaD/TSA) resulted in a higher degree of apoptosis. Two to 6 months after the transplantation of CMAs treated JAK2V617F(+) PMF CD34(+) cells into nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient (SCID)/IL-2R?(null) mice, the percentage of JAK2V617F/JAK2(total) in human CD45(+) marrow cells was dramatically reduced. These findings suggest that both PMF HPCs, short-term and long-term SCID repopulating cells (SRCs), are JAK2V617F(+) and that JAK2V617F(+) HPCs and SRCs can be eliminated by sequential treatment with CMAs. Sequential treatment with CMAs, therefore, represents a possible effective means of treating PMF at the level of the malignant SRC.

20625010
Treatment with the Bcl-xL inhibitor ABT-737 in combination with interferon ? specifically targets JAK2V617F-positive polycythemia vera hematopoietic progenitor cells.
Polycythemia vera (PV) treatment with interferon ? (IFN?) is frequently limited by dose-related toxicity. PV CD34(+) cells are characterized by overexpression of Bcl-xL, which can be antagonized by ABT-737 leading to apoptosis. We explored the effects of ABT-737 and IFN? on PV hematopoiesis. Both IFN? and ABT-737 alone or in combination had a modest effect on normal hematopoiesis but each individually were able to markedly induce PV CD34(+) cell apoptosis and suppress hematopoietic colony formation. The inhibitory activities of these agents in combination were greater against PV hematopoiesis than either agent alone. The exposure of PV CD34(+) cells to low doses of IFN? and ABT-737 in combination resulted in the reduction of the proportion of JAK2V617F(+) colonies similar to that observed with higher doses of IFN?. These data provide the rationale for combination therapy with low doses of IFN? and a BH3 mimetic for patients with PV.

20388788
The effect of CXCL12 processing on CD34+ cell migration in myeloproliferative neoplasms.
Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) and polycythemia vera (PV) are chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms. PMF and, to a lesser degree, PV are characterized by constitutive mobilization of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and progenitor cells (HPC) into the peripheral blood (PB). The interaction between the chemokine CXCL12 and its receptor CXCR4 plays a pivotal role in determining the trafficking of CD34(+) cells between the bone marrow (BM) and the PB. PMF, but not PV, is associated with downregulation of CXCR4 by CD34(+) cells due to epigenetic events. Both PV and PMF patients have elevated levels of immunoreactive forms of CXCL12 in the BM and PB. Using electrospray mass spectrometry, the PB and BM plasma of PV and PMF patients was shown to contain reduced amounts of intact CXCL12 but significant amounts of several truncated forms of CXCL12, which are lacking in normal PB and BM plasma. These truncated forms of CXCL12 are the product of the action of several serine proteases, including dipeptidyl peptidase-IV, neutrophil elastase, matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), MMP-9, and cathepsin G. Unlike CXCL12, these truncates either lack the ability to act as a chemoattractant for CD34(+) cells and/or act as an antagonist to the action of CXCL12. These data suggest that proteolytic degradation of CXCL12 is characteristic of both PV and PMF and that the resulting truncated forms of CXCL12, in addition to the reduced expression of CXCR4 by CD34(+) cells, lead to a profound mobilization of HSC/HPC in PMF.

20303384
Interferon-alpha targets JAK2V617F-positive hematopoietic progenitor cells and acts through the p38 MAPK pathway.
Interferon-alpha (IFNalpha) therapy leads to hematological remissions and a reduction of the JAK2V617F allele burden in patients with polycythemia vera (PV). In this study, the cellular target by which IFNalpha affects hematopoiesis in PV patients was evaluated. CD34(+) cells were isolated from normal bone marrow and the peripheral blood of patients with PV and were treated in vitro with each of the three commercially available forms of IFNalpha: IFNalpha 2b, pegylated IFNalpha 2a (Peg-IFNalpha 2a), and pegylated IFNalpha 2b (Peg-IFNalpha 2b). Each form of IFNalpha was equally potent in suppressing hematopoietic colony formation by normal CD34(+) cells, but Peg-IFNalpha 2a and IFNalpha 2b were more effective than Peg-IFNalpha 2b in inhibiting burst-forming unit erythroid-derived colony formation by PV CD34(+) cells. In addition, exposure of PV CD34(+) cells to equal doses of Peg-IFNalpha 2a and IFNalpha 2b resulted in a 38% to 40% reduction in the proportion of JAK2V617F-positive hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPC), while equivalent doses of Peg-IFNalpha 2b did not reduce the number of malignant HPC. Further studies explored the mechanism by which IFNalpha induced PV HPC growth inhibition. Treatment of Peg-IFNalpha 2a increased the rate of apoptosis of PV CD34(+) cells and the phosphorylation/activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in PV CD34(+) cells, while the p38-specific inhibitor SB203580 reversed the growth inhibition and apoptosis induced by Peg-IFNalpha 2a. These data suggest that low doses of IFNalpha selectively and directly suppress PV JAK2V617F HPC and that these agents act through the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

20112287
Evidence for organ-specific stem cell microenvironments.
The X-linked Gata1(low) mutation in mice induces strain-restricted myeloproliferative disorders characterized by extramedullary hematopoiesis in spleen (CD1 and DBA/2) and liver (CD1 only). To assess the role of the microenvironment in establishing this myeloproliferative trait, progenitor cell compartments of spleen and marrow from wild-type and Gata1(low) mice were compared. Phenotype and clonal assay of non-fractionated cells indicated that Gata1(low) mice contain progenitor cell numbers 4-fold lower and 10-fold higher than normal in marrow and spleen, respectively. However, progenitor cells prospectively isolated from spleen, but not from marrow, of Gata1(low) mice expressed colony-forming function in vitro. Therefore, calculation of cloning activity of purified cells demonstrated that the total number of Gata1(low) progenitor cells was 10- to 100-fold lower than normal in marrow and >1,000 times higher than normal in spleen. This observation indicates that Gata1(low) hematopoiesis is favored by the spleen and is in agreement with our previous report that removal of this organ induces wild-type hematopoiesis in heterozygous Gata1(low/+) females (Migliaccio et al., 2009, Blood 114:2107). To clarify if rescue of wild-type hematopoiesis by splenectomy prevented extramedullary hematopoiesis in liver, marrow cytokine expression profile and liver histopathology of splenectomized Gata1(low/+) females were investigated. After splenectomy, the marrow expression levels of TGF-beta, VEGF, osteocalcin, PDGF-alpha, and SDF-1 remained abnormally high while Gata1(low) hematopoiesis was detectable in liver of both CD1 and DBA/2 mutants. Therefore, in the absence of the spleen, Gata1(low) hematopoiesis is supported by the liver suggesting that treatment of myelofibrosis in these animals requires the rescue of both stem cell and microenvironmental functions.

19762257
Human CD34+ cells are capable of generating normal and JAK2V617F positive endothelial like cells in vivo.
Endothelial like cells (ELCs) are thought to originate from either a hierarchy of endothelial progenitor cells (EPC), monocytes or monocyte derived multipotent progenitor cells (MOMCs). In this report, the ability of CD34(+) cells to generate ELC in vivo was examined using an immunodeficient mouse transplant assay system. The Philadelphia chromosome negative (Ph(-)) myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are associated with the acquired mutation, JAK2V617F. In order to further examine the ability of cord blood and JAK2V617F positive MPN CD34(+) cells to generate ELC, CD34(+) cells were transplanted into NOD/SCID mice. Cells within the livers and lungs of recipient mice had phenotypic and molecular properties of human ELC as examined using RT-PCR, flow cytometric analysis and fluorescence microscopy. These cells possessed either human wild type JAK2 or JAK2V617F indicating that they were derived from the transplanted human cells and that a fraction of such cells were involved by the malignant process. Furthermore, human CD144(+) cells isolated from the livers of recipient mice formed clusters in vitro composed of ELC, which contained either wild type JAK2 or JAK2V617F suggesting that these cells are derived from either MOMC or EPC that have an extensive proliferative capacity as well as some degree of self renewal capacity. These studies indicate that adult CD34(+) cells can be affected by JAK2V617F and that they can generate ELC which might play a role in the development of thrombosis in patients with MPN.

19752087
Correction of the abnormal trafficking of primary myelofibrosis CD34+ cells by treatment with chromatin-modifying agents.
The abnormal trafficking of CD34+ cells is a unique characteristic of primary myelofibrosis (PMF). We have further studied the behavior of PMF CD34+ cells by examining their homing to the marrow and the spleens of nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient (NOD/SCID) mice. Following the infusion of PMF and normal granulocyte colony-stimulating factor-mobilized peripheral blood (mPB) CD34+ cells into NOD/SCID mice, reduced numbers of PMF CD34+ cells and granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming unit (CFU-GM) compared with mPB were detected in the marrow of these mice, whereas similar numbers of PMF and mPB CD34+ cells and CFU-GM homed to their spleens. The abnormal homing of PMF CD34+ cells was associated with reduced expression of CXCR4, but was not related to the presence of JAK2V617F. The sequential treatment of PMF CD34+ cells with the chromatin-modifying agents 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5azaD) and trichostatin A (TSA), but not treatment with small molecule inhibitors of JAK2, resulted in the generation of increased numbers of CD34+CXCR4+ cells, which was accompanied by enhanced homing of PMF CD34+ cells to the marrow but not the spleens of NOD/SCID mice. Following 5azaD/TSA treatment, JAK2V617F-negative PMF hematopoietic progenitor cells preferentially homed to the marrow but not the spleens of recipient mice. Our data suggest that PMF CD34+ cells are characterized by a reduced ability to home to the marrow but not the spleens of NOD/SCID mice and that this homing defect can be corrected by sequential treatment with chromatin-modifying agents.

19293426
The presence of JAK2V617F mutation in the liver endothelial cells of patients with Budd-Chiari syndrome.
Patients with myeloproliferative disorders are at a high risk of developing thrombotic events. Several investigators have hypothesized that endothelial cell (EC) abnormalities might contribute to this prothrombotic state. Budd-Chiari syndrome (BCS) and portal vein thrombosis have been reported to be associated with JAK2V617F-positive hematopoiesis. We explored whether JAK2V617F was present in ECs in the vessels of polycythemia vera (PV) patients with BCS using laser capture microdissection followed by nested polymerase chain reaction or reverse-transcribed polymerase chain reaction. The ECs of the 2 BCS patients with PV were homozygous for the JAK2V617F and were shown to express transcripts characteristic of ECs but not hematopoietic cells. ECs of the other BCS patient with PV and 2 patients with hepatoportal sclerosis without PV contained exclusively wild-type JAK2. The presence of JAK2V617F in both ECs and hematopoietic cells belonging to BCS patients with PV indicate that ECs in PV are involved by the malignant process and that in a subpopulation of the patients the disease might originate from a common cell of origin for hematopoietic and ECs.

19196660
Pivotal role of mast cells in pruritogenesis in patients with myeloproliferative disorders.
Pruritus is a common symptom in patients with Philadelphia chromosome-negative myeloproliferative disorders (MPDs). The pathophysiology of MPD-associated pruritus is unclear. We have demonstrated that MPD mast cells (MCs) are involved by the malignant process. In the present study, we explored the hypothesis that MCs play an important role in the development of pruritogenesis in MPDs. We found that MPD MCs released significantly greater amounts of pruritogenic factors, including histamine, leukotrienes, and interleukin-31 (IL-31) than normal MCs. Elevated levels of IL-31 were also observed in MPD CD3(+) cell-conditioned media. MPD MCs exhibited increased migratory behavior in response to stem cell factor or interleukin-8, which was associated with increased filamentous-actin content. Furthermore, the presence of pruritus in MPDs was statistically correlated with a greater number of MCs being generated by CD34(+) cells, a greater number of MC colonies being formed by CD34(+) cells, decreased apoptosis and prostaglandin D(2) release by cultured MCs, and higher plasma levels of IL-31. These data demonstrate that functional abnormalities of MPD MCs probably lead to pruritogenesis in patients with MPDs. These studies provide cellular and molecular targets for the development of antipruritus drugs for patients with MPDs.

18715806
Circulating angiogenic monocyte progenitor cells are reduced in JAK2V617F high allele burden myeloproliferative disorders.
The clinical course of patients with Philadelphia chromosome negative myeloproliferative disorder is frequently complicated by thrombotic events. Post-natal vasculogenesis has been proposed to play a critical role in angiogenesis by acting through a hierarchy of endothelial progenitor cells. Some endothelial progenitor cells have been shown to share a number of features associated with monocytes while other more primitive progenitor cells produce endothelial cells in vitro exclusively. The cells which share features of monocytes and endothelial cells have been termed angiogenic monocytes. Reduced levels of angiogenic monocyte progenitor cells have been reported to be predictive of atherosclerotic disease progression. Angiogenic monocyte progenitor cells were assayed in vitro from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells of myeloproliferative disorder patients. Angiogenic monocyte colonies were plucked and analyzed for endothelial cells and hematopoietic cell markers, JAK2V617F and their ability to incorporate into vascular endothelium following their transplantation into non-obese diabetic, severe combine immunodeficient mice. Myeloproliferative disorder angiogenic monocyte colonies that were detected were uniformly JAK2V617F positive and produced cells that expressed phenotypic markers characteristic of both monocytes and endothelial cells. Reduced numbers of angiogenic monocyte colonies were present in the blood of myeloproliferative disorder patients with a high JAK2V617F burden (>50%), (p<0.01). Transplanted angiogenic monocytes were able to contribute to the vascular endothelium of non-obese diabetic, severe combine immunodeficient mice. These studies suggest that reduced numbers of circulating angiogenic monocyte progenitors contribute to the propensity to develop thrombotic complications in myeloproliferative disorder patients.

18024650
Biology and treatment of primary myelofibrosis.
Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is a chronic myeloproliferative disorder associated with an average survival of less than 5 years. Therapy for PMF has used chemotherapeutic agents, immunomodulatory drugs, or biological-response modifiers that have not always been directed at the biological processes that underlie the origins of PMF. Such strategies are palliative and have an uncertain effect on survival. At present, allogeneic stem cell transplantation (ASCT) is the only means of altering the natural history of patients with PMF and provides the only hope for cure of this disorder. Enthusiasm for ASCT in PMF has been muted due to an unacceptable transplantation-related morbidity and mortality in patients receiving fully myeloablative conditioning regimens. Recently, a variety of reduced-intensity conditioning regimens have been utilized in older patients with PMF with significant comorbidities with promising results. Greater understanding of the cellular and molecular events that lead to the development of PMF have provided the opportunity for targeted therapies for PMF. Such therapies must be first evaluated in phase 1/2 trials using a variety of endpoints to assess their efficacy and their potential associated toxicities. The performance of randomized clinical trials comparing these agents to the present standard of care would permit for the first time evidence-based therapeutic decisions to be made for patients with PMF.

17764815
Behavior of CD34+ cells isolated from patients with polycythemia vera in NOD/SCID mice.
We investigated if polycythemia vera (PV) peripheral blood (PB) CD34+ cells contain cells capable of engrafting nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient (NOD/SCID) mice and if the JAK2V617F mutational burden of these cells alters their behavior in NOD/SCID mice. CD34+ cells isolated from patients with PV, idiopathic myelofibrosis (IM), or granulocyte colony-stimulating factor-mobilized normal donors were transplanted into sublethally irradiated NOD/SCID mice. Cells engrafted into the NOD/SCID mice were analyzed flow cytometrically using lineage-specific antibodies. Genomic DNA was extracted from granulocytes, CD34+ cells, and sorted human CD45(+) cells purified from the bone marrow cells of these mice to examine their JAK2V617F mutational burdens. Multilineage human cell engraftment was observed in mice transplanted with CD34+ cells from mobilized normal volunteers, IM patients and PV patients with high JAK2V617F burden, but not in mice receiving grafts from PV patients with low JAK2V617F burden. The differentiation program of engrafting PV CD34+ cells with high JAK2V617F burden was remarkably different than that of IM CD34+ cells. The JAK2V617F allele frequency in the human CD45+ cells isolated from the mice receiving CD34+ cells was lower than that observed in the CD34+ cell grafts, indicating the persistence of a JAK2V617F negative compartment of stem cells. We conclude that PB CD34+ cells from PV patients with high JAK2V617F burden and patients with IM contain NOD/SCID repopulating cells, and that differentiation program of IM and PV CD34+ cells are dramatically different.

17713553
T cells from patients with polycythemia vera elaborate growth factors which contribute to endogenous erythroid and megakaryocyte colony formation.
In the present study, we report that media conditioned by polycythemia vera (PV) CD3+ cells promote BFU-E and CFU-Mk colony formation by both cord blood and PV peripheral blood CD34+ cells in the absence of exogenous cytokines and promoting megakaryocyte proplatelet formation. CD3+ cells constitutively produce elevated levels of IL-11, while stimulation with the addition of phytohemagglutinin (PHA) increased GM-CSF levels in most of the patients with PV. Anti-IL-11-neutralizing antibody partially inhibited the formation of BFU-E and CFU-Mk colonies promoted by PV CD3+ cell-conditioned media. Although IL-11 is not produced by normal T cells, real-time PCR and flow cytometric analysis showed that IL-11 was upregulated in the CD3+ cells of most PV patients as compared to normal CD3+ cells. In addition, a greater percentage of BFU-E colonies formed by PV CD34+ cells in the presence of PV CD3+ cell-conditioned media alone were JAK2V617F-positive as compared with that induced by EPO. We conclude that dysregulated production of soluble growth factor(s), including IL-11 and GM-CSF by PV T cells, contributes to the in vitro formation of erythroid colonies in the absence of exogenous cytokines by PV CD34+ cells and likely plays a role in sustaining hematopoiesis in PV.

