21344347
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) type 1, 2, and 3: a review of the liver pathology findings.
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestatic diseases encompass a group of autosomal recessive hereditary diseases, which usually present in infancy or childhood, with cholestasis of hepatocellular origin. The currently preferred nomenclature for the three PFIC disorders that have been characterized to date is FIC1 deficiency, BSEP deficiency, and MDR3 deficiency, relating to mutations in the specific genes involved in bile acid formation and transport. Since the first description of these diseases, extensive clinical, biochemical, and molecular studies have increased our understanding of the features specific to each one of them. This review focuses mainly on the liver histology, summarizing their characteristic pathologic features, the correlation to specific genotypes, and complications arising with disease progression.

19235665
Chronic rejection preceded by central perivenulitis, rapidly ensuing after liver transplantation in a pediatric patient.
A 15-year-old boy who underwent liver transplantation for fulminant Wilson's disease, presented with elevated transaminases 2 months post-transplant. He had recently seroconverted from previous Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) naive status and by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) had increasing viral load copies of EBV in blood. A liver biopsy was obtained 6 weeks post-transplant, which showed isolated central perivenulitis (CP). His immunosuppresion was reduced and antiviral therapy was added with subsequent increase in liver transaminases. A second liver biopsy 6 weeks later again showed isolated CP. Subsequent further reduction in immunosuppression was followed by the appearance of portal-based moderate acute cellular rejection that was resistant to immunosuppressive treatment and rapidly evolved into ductopenic chronic rejection. This case report underlines the difficulties in interpreting isolated perivenulitis, especially in the setting of EBV seroconversion, and suggests that it may not only represent a form of acute rejection but also a predictor of rapidly progressing chronic rejection.

19005013
Successful split liver-kidney transplant for factor H associated hemolytic uremic syndrome.
A male infant with a family history of thrombotic microangiopathy developed atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS). Case report. Genetic analysis demonstrated a heterozygous mutation (S1191L) of CFH, the gene coding complement factor H (CFH). The child suffered many episodes of HUS, each treated with plasma exchange. In time, despite initiation of a prophylactic regimen of plasma exchange, his renal function declined significantly. At the age of 4 yr he received a (split liver) combined liver-kidney transplant (LKT) with preoperative plasma exchange and enoxaparin anticoagulation. Initial function of both grafts was excellent and is maintained for nearly 2 yr. This report adds to the small but growing number of individuals in whom LKT has provided a favorable outcome for aHUS associated with CFH mutation, expands the technique of using a split liver graft, and describes the unique histologic features of subclinical liver disease in HUS.

17873749
Multiple exudative ulcers and pseudopolyps in allergic eosinophilic gastroenteritis that responded to dietary therapy.


17873744
Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis in children with eosinophilic esophagitis.
Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis has been reported in adults with eosinophilic esophagitis (EE). Our goal was to determine the prevalence of esophageal fibrosis in children with EE, to determine whether it is specific for EE, and to correlate it with clinical and pathological features. Twenty-one children with EE, 7 with eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 6 with gastroesophageal reflux disease, and 17 control children were studied. Distal esophageal biopsy specimens containing lamina propria were evaluated for extent of subepithelial collagen deposition by use of trichrome staining. Fibrosis was defined as abnormally increased collagen deposition, determined after the establishment of normal patterns on sections of esophagus from pediatric autopsies. Maximum numbers of intraepithelial and lamina propria eosinophils per high-power field by hematoxylin and eosin staining and mast cells per high-power field by immunohistochemical staining for tryptase were determined. Eosinophil and mast cell degranulation in epithelium and lamina propria was determined by use of immunohistochemical staining for major basic protein and tryptase, respectively. The patients' records were reviewed. Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis was present in 12 (57%) patients with EE, 1 with eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 0 with gastroesophageal reflux disease, and 1 control patient. Forty-two percent of those with fibrosis had dysphagia, 80% of whom had food impactions; these symptoms were present only in patients with fibrosis. Within the EE group, fibrosis was not associated with duration of symptoms or with increasing numbers of infiltrating eosinophils/mast cells, but it was associated with eosinophil degranulation. Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis is prevalent in EE and is specific for the disease in children. It is associated with dysphagia, and it may explain and predict future esophageal dysmotility. Fibrosis is related to the extent of esophageal eosinophil activation, as evidenced by eosinophil degranulation.

17682978
Bile duct paucity in infancy.


17601903
Prepubertal unilateral fibrous hyperplasia of the labium majus: report of eight cases and review of the literature.
To report and propose a consensus term for eight cases of a newly recognized, asymptomatic, rapidly growing unilateral labium majus mass without palpable borders in prepubertal girls, appearing to be temporally associated with the physiologic increase of adrenal hormones. Histologic examination, special stains, and immunohistochemistry were performed on all cases. In our personal cases, electron microscopy and chromosomal analysis were also performed, together with pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), inguinal exploration, vaginoscopy with biopsies, and adrenal hormone levels. Of the eight cases, seven were Ashkenazi Jewish girls from the same area in New York City. The unilateral masses were asymptomatic, soft, without palpable borders. The overlying skin had a slightly tan peau d'orange surface. The masses could not be completely excised because they extended into the contiguous pelvic floor. Histologically, the masses were composed of bland hypocellular fibrous tissue extending into the deep subcutaneous tissue. The masses blended into the surrounding tissue and adjacent pelvic floor as shown by MRI preoperatively and postoperatively. Residual tissue did not progress after incomplete resection. These fibrous lesions develop in months at the time of physiologic increase in adrenal hormone secretion just before puberty and subsequently appear to stop growing. The surgeon should not attempt a complete removal but simply excise sufficient tissue for a reasonable cosmetic result and to confirm the diagnosis. The lesions reflect fibroblastic hyperplasia, which is possibly hormone-driven. The ethnic and geographic clustering of cases raises consideration of environmental exposures or genetic predisposition.

