18498030
Fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography for evaluation of indeterminate lung nodules: assigning a probability of malignancy may be preferable to binary readings.
To assess the diagnostic value of fluorine-18 fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) using standard uptake values (SUV) in the differential diagnoses of indeterminate pulmonary nodules. Specifically, we assessed the probability of malignancy for various SUV ranges, and compared the diagnostic efficacy of SUV with and without correction for partial volume effects on the basis of lesion size. The FDG-PET scans performed on 158 patients with biopsy-proven pulmonary lesions seen on computed tomography (CT) scan were retrospectively reviewed. Histopathological confirmation was obtained to establish the diagnosis of the lesions. A region of interest (ROI) was drawn for each lesion, and FDG uptake was quantified (SUV(raw)). The SUV(raw) values were normalized for the "size" of the pulmonary lesions measured on CT (SUV(size)). Sensitivity and specificity of FDG-PET for pulmonary lesions <2 cm in diameter or > or =2 cm in diameter were determined at SUV cutoff values of 2.5. The areas under the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve for SUV(raw) and SUV(size) regarding the presence of malignancy were compared for statistical differences. The frequency of malignant lesions for each range of SUVs was obtained to produce the probability of cancer (POC). The mean SUV(raw) was 3.17 +/- 2.76 and 9.18 +/- 6.72 for benign and malignant lesions, respectively. When a SUV(raw) value of 2.5 was used as a cutoff, sensitivity and specificity were 89% and 51%, respectively, for all lesion sizes. The sensitivity and specificity at a cutoff SUV(raw) of 2.5 for lesions less than 2 cm in diameter were 75% and 72%, respectively, and 92% and 41% for lesions 2 cm or greater, respectively. The sensitivity and specificity at a cutoff SUV(size) of 2.5 were 88% and 42%, respectively. The area under the ROC curves for SUV(raw) and SUV(size) was 0.816 and 0.743, respectively (P value 0.034). When the SUV(raw) was divided into three groups, the probability of malignancy was 26% when the SUV(raw) was <2, 57% for 2 < or = SUV(raw) < 6, and 89% for SUV(raw) > or = 6. The FDG-PET is a reasonably accurate and useful tool for characterizing the nature of indeterminate pulmonary lesions, although the specificity was not as high as that reported in the literature, probably owing in part to our patient population and selection bias. Our data suggest that reporting the results of PET studies as a probability rather than as positive or negative for malignancy would be more useful for further management decision making. Correction of SUVs for tumor size did not improve accuracy.

18157529
Temporal relation between temperature change and FDG uptake in brown adipose tissue.
It has been reported that the prevalence of (18)F fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in brown adipose tissue (BAT) is related to outdoor temperature, i.e., more frequent during the colder periods of the year. The purpose of this study was to assess the temporal relationship between BAT FDG uptake and temperature. We correlated the prevalence of BAT with average temperatures (divided into five temperature ranges) of seven different durations. One thousand four hundred ninety-five consecutive FDG Positron emission tomography (PET) studies in 1,159 patients (566 male and 593 female, mean age = 60.4 years) were retrospectively reviewed. FDG uptake with distinct patterns compatible with BAT was identified by a consensus of two readers. The local daily average temperature from January 2000 to November 2003 (beginning 60 days before the date of first PET scan) were obtained, and 2-, 3-, 7-, 14-, 30-, and 60-day average temperatures before the date of a PET study were calculated. The prevalence of BAT FDG uptake was correlated with these various average temperatures. The daily, 2-day, 3-day, and 7-day average temperature had an inverse relation with the prevalence of BAT, i.e., the lower the temperature, the higher prevalence of BAT. When the temperature was averaged over 14 days or longer, this inverse relationship between the temperature and the prevalence of BAT was no longer preserved. Our data suggest that increased FDG uptake in BAT occurs more often as an acute response to cold weather (1-7 days) rather than to prolonged periods of average cold weather.

17242559
Appearance of descended superior parathyroid adenoma on SPECT parathyroid imaging.
An ectopic superior parathyroid adenoma (SPA) descends inferoposteriorly and can migrate to the posterior mediastinum. It often appears on sestamibi planar parathyroid imaging as an inferior lesion, which can be misleading to inexperienced surgeons. Its correct identification before surgery will be of great help for correct surgical planning. We assessed the appearance of descended SPA on SPECT imaging. Sestamibi SPECT imaging studies performed on 103 patients who had parathyroid adenomas with their origin and locations confirmed by surgery and histology were retrospectively reviewed. Abnormal foci seen on the SPECT images were grouped as to location relative to the thyroid gland as superior (S), middle (M), and inferior (I). The proximity between the focus and the thyroid on the sagittal SPECT images was graded from 0 to 2 with 2 being widely separated. Of the 103 SPECT studies, 89 were positive. Eleven of the 89 visualized foci were at the S level: all were SPA. Ten foci were at the M level, including 6 SPA and 4 inferior parathyroid adenomas (IPA). There were 68 foci at the I level; none (0%) of 56 in the I0 location, 2 (25%) of 8 foci in the I1 location, and all (100%) of 4 abnormal foci in the I2 location were descended SPAs. The more posteriorly located the abnormal focus, the higher the probability of descended SPA. Recognition of the characteristic appearance of descended SPA on SPECT imaging can have a significant impact on the surgical approach and prevent failed neck exploration.

