21422366
Cessation of clopidogrel before major abdominal procedures.
To determine whether timing of clopidogrel bisulfate cessation influences outcome after abdominal operations. A review was performed of 104 patients receiving clopidogrel who underwent abdominal operations between March 2003 and March 2009. Patients were grouped by last clopidogrel use: group A (<7 days) and group B (?7 days). Of 104 patients, 43 were in group A and 61 were in group B. Overall, 6 deaths occurred (group A, 5 patients [12%] vs group B, 1 [2%]; P = .03) and 27 patients required intensive care unit admission (group A, 16 patients [37%] vs group B, 11 [18%]; P = .03). Twenty-one patients developed a postoperative bleeding complication; 19 complications were managed by blood transfusion and 2 required reoperation. Group A vs group B had significantly increased rates of postoperative bleeding requiring blood transfusion (13 patients [30%] vs 8 [13%]; P = .03). No significant difference in postoperative bleeding resulting in reoperation or mortality was demonstrated. Timing of clopidogrel cessation within 7 days did not affect postoperative bleeding risk. Eighty-nine patients (86%) underwent elective operations (group A, 30 patients [70%] vs group B, 59 [97%]; P < .001). While elective patients in group A vs those in group B demonstrated a trend toward increased risk of postoperative bleeding requiring transfusion (7 patients [23%] vs 8 [14%]; P = .25), no significant difference in intensive care unit admission (group A, 6 patients [20%] vs group B, 9 [15%]; P = .31) or mortality (1 [3%] vs 1 [2%]; P = .62) was demonstrated. While clopidogrel use within 7 days of an operation significantly increased the risk of postoperative bleeding, most bleeding episodes were successfully managed by transfusion without an increase in bleeding-related mortality or necessity for reoperation. After controlling for operative urgency, no significant difference in mortality or intensive care unit admission was demonstrated in patients undergoing elective procedures. High-risk patients undergoing elective operations may not require preoperative clopidogrel cessation. When clopidogrel cessation is warranted, 7 days before the procedure is recommended. Perioperative risk does not vary by timing of cessation within 7 days of an operation.

21376641
Paired immunoglobin-like receptor-B regulates the suppressive function and fate of myeloid-derived suppressor cells.
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) bear characteristics of precursors for both M1 and M2 macrophages. The molecular mechanism underlying the differentiation into M1 and M2 macrophages and the relationship of this differentiation to antitumor responses remains largely undefined. Herein, we investigate the potential function of paired immunoglobulin-like receptor B (PIR-B), also known as leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor subfamily B member 3 (LILRB3) in MDSC differentiation, and its role in tumor-induced immunity. Our studies indicated that MDSCs genetically ablated for PIR-B (Lilrb3(-/-)) underwent a specific transition to M1-like cells when entering the periphery from bone marrow, resulting in decreased suppressive function, regulatory T cell activation activity, primary tumor growth, and lung metastases. Activation of Toll-like receptor (TLR), signal transducers, and activators of transcription 1 (STAT1), and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-?B) signaling in Lilrb3(-/-) MDSC promoted the acquisition of M1 phenotype. Inhibition of the PIR-B signaling pathway promoted MDSC differentiation into M1 macrophages.

21339428
Persistent noncompliance with the work-hour regulation.
To investigate the reason for noncompliance with the work-hour regulation by surgical residents. Nationwide anonymous survey (November 1, 2007, to March 1, 2008). Academic center. Surgical residents throughout the United States. Incidence of noncompliance remains high and reasons for noncompliance are multifactorial. The first 141 questionnaires returned were included in this analysis. Responders consisted of postgraduate year (PGY)-1 (32.6%), PGY-2 (19.1%), PGY-3 (17.7%), PGY-4 (13.5%), and PGY-5 (17.0%) surgical residents. Many residents were categorical (79.4%), male (61.7%), and married (53.2%). Ninety-eight percent of residents were aware of the work-hour regulation, with 72.1% of residents in favor of it. However, noncompliance with the work-hour regulation was 64.6%, with 21.1% of residents working more than 90 h/wk (average, 86.6 h/wk). The most problematic regulations to follow were "at least 10 hours of rest between duty hours" (36.9%), "24-hour limit of continuous care plus 6 additional hours for continuity of care and educational objectives" (26.1%), and "80-hour work limit over 4 weeks" (22.7%). Education and continuity in patient care were the main reasons associated with noncompliance. Noncompliance was highest in trauma (25.2%) and vascular surgery (16.3%) residents. In addition, 65.2% of the attending physicians do not agree with implementing work-hour regulation standards in the surgical faculty. The survey demonstrates that noncompliance with the work-hour regulation is prevalent. The reasons for noncompliance are multifactorial. These findings will help restructure training programs in the efforts to increase compliance with the work-hour regulation.

21304363
Completely intracorporeal retraction of the gallbladder for laparoendoscopic single site (LESS) surgery.
Laparoendoscopic single site surgery (LESS) cholecystectomy requires a creative solution to retract the gallbladder. Transabdominal suture retraction is a commonly used technique to achieve adequate exposure of the critical structures within Calot's triangle. To avoid the multiple punctures of the gallbladder and abdominal wall required by such suture retraction, we developed a novel internal retractor specifically for use during LESS cholecystectomy. This retractor consists of a laparoscopic bulldog clamp fitted with a small metal hook, and was successfully used in a recent case of LESS cholecystectomy.

20956337
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells prevent type 1 diabetes in murine models.
Effective immunotherapy for type 1 diabetes (T1D) relies on active induction of peripheral tolerance. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) play a critical role in suppressing immune responses in various pathologic settings via multiple mechanisms, including expansion of regulatory T cells (Tregs). In this study, we investigated whether MDSCs could act as APCs to induce expansion of Ag-specific Tregs, suppress T cell proliferation, and prevent autoimmune T1D development. We found that MDSC-mediated expansion of Tregs and T cell suppression required MHC-dependent Ag presentation. A murine T1D model was established in INS-HA/RAG(-/-) mice in which animals received CD4-HA-TCR transgenic T cells via adoptive transfer. We found a significant reduction in the incidence of diabetes in recipients receiving MDSC plus HA, but not OVA peptide, leading to 75% diabetes-free mice among the treated animals. To test further whether MDSCs could prevent diabetes onset in NOD mice, nondiabetic NOD/SCID mice were injected with inflammatory T cells from diabetic NOD mice. MDSCs significantly prevented diabetes onset, and 60% of MDSC-treated mice remained diabetes free. The pancreata of treated mice showed significantly lower levels of lymphocyte infiltration in islet and less insulitis compared with that of the control groups. The protective effects of MDSCs might be mediated by inducing anergy in autoreactive T cells and the development of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) Tregs. Thist study demonstrates a remarkable capacity of transferred MDSCs to downregulate Ag-specific autoimmune responses and prevent diabetes onset, suggesting that MDSCs possess great potential as a novel cell-based tolerogenic therapy in the control of T1D and other autoimmune diseases.

20822740
Surgical management of acute right lower-quadrant pain in pregnancy: a prospective cohort study.
The etiology of right lower-quadrant pain in pregnant patients is a challenge in diagnosis. We discuss the surgical issues among pregnant patients with right lower-quadrant pain and demonstrate the method to diagnosis. This was a prospective cohort study with enrollment during 2 years. Pregnant patients presenting with acute right lower-quadrant abdominal pain and requiring surgical consult were included. Demographics, gestational age, symptoms, workup, operative results, and pathology were recorded. One-hundred patients were enrolled, 38 had nonspecific abdominal pain, 15 of whom were admitted. There were no differences in temperature, leukocyte count, and neutrophil shift among the admitted and nonadmitted patients. Forty-one patients underwent surgery and had a substantially higher gestational age, leukocyte count, and neutrophil shift than those who did not. Ultrasound was performed considerably more often on first-trimester patients (81.6%) compared with second- (58.1%) and third-trimester (57.9%) patients, and CT scan was used considerably less in the first trimester compared with the second and third trimesters, and considerably less than ultrasound for the first trimester. Sensitivity of ultrasound for appendicitis was inversely correlated to fetal gestational age, and CT scan retained high sensitivity and specificity throughout pregnancy. This is one of the first prospective studies assessing diagnoses and workup of pregnant patients with right lower-quadrant pain. We recommend abdominal ultrasound be the first imaging modality for patients for whom surgical consultation is necessary, thereby determining if the pathology is obstetric. If inconclusive, a CT scan is necessary to guide treatment.

20713931
Impact of race and socioeconomic status on presentation and management of ventral hernias.
To assess for disparity in presentation and management of ventral hernias. Retrospective review. Academic center. Three hundred twenty-one patients who underwent ventral hernia repair from 2005 to 2008. Disparity in ventral hernia presentation, management, and outcome. Univariate analysis was conducted by unpaired t test and chi(2) test. Black individuals were more likely than white individuals to present with acute hernia complications requiring emergent surgery (11% vs 4%; P < .01). This finding persisted after controlling for socioeconomic status (SES). Assessment by SES demonstrated patients with Medicaid were more likely to present with incarcerated or strangulated hernias (39% vs 25%; P < .001) and had longer hospital stays (4.7 vs 3 days; P < .05) as compared with patients with private insurance. Patients classified as low income had increased 30-day readmission rates as compared with average- or high-income patients (32% vs 9% vs 7%, respectively; P < .01). No difference in use of minimally invasive technique, performance of primary vs mesh repair, or postoperative morbidity or mortality was demonstrated. Twelve-month follow-up demonstrated no difference in recurrence rate by race or SES. Our study demonstrates the existence of disparity in patient presentation with complicated ventral hernia. Despite clear disparity by race and SES, at our institution, disparate presentation did not equate to disparate treatment or postoperative complications. No difference was demonstrated by use of operative technique, perioperative outcome, or 12-month recurrence rate. This study illustrates the need for long-term measures directed at reevaluation of organizational and institutional factors that perpetuate inequality.

20607756
The clinical utility of Ki-67 in assessing tumor biology and aggressiveness in patients with appendiceal carcinoids.
To elucidate the correlation of Ki-67 with tumor biology and survival in appendiceal carcinoid tumors. A retrospective chart review conducted on 51 patients with appendiceal carcinoid tumors who underwent surgical intervention from 1991 to 2008. MIB-1, an antibody of Ki-67, was used to determine cell proliferation and correlated with clinical and histological parameters. MIB-1 index was categorized according to the World Health Organization (WHO) classification. Of the 51 patients, 32 had tumors <2 cm; 3 >2 cm; and 16 with unspecified tumor size. Increased MIB proliferative index did not significantly correlate with increasing tumor size (P = 0.426). Twelve patients had metastatic disease on presentation: 9 had MIB-1 index <2%, 1 had index 2-15% and 2 with index >15%. No significant correlation between MIB index and metastasis was demonstrated (P = 0.68). Median follow-up was 40 months (range 10-183 months) with a 51% follow-up rate. Seven mortalities and three recurrences presented in 26 patients. Assessment of survival demonstrated significantly decreased survival by increasing MIB index. Survival rate by MIB index was as follows: <2% was 97%, 2-15% was 85% and >15% was 67% (P = 0.02). Increased MIB index significantly correlated with decreased survival. No correlation was demonstrated by MIB index and tumor size or presentation with metastatic disease.

20421108
Laparoscopic antrectomy for the treatment of type I gastric carcinoid tumors.
While the optimal treatment for type I gastric carcinoid tumors remains controversial, there is evidence to suggest that in multifocal disease, antrectomy may not only control local disease but also may lead to enterochromaffin-like cell (ECL) hyperplasia regression compared to medical and endoscopic treatments. A single institution retrospective review of eight consecutive patients with multifocal type I gastric carcinoid tumor patients with no evidence of metastatic disease was performed from 2005 to 2006. All of these patients underwent laparoscopic antrectomy with Billroth II reconstruction. Patients' preoperative gastrin, chromogranin A levels, and biopsy and surgical specimen slides were compared with postoperative laboratory and biopsy slides. Pathology slides were reanalyzed by a blinded pathologist from our institution for evidence of tumor and ECL hyperplasia regression. All patients tolerated the procedure well with no reoperations or mortalities. Six of eight patient complained of mild reflux which was treated medically. One of eight had a mild wound infection which resolved with a course of cephalexin. Gastrin levels significantly decreased (98.9%) in all patients (P = 0.001). Furthermore, chromogranin A levels also significantly decreased (81.4%). Eight of eight patients showed no evidence of carcinoid tumor after surgery at mean biopsy follow-up of 17 mo (range 2-35 mo), however there was ECL hyperplasia after resection. Four of eight patients (50%) showed regression of ECL hyperplasia on postop biopsy, while the remaining four of eight showed no evidence of regression. This is the largest case series to investigate the surgical, clinical, and histologic outcomes of laparoscopic antrectomy in type I gastric carcinoid. Our data suggest that laparoscopic antrectomy is a safe and minimally invasive approach to treat nonmetastatic type I gastric carcinoid. All patients had no evidence of gross or microscopic disease at follow-up biopsy and almost half had regression of ECL hyperplasia at follow-up suggesting that antrectomy may be sufficient to prevent tumor recurrence. However, continued regular endoscopic surveillance and medical follow-up of patients with ECL hyperplasia are recommended.

20409527
Surgical aspects of fulminant Clostridium difficile colitis.
Clostridium difficile-associated disease (CDAD) is responsible for the majority of nosocomial diarrhea, and fulminant C difficile colitis can have mortality upwards of 80%. Early identification and treatment of fulminant C difficile colitis is critical to patient care, but timing of surgical intervention remains difficult. This review summarizes the epidemiology, predictors of development, and management of fulminant C difficile colitis. A literature search was conducted between January 1989 and May 2009 using the keywords "clostridium difficile colitis" or "fulminant clostridium difficile colitis" and "surgery." Articles not in English, those not involving human subjects, and case reports were excluded. Early diagnosis and treatment with subtotal colectomy and end ileostomy is critical in reducing the mortality associated with fulminant colitis. Patients who have a history of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), recent surgery, prior treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), vasopressor requirements, leukocytosis, or increased lactate should have early surgical consultation and operative intervention.

20404288
Risk factors for anastomotic leak following colorectal surgery: a case-control study.
To assess anastomotic leak (AL) risk factors in a large patient series. Case-control study. The Mount Sinai Hospital. Ninety patients with AL following colorectal resection and 180 patients who underwent uncomplicated procedures. Risk factors associated with development of AL. The AL rate was 2.6%. Five risk factors for AL were identified: (1) preoperative albumin level lower than 3.5 g/dL (odds ratio [OR] 2.8; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.3-5.1) (P = .03); (2) operative time of 200 minutes or longer (OR, 3.4; 95% CI, 2.0-5.8) (P = .01); (3) intraoperative blood loss of 200 mL or more (OR, 3.1; 95% CI, 1.9-5.3) (P = .01); (4) intraoperative transfusion requirement (OR, 2.3; 95% CI, 1.2-4.5) (P = .02); and (5) histologic specimen margin involvement in disease process in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (OR, 2.9; 95% CI, 1.4-6.1) (P = .01). Patients with all 3 intraoperative risk factors had an OR of 22.1; 95% CI, 2.8-175.4 (P < .001) for development of AL. Histologic resection margin involvement in disease process in patients with IBD, preoperative albumin levels lower than 3.5 g/dL, intraoperative blood loss of 200 mL or more, operative time of 200 minutes or more, and/or intraoperative transfusion requirement increased AL risk. Enteral nutritional optimization prior to elective surgery is essential. Proximal diversion should be considered for patients with all 3 intraoperative risk factors because they are at high risk for AL.

20204417
Laparoscopic subtotal colectomy for medically refractory ulcerative colitis: the time has come.
To evaluate laparoscopic versus open subtotal colectomy (STC) in patients with ulcerative colitis (UC) requiring urgent or emergent operative intervention. A retrospective review was performed of 90 patients with medically refractory UC who underwent STC with end ileostomy at The Mount Sinai Medical Center from 2002 to 2007. Patients with toxic megacolon were excluded. Univariate analysis was conducted by unpaired Student t-test and chi-square test. Results are presented as mean +/- 95% confidence interval. Ninety patients underwent STC, 29 by laparoscopic and 61 by open approach. In patients undergoing laparoscopic versus open STC, intraoperative blood loss was decreased (130.4 +/- 38.4 vs. 201.4 +/- 43.2 ml, p < 0.05) and operative time prolonged (216.4 +/- 20.2 vs. 169.9 +/- 14.4 min, p < 0.01). In the absence of postoperative complication, hospital length of stay (4.5 +/- 0.7 vs. 6 +/- 1.3 days, p < 0.001) was shorter in laparoscopic versus open group. No mortalities occurred. Overall morbidity, 30-day readmission, and reoperation were equivalent regardless of operative approach. Wound complications were absent in the laparoscopic group compared with 21.4% in the open group (p < 0.01). Follow-up at a mean of 36 months demonstrated no difference in restoration of gastrointestinal continuity. Laparoscopic STC confers the benefits of improved cosmesis, reduced intraoperative blood loss, negligible wound complications, and shorter hospital stay. Laparoscopy is a feasible and safe alternative to open STC in patients with UC refractory to medical therapy requiring urgent or emergent operation.

20073041
Development and function of myeloid-derived suppressor cells generated from mouse embryonic and hematopoietic stem cells.
Emerging evidence suggests that myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) have great potential as a novel immune intervention modality in the fields of transplantation and autoimmune diseases. Thus far, efforts to develop MDSC-based therapeutic strategies have been hampered by the lack of a reliable source of MDSCs. Here we show that functional MDSCs can be efficiently generated from mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells and bone marrow hematopoietic stem (HS) cells. In vitro-derived MDSCs encompass two homogenous subpopulations: CD115(+)Ly-6C(+) and CD115(+)Ly-6C(-) cells. The CD115(+)Ly-6C(+) subset is equivalent to the monocytic Gr-1(+)CD115(+)F4/80(+) MDSCs found in tumor-bearing mice. In contrast, the CD115(+)Ly-6C(-) cells, a previously unreported population of MDSCs, resemble the granulocyte/macrophage progenitors developmentally. In vitro, ES- and HS-MDSCs exhibit robust suppression against T-cell proliferation induced by polyclonal stimuli or alloantigens via multiple mechanisms involving nitric oxide synthase-mediated NO production and interleukin (IL)-10. Impressively, they display even stronger suppressive activity and significantly enhance ability to induce CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T-cell development compared with tumor-derived MDSCs. Furthermore, adoptive transfer of ES-MDSCs can effectively prevent alloreactive T-cell-mediated lethal graft-versus-host disease, leading to nearly 82% long-term survival among treated mice. The successful in vitro generation of MDSCs may represent a critical step toward potential clinical application of MDSCs.

19996287
Immune stimulatory receptor CD40 is required for T-cell suppression and T regulatory cell activation mediated by myeloid-derived suppressor cells in cancer.
Immune tolerance to tumors is often associated with accumulation of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and an increase in the number of T-regulatory cells (Treg). In tumor-bearing mice, MDSCs can themselves facilitate the generation of tumor-specific Tregs. In this study, we demonstrate that expression of the immune stimulatory receptor CD40 on MDSCs is required to induce T-cell tolerance and Treg accumulation. In an immune reconstitution model, adoptive transfer of Gr-1+CD115+ monocytic MDSCs derived from CD40-deficient mice failed to recapitulate the ability of wild-type MDSCs to induce tolerance and Treg development in vivo. Agonistic anti-CD40 antibodies phenocopied the effect of CD40 deficiency and also improved the therapeutic efficacy of IL-12 and 4-1BB immunotherapy in the treatment of advanced tumors. Our findings suggest that CD40 is essential not only for MDSC-mediated immune suppression but also for tumor-specific Treg expansion. Blockade of CD40-CD40L interaction between MDSC and Treg may provide a new strategy to ablate tumoral immune suppression and thereby heighten responses to immunotherapy.

19888635
Large epiphrenic diverticulum.


19879609
Significant parameters for surgery in adult intussusception.


19841363
Management and treatment of iliopsoas abscess.
Even with improved diagnostic modalities, the optimum management strategy for iliopsoas abscess (IPA) is not uniform, and a better understanding of treatment options is needed. Retrospective case series. Academic center. Sixty-one consecutive patients diagnosed as having IPA at the Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, New York, from August 1, 2000, to December 30, 2007. Development and cause of IPA, the need for additional interventions, morbidity, and mortality. The mean age of the patients was 53 years. Most patients were initially seen with pain (95% [58 of 61]), gastrointestinal tract complaints (43% [26 of 61]), and lower extremity pain (30% [18 of 61]). Primary and secondary abscesses occurred in 11% (7 of 61) and 89% (54 of 61), respectively. The most frequent underlying cause of secondary abscesses was inflammatory bowel disease. Broad-spectrum antibiotics were prescribed in all patients. Computed tomography was the most common diagnostic modality used. Abscesses were larger than 6 cm in 39% of patients (24 of 61), bilateral in 13% (8 of 61), and multiple in 25% (15 of 61). Nine patients were treated using antibiotics alone, with a success rate of 78% (7 of 9). Forty-eight patients initially underwent percutaneous drainage, which was successful in 40% (19 of 48). Among those with unresolved IPAs, 71% of patients ultimately required surgery, and the IPAs were typically associated with underlying gastrointestinal tract causes. Seven percent (4 of 61) of patients directly underwent exploratory surgery and drainage, and all of these interventions were successful. The overall mortality was 5% (3 of 61). Iliopsoas abscess remains a therapeutic challenge. Gastrointestinal tract disease is the most common cause, with computed tomography as the diagnostic modality of choice. Percutaneous drainage remains the initial treatment modality but is rarely the sole therapy required. Patients with inflammatory bowel disease are likely to require ultimate operative management.

19779946
Selective management of patients with acute biliary pancreatitis.
Detection of common bile duct (CBD) stones in patients with acute biliary pancreatitis (ABP) proves challenging. We hypothesized that grouping clinically significant predictors would increase reliability of detection. A retrospective review was performed of 144 consecutive patients who presented to a single tertiary care institution from 2002 to 2007 with ABP. Of the 144 patients, 32 had a persistent CBD stone. Following multivariate analysis, admission CBD size on ultrasound, gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT), alkaline phosphatase (AP), total bilirubin (TB), and direct bilirubin (DB) significantly correlated with persistent CBD stone. Receiver operator curve analysis and linear regression were applied to obtain optimal and equitable predictive values, and variables combined. Optimal values were: CBD >or= 9 mm; AP >or= 250 U/l; GGT >or= 350 U/l; TB >or= 3 mg/dl; and DB >or= 2 mg/dl. Presence of five variables had an associated odds ratio (OR) of 53.1 (p < 0.001) and four variables an OR of 8.97 (p = 0.004) for presence of persistent CBD stone. Zero variables conferred a significantly decreased probability of CBD stone, OR 0.15 (p < 0.001). Presence of one to three variables did not predict presence of CBD stone. Presence of four or five variables significantly correlated with persistent CBD stone. Biliary evaluation by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography is suggested, as initial magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) may only increase cost and delay time to intervention. In the absence of any variable, biliary evaluation by intraoperative cholangiogram may be sufficient. Decisions regarding patients with one to three variables should occur on a case-to-case basis. Initial biliary evaluation by MRCP is likely preferable, however, as no increased probability of CBD stone was identified, thus not warranting risks associated with intervention.

19325923
Current recommendations on diagnosis and management of right-sided diverticulitis.
We present the case of a 52-year-old female with recurrent symptomatic ascending colon diverticulitis who ultimately underwent elective laparoscopic right hemicolectomy. The following is a case report and literature review pertaining to right colonic diverticular disease.

19289670
Image of the month. Adrenal myelolipoma.


19276342
The novel role of tyrosine kinase inhibitor in the reversal of immune suppression and modulation of tumor microenvironment for immune-based cancer therapies.
In tumor-bearing hosts, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and T regulatory cells (Treg) play important roles in immune suppression, the reversal of which is vitally important for the success of immune therapy. We have shown that ckit ligand is required for MDSC accumulation and Treg development. We hypothesized that sunitinib malate, a receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, could reverse MDSC-mediated immune suppression and modulate the tumor microenvironment, thereby improving the efficacy of immune-based therapies. Treatment with sunitinib decreased the number of MDSC and Treg in advanced tumor-bearing animals. Furthermore, it not only reduced the suppressive function of MDSCs but also prevented tumor-specific T-cell anergy and Treg development. Interestingly, sunitinib treatment resulted in reduced expression of interleukin (IL)-10, transforming growth factor-beta, and Foxp3 but enhanced expression of Th1 cytokine IFN-gamma and increased CTL responses in isolated tumor-infiltrating leukocytes. A significantly higher percentage and infiltration of CD8 and CD4 cells was detected in tumors of sunitinib-treated mice when compared with control-treated mice. More importantly, the expression of negative costimulatory molecules CTLA4 and PD-1 in both CD4 and CD8 T cells, and PDL-1 expression on MDSC and plasmacytoid dendritic cells, was also significantly decreased by sunitinib treatment. Finally, sunitinib in combination with our immune therapy protocol (IL-12 and 4-1BB activation) significantly improves the long-term survival rate of large tumor-bearing mice. These data suggest that sunitinib can be used to reverse immune suppression and as a potentially useful adjunct for enhancing the efficacy of immune-based cancer therapy for advanced malignancies.

19228508
Laparoscopic management and longterm outcomes of gastrointestinal stromal tumors.
Surgery remains the standard for nonmetastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs). Laparoscopic surgery should be considered for these tumors, because their biologic behavior lends them to curative resection without requiring large margins or extensive lymph-adenectomies. A retrospective review was performed of patients who underwent laparoscopic treatment of GISTs at Mount Sinai Medical Center from 2000 to 2007. Kaplan-Meier method was used for survival analysis. Chi-square analysis was used to identify factors associated with poor outcomes. Laparoscopic surgery was attempted in 76 patients. The average age was 66 years, and 39 were men. Forty-two percent of patients presented with gastrointestinal bleeding. Tumors were located in the stomach (72%) and in the small bowel (28%). Mean tumor sizes were 4.2 and 3.9 cm, respectively. Operations included laparoscopic wedge resection (26%), partial gastrectomy (25%), sleeve (9%) gastrectomy, and small bowel resection (22%). Reasons for conversions (14%) were invasion of tumor into adjacent organs, adhesions, proximity to the gastroesophageal junction, large tumor size, or coincidental pathology. There was 1 mortality and a 10% morbidity rate, including an evisceration, obstruction, and pelvic hematoma requiring reoperation. Mean followup was 41 months (range, 3 to 102 months). The overall survival rate was 89%. Gastric and small bowel survival rates were the same (89%). The recurrence rate was 6%. The overall disease-free survival was 78% (77% gastric versus 82% small bowel). Three percent of patients died of metastatic disease. Adjuvant therapy was used on patients initially diagnosed with metastatic disease (n=5) and recurrent disease (n=4). Laparoscopic resection of GISTs is considered safe and effective. The longterm disease-free survival of 78% establishes this minimally invasive approach as comparable to open techniques.

19075169
Cystic duct stump leaks: after the learning curve.
To describe a series of patients who have had cystic duct stump leaks (CDSLs) after laparoscopic cholecystectomy and to compare the current presentation and management with that in previous studies. Two-institution retrospective case series and review of the previously published literature. Two teaching hospitals. Twelve patients who had CDSLs of 5751 patients who underwent total laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Symptoms at presentation, laboratory values, imaging modalities, treatment modalities, and operative indications and techniques. Between January 1, 1998, and March 31, 2007, 12 patients (0.21%) developed CDSLs a mean of 2.3 days postoperatively. Five patients (42%) were reported to have abnormal cystic ducts. A mean of 3 surgical clips were used for closure. Abdominal pain (58%) was the most common presenting symptom; 9 patients (75%) had an elevated white blood cell count, and 9 (75%) had abnormal liver function test results. Ten patients (83%) underwent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), and 8 (67%) were definitively treated with ERCP stenting of the common bile duct. Two patients (17%) required adjunctive computed tomography-guided drainage. There was 1 death. A CDSL can occur for a variety of reasons. Any patient with a postoperative picture consistent with a bile leak should undergo ERCP. If a CDSL is discovered, the common bile duct should be stented. Computed tomography-guided drainage is indicated if the patient does not improve after ERCP. Operative intervention should be reserved for the most serious of circumstances.

19059134
Pneumoperitoneum and pneumatosis: a clinical conundrum.


18926456
Management of hernias in pregnancy.
Even though groin and umbilical hernias are rare in adult women, the rarer cases of pregnant women presenting with hernias create distinct challenges to treatment planning. The course of hernias in pregnant women, the effect of hernias on delivery, and the timing of elective herniorrhaphy have not been established. To date, there have been no published series establishing that postpartum repair of umbilical and groin hernias that develop in pregnancy is safe and acceptable. From September 2004 to July 2006, 12 female patients with groin or umbilical hernias occurring during pregnancy presented to a single surgeon at the Mount Sinai Medical Center. All patients later underwent postpartum herniorrhaphy and were enrolled retrospectively. All patients underwent either open umbilical or inguinal hernia repair primarily or using a plug-and-patch method (Bard Mesh PerFix Plug; Davol) in an ambulatory setting. Mean longterm followup was 17 months. Mean age of the patients was 35 years (range 27 to 41 years). The most common type of hernia was inguinal (58%). The predominant side was right (86%). None of the patients had an associated diagnosis or clinically significant medical history. All patients were evaluated, operated, and followed up by the same surgeon. Neither incarceration nor strangulation occurred in any patient before or after delivery. None required hospitalization or emergent hernia repair. Patients did not experience any delivery complications. All patients underwent elective postpartum open hernia repair with sedation and local anesthesia (4 to 52 weeks postpartum; mean 22 weeks postpartum). No patient experienced any perioperative or postoperative complications. None of the patients experienced a hernia recurrence. Four patients had subsequent uncomplicated pregnancies. This series lends support to the "watchful waiting" strategy during pregnancy, with a plan for postpartum herniorrhaphy. Elective, postpartum hernia repair provides similar results to the nonpregnant population.

18705573
Clopidogrel and bleeding after general surgery procedures.
Although many studies in the cardiothoracic literature exist about the relationship between clopidogrel and postoperative bleeding, there is scarce data in the general surgery literature. We assessed whether there are increased bleeding complications, morbidity, mortality, and resource utilization in patients who are on clopidogrel (Plavix) within 1 week before undergoing a general surgery procedure. Fifty consecutive patient charts were retrospectively reviewed after identifying patients who had pharmacy orders for clopidogrel and who underwent a general surgery procedure between 2003 and 2007. Patients who took clopidogrel within 6 days before surgery (group I, n = 28) were compared with patients who stopped clopidogrel for 7 days or more (group II, n = 22). A larger percentage of patients who took their last dose of clopidogrel within 1 week of surgery (21.4% vs 9.5%) had significant bleeding after surgery requiring blood transfusion. However, there were no significant differences between the groups in operative or postoperative blood transfusions (P = 0.12, 0.53), decreases in hematocrit (P = 0.21), hospital stay (P = 0.09), intensive care unit stay (P = 0.41), late complications (P = 0.45), or mortality (P = 0.42). Although our cohort is limited in size, these results suggest that in the case of a nonelective general surgery procedure where outcomes depend on timely surgery, clopidogrel taken within 6 days before surgery should not be a reason to delay surgery. However, careful attention must be paid to meticulous hemostasis, and platelets must be readily available for transfusion in the operating room.

18589359
Surgical management and outcomes of patients with duodenal Crohn's disease.
Duodenal Crohn's disease (DCD) has been reported to occur in 0.5% to 4% of patients with Crohn's disease. When patients fail to respond to conservative therapy or severe narrowing of the duodenum develops, operation is required. The recent literature is limited in description of surgical treatment of such patients. We reviewed our experience with surgical management and outcomes in patients with DCD, including outcomes of laparoscopic bypass procedures. A retrospective review was undertaken of all patients who underwent surgical intervention for DCD between 1995 and 2006. Data collected included demographics, clinical presentation, operative and hospital course, and postoperative followup. Thirty patients had surgical intervention for DCD during the selected period. Four patients had duodenoenteric fistulas, resulting from complications of their disease in the distal gastrointestinal tract. Operations done for intrinsic DCD were: open bypass (n = 11), laparoscopic bypass (n = 13), and stricturoplasty (n = 2). Only one vagotomy was done. Mean followup was 58 months (range 6 to 144 months). Patients resumed oral diet 3.0 days after laparoscopic bypass, with mean discharge of 6.9 days, as compared with 4.4 days and 12.2 days after open bypass, respectively. In the early postoperative period (0 to 30 days), six major complications (n=5, 19%): persistent obstruction, anastomotic leak, small bowel obstruction, anastomotic bleeding (two patients), and respiratory failure, developed in four patients in the open (36%) and one patient in the laparoscopic (8%) bypass group. There were two more complications during longterm followup, for an overall major morbidity rate of 27%. Two patients experienced recurrence requiring revision (one in the open group and one in the laparoscopic group). Gastroduodenal ulcers requiring operation did not develop in any of the patients. Surgery is a viable and safe option for patients with intractable duodenal Crohn's disease. The laparoscopic approach during a bypass procedure, as opposed to an open bypass, may result in faster recovery, less morbidity, and comparable recurrence rate. There is no role for vagotomy in bypass procedures.

18436010
Risk factors for the development of fulminant Clostridium difficile colitis.
The development of fulminant Clostridium difficile colitis (FCDC) requires prompt operative intervention and is associated with a high mortality rate. The aim of this study was to use a case-control design to define the clinical and laboratory parameters that predict which patients with Clostridium difficile infection are most likely to progress to FCDC. Cases from 1994 to 2006 with documented in-hospital progression of Clostridium difficile infection to FCDC were matched retrospectively at the start of medical therapy by age, sex, and intensive care unit (ICU) status to controls with Clostridium difficile infection who did not develop FCDC. Chi-Square and multivariable logistic regression were used to identify risk factors for progression to FCDC. A total of 35 patients with FCDC were matched to 70 controls with Clostridium difficile infection who did not develop FCDC. The patients with FCDC underwent colectomy after an average of 4.6 days of medical therapy and had a mortality rate of 40%. On multivariate analysis, independent risk factors for the development of FCDC were a WBC > 16,000 cells/mm(3) (P < .01) at initiation of therapy, operative therapy within the last 30 days (P = .03), a history of inflammatory bowel disease (P = .04), and a history of intravenous immunoglobulin treatment (P < .01). Leukocytosis, recent prior operative therapy, and a history of inflammatory bowel disease and intravenous immunoglobulin treatment were negative prognostic indicators for patients with Clostridium difficile infection. The presence of these factors merits close observation for progression to FCDC and acceleration of the planning process for operative intervention.

18435881
Postoperative pain after laparoscopic ventral hernia repair: a prospective comparison of sutures versus tacks.
Mesh fixation in laparoscopic ventral hernia repair typically involves the use of tacks, transabdominal permanent sutures, or both of these. We compared postoperative pain after repair with either of these 2 methods. Patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair at the Mount Sinai Medical Center were prospectively enrolled in the study. They were sorted into 2 groups (1) those undergoing hernia repairs consisting primarily of transabdominal suture fixation and (2) those undergoing hernia repairs consisting primarily of tack fixation. The patients were not randomized. The technique of surgical repair was based on surgeon preference. A telephone survey was used to follow-up at 1 week, 1 month, and 2 months postoperatively. From 2004 through 2005, 50 patients were enrolled in the study. Twenty-nine had hernia repair primarily with transabdominal sutures, and 21 had repair primarily with tacks. Both groups had similar average age, BMI, hernia defect size, operative time, and postoperative length of stay. Pain scores at 1 week, 1 month, and 2 months were similar. Both groups also had similar times to return to work and need for narcotic pain medication. Patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair with primarily transabdominal sutures or tacks experience similar postoperative pain. The choice of either of these fixation methods during surgery should not be based on risk of postoperative pain.

18376688
Recurrence after laparoscopic ventral hernia repair: a prospective pilot study of suture versus tack fixation.
Mesh fixation in laparoscopic ventral hernia repair requires the use of tacks and/or permanent transabdominal sutures. Sutures pass through all fascial and muscle layers of the anterior abdominal wall, whereas tacks secure the mesh simply to peritoneum. Controversy exists regarding the optimal fixation method. In this pilot study, we compared recurrence rates between these two techniques. Patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair at the Mount Sinai Medical Center were prospectively and nonrandomly enrolled in the study and underwent either suture-fixation or tack-fixation. Office charts, computed tomography, and telephone interviews were used to determine recurrence events. chi2 and Student's t tests were performed to compare group characteristics and multivariate Cox regression analysis was used to assess for recurrence predictors after adjusting for potential confounders. From 2004 to 2005, 27 patients had suture repairs and 21 had tack repairs. The two groups had similar demographic, history, and operative variables. At a mean follow-up of 18 months, the recurrence rate was 14 per cent. In multivariate analyses, fixation method did not significantly affect recurrence. In this pilot study, patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair with primarily transabdominal sutures or tacks experienced similar recurrence rates. Future studies will be needed to validate these findings.

18362617
Fact and fiction: debunking myths in the US healthcare system.
The United States has the most expensive and complex healthcare system in the world. Despite the magnitude of funds spent on the system, Americans do not achieve the high standards of health seen in other developed countries. The current model of health insurance has failed to deliver efficient and effective healthcare. The administrative costs and lack of buying power that arise out of the existing multipayer system are at the root of the problem. The current system also directly contributes to the rising number of uninsured and underinsured Americans. This lack of insurance leads to poorer health outcomes, and a significant amount of money is lost into the system by paying for these complications. Experience from other countries suggests that tangible improvements can occur with conversion to a single-payer system. However, previous efforts at reform have stalled. There are many myths commonly held true by both patients and physicians. This inscrutability of the US healthcare system may be the major deterrent to its improvement. A discussion of these myths can lead to increased awareness of the inequality of our healthcare system and the possibilities for improvement.

18347864
Laparoscopic cortical-sparing adrenalectomy for bilateral pheochromocytoma.
A 32-year-old female with asthma was hospitalized for pneumonia in 2/06. She underwent a CT scan of the chest which revealed an incidental finding of bilateral adrenal masses. On further questioning, she admitted to palpitations and flushing. She was normotensive. Biochemical workup was significant for elevated urinary norepinephrine and normetanephrines, and plasma catecholamine level. MIBG scan showed positive uptake in the left adrenal gland consistent with pheochromocytoma. T2 weighted MRI showed bilateral adrenal masses, left greater than right. After adequate alpha blockade with phenoxybenzamine, the patient underwent a laparoscopic left adrenalectomy. Pathology revealed a 3.5 cm pheochromocytoma. The patient then underwent a right cortical-sparing adrenalectomy to avoid complete adrenal insufficiency and Addisonian crisis. The choice of operation was made realizing the potential for increased bleeding, which was further complicated by the patient's Jehovah's Witness beliefs, which prohibit transfusion of any blood products. At surgery, a small, well-circumscribed mass of the inferior right adrenal gland was found, and excised in its entirety. A postoperative ACTH-stimulation test showed appropriate cortisol response. Pathology revealed a 1.5 cm pheochromocytoma, and the patient recovered uneventfully. Cortical-sparing adrenalectomy has been reported with success rates of 65-100% in avoiding exogenous steroid dependence.(1,2) Bilateral pheochromocytoma remains the most common indication. Risks for both recurrence and malignancy require lifelong follow-up in these patients.

18308281
Non-physician practitioners' overall enhancement to a surgical resident's experience.
The Mount Sinai Surgical Residency program uses physician assistants and nurse practitioners, jointly termed non-physician practitioners (NPPs), to adhere to the 80-hour work-week restrictions implemented by Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) resident duty hour requirements initiated in 2003. A survey was performed to determine how the integration of NPPs into the surgical subspecialty teams has affected surgical residents' perceptions of their education and overall residency experience. We review the roles of NPPs within surgical specialty teams as well as our survey findings about NPP and resident impressions about the NPP role. A survey was distributed to every surgical resident and inpatient NPP using a Likert scale for responses. The survey addressed general experiences about the NPP-resident relationship in regard to education, continuity of care, workload, communication, collaboration, role, and hierarchy. NPP responses were compared with resident responses through a Pearson chi-square test. Sixty-six residents and 28 NPP responses were obtained. Overall, NPPs and residents have similar perceptions about the NPP function. Most NPPs and residents believe that having an NPP on the service decreases their workload (96.4% and 84.8%, respectively), and they believe that adequate communication and collaboration occurs between the NPPs and the residents (85.7% and 73.8% and 67.9% and 80.3%, respectively). Significantly more NPPs than residents feel that NPPs contribute to the residents' clinical education (75.0% vs 38.5%, p = 0.005) and that NPPs provide better continuity of care (96.4% vs 60.6%, p = 0.002). Although NPPs and residents believe that the NPP role is clearly defined, NPPs and residents have very different perceptions about where NPPs fall within the surgical hierarchy. Seventy-five percent of NPPs believe that they function at a senior resident level or above, whereas 90.5% of residents believe that NPPs function at the intern level or below (p < 0.001). We found that at our institution, residents and NPPs agree that they work well together and that NPPs positively contribute to resident education. We recommend a service-specific orientation for the residents with each rotation to clarify NPP responsibilities and functions, thereby maximizing collaboration. With a firm understanding of the various roles of the NPPs, a cohesive, multidisciplinary group can be attained while enhancing surgical education.

18283139
Predictors of mortality after colectomy for fulminant Clostridium difficile colitis.
To present, to our knowledge, the largest experience with colectomy for fulminant Clostridium difficile colitis and to propose factors significant in predicting mortality. Retrospective medical record review. University teaching hospital. Seventy-three patients undergoing colectomy between 1994 and 2005 for C difficile-associated pseudomembranous colitis. Preoperative predictors of in-hospital mortality. Seventy-three of 5718 cases (1.3%) of C difficile colitis required colectomy. Mean age was 68 years. In-hospital mortality was 34% (n = 25). Eighty-six percent (n = 63) of patients received a subtotal colectomy. Patients presented with diarrhea (84%; n = 61), abdominal pain (75%; n = 55), and ileus (16%; n = 12). Mean duration of symptoms was 7 days followed by 4 days of medical treatment prior to colectomy. On univariate analysis, an admitting diagnosis other than C difficile (P = .049), vasopressor requirement (P = .001), intubation (P = .001), and mental status changes (P < .001) were significant predictors of mortality. Arterial lactate level (4.9 vs 2.4 mmol/L; P = .007) was significantly higher and length of medical management (6.4 vs 3.0 days; P = .006) was significantly longer in the mortality group. Platelet counts (169 x 10(3)/microL vs 261 x 10(3)/microL [to convert to x 10(9)/L, multiply by 1]; P = .04) were significantly lower in the mortality group. On multivariate analysis, vasopressor requirement (P = .04; odds ratio, 5.0), mental status changes (P = .002; odds ratio, 12.6), and treatment length (P = .002; odds ratio, 1.4) remained significant predictors of mortality. Colectomy for C difficile colitis carries a substantial mortality regardless of patient age and white blood cell count. Preoperative vasopressor requirement, mental status changes, and length of medical treatment significantly predict mortality.

18224663
Effect of the number of lymph nodes sampled on postoperative survival of lymph node-negative esophageal cancer.
The presence of lymph node (LN) metastases in esophageal cancer has important prognostic and treatment implications. However, the optimal number of LNs that should be examined for accurate staging is controversial. In the current study, the association between survival and the number of LNs evaluated was examined in patients who underwent resection of lymph node-negative (American Joint Committee on Cancer [AJCC] TNM stage I-IIA) esophageal cancer. All patients were identified who underwent surgery for lymph node-negative esophageal cancer between 1988 and 2003 from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results cancer registry. Patients were classified into 3 groups by the number of negative LNs sampled during surgery (<or=10 LNs, 11-17 LNs, and>or=18 LNs). Esophageal cancer-specific survival was compared among these LN groups using Kaplan-Meier curves. Stratified and Cox regression analyses were used to evaluate the association between survival and the number of negative LNs after adjusting for potential confounders. A total of 972 patients were included in the study. Disease-specific survival rates increased with a higher number of negative LNs. The 5-year disease-specific survival rate was 55% among patients with<or=10 negative LNs, compared with 66% and 75%, respectively, for those with 11 to 17 negative LNs and>or=18 negative LNs. The number of negative LNs was found to be significantly associated with survival in analyses stratified by tumor status. On multivariate regression controlling for age, race/ethnicity, sex, histology, tumor status, and postoperative radiotherapy, a higher number of negative LNs was found to be independently associated with higher disease-specific survival. The presence of LN metastases in patients with esophageal cancer appears to have important prognostic and treatment implications. Data from the current study suggest that patients undergoing surgical resection for esophageal cancer should have at least 18 LNs removed.

18222375
Prognostic significance of the number of lymph node metastases in esophageal cancer.
Regional lymph node (LN) involvement is one of the most important predictors of survival for patients with esophageal cancer. The current staging classification differentiates only between the presence and absence of LN metastasis. In this study, we examined whether involvement of a higher number of LNs is associated with worse survival among esophageal cancer patients. We identified all patients who underwent operations for node-positive esophageal cancer between 1988 and 2003 from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results cancer registry. Because the number of positive LNs is confounded by the total number of LNs removed, patients were classified into three groups by the ratio of positive-to-total number of LNs removed (LN ratio [LNR]): <or= 0.2, 0.21 to 0.5, and>0.5. Esophageal cancer-specific survival was compared among these groups using Kaplan-Meier curves. Stratified and Cox regression analyses were used to evaluate the relationship between the LNR and survival after adjusting for potential confounders. The study cohort included 838 esophageal cancer patients. Disease-specific survival rates decreased with higher LNR. Five-year disease-specific survival was 30% among patients with an LNR<or=0.2, compared with 16% and 13% for those with LNs of 0.21 to 0.5 and>0.5, respectively (p < 0.001). In stratified and multivariable analyses controlling for age, race, gender, histology, tumor-status, and postoperative radiotherapy, a higher LNR was independently associated with worse disease-specific survival. These data suggest that a higher LNR among patients with node-positive esophageal cancer is associated with worse survival. If validated, this prognostic criterion may be included in staging classifications.

18049397
Comparison of iatrogenic splenectomy during open and laparoscopic colon resection.
Iatrogenic splenic injury requiring splenectomy is a well-recognized and potentially serious complication of colon resection. Iatrogenic splenectomy is associated with significant morbidity and mortality, including bleeding and the postsplenectomy sepsis syndrome. Our study aims to compare the incidence of iatrogenic splenectomy in laparoscopic colon resection with that of open colon resection over an 11-year-period at Mount Sinai. A retrospective chart review of all patients undergoing colon resection at Mount Sinai Medical Center during the last 11 years was performed to identify patient demographics, procedure, indication, and outcome. There was a significant difference (P=0.03) in the incidence of iatrogenic splenectomy during open colectomy (13/5477, 0.24%) versus laparoscopic colectomy (0/1911, 0%). All cases complicated by iatrogenic splenectomy involved splenic flexure mobilization. Laparoscopy has many recognized advantages over open procedures, including shorter recovery and length of stay. This retrospective review of our experience at Mount Sinai presents another potential benefit of the laparoscopic approach to colon resection.

17987341
Racial disparities in esophageal cancer treatment and outcomes.
Blacks have a higher mortality rate than whites from esophageal cancer, but the reasons underlying this disparity remain unclear. In this study, we used a national sample of patients with resectable esophageal cancer to assess the extent to which racial inequalities in care can explain outcome disparities. We identified all non-Hispanic white and black patients diagnosed with T0-T2, node-negative esophageal cancer between 1988 and 2003 from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results registry. Racial differences in esophageal-specific survival were assessed using the Kaplan-Meier method. We performed Cox regression to test for racial differences in survival after adjusting for potential confounders and to assess the extent to which disparities can be explained by later diagnosis or treatment inequalities. A total of 1522 patients were included in the study. Blacks had worse esophageal-specific survival rates than whites (37% vs 60% 5-year survival; P < .0001). Blacks were more likely to be diagnosed at a more advanced stage and to have squamous cell tumors, but were less likely to undergo surgery. In multivariate regression controlling for age, sex, marital status, histology, and tumor location, black race was associated with worse survival. When tumor status, surgery, and radiotherapy were added to the model, race was no longer significantly associated with survival. These data suggest that blacks are at greater risk of death from esophageal cancer. While the disparity is due in part to differences in tumor histology, diagnosis at an earlier stage and higher rates of surgery among blacks could reduce this survival disparity.

17939416
Eikenella corrodens causing necrotizing fasciitis after an elective inguinal hernia repair in an adult: a case report and literature review.
We report an unusual case of necrotizing fasciitis in a 43-year-old man after elective inguinal hernia repair. The patient presented to the emergency department 9 days postoperatively with high fevers, tachycardia, and crepitus along his abdominal wall. He was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics and underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy as well as a wide debridement of all necrotic tissue. Cultures grew out Eikenella corrodens, which, to our knowledge, has only been reported in one other case as a cause of necrotizing fasciitis. Patients can develop necrotizing fasciitis after elective, clean procedures and should be adequately resuscitated, undergo immediate surgical debridement, and receive antibiotics. Laparoscopy can be useful in determining if intraabdominal pathology is the cause of the infection and a wound vacuum-assisted device is a cost-effective way to decrease healing times.

17885078
Reversion of immune tolerance in advanced malignancy: modulation of myeloid-derived suppressor cell development by blockade of stem-cell factor function.
Tumor growth induced a significant increase of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in the tumor-bearing host. In our previous study, we showed that MDSCs induced tumor-specific T-cell tolerance and the development of T regulatory cells (Tregs). Tumor-derived factors have been implicated in the accumulation of MDSCs. We hypothesize that reduction of MDSC accumulation in tumor-bearing hosts, through the blockade of tumor factors, can prevent T-cell anergy and Treg development and thereby improve immune therapy for the treatment of advanced tumors. Several tumor-derived factors were identified by gene array analysis. Among the candidate factors, stem- cell factor (SCF) is expressed by various human and murine carcinomas and was selected for further study. Mice bearing tumor cells with SCF siRNA knockdown exhibited significantly reduced MDSC expansion and restored proliferative responses of tumor-infiltrating T cells. More importantly, blockade of SCF receptor (ckit)-SCF interaction by anti-ckit prevented tumor-specific T-cell anergy, Treg development, and tumor angiogenesis. Furthermore, the prevention of MDSC accumulation in conjunction with immune activation therapy showed synergistic therapeutic effect when treating mice bearing large tumors. This information supports the notion that modulation of MDSC development may be required to achieve effective immune-enhancing therapy for the treatment of advanced tumors.

17687617
Pneumatosis intestinalis in adults: management, surgical indications, and risk factors for mortality.
Pneumatosis intestinalis (PI) is an unusual finding that can exist in a benign setting but can indicate ischemic bowel and the need for surgical intervention. We present a series of cases of PI in adults to illustrate factors associated with death and surgical intervention. We reviewed the radiology database of the Mount Sinai Medical Center for cases of PI between 1996-2006 in adult patients. Chi-square and multivariable logistic regression analyses were used to identify factors significant for surgery and death. Forty patients developed PI over a 10-year span. The overall in-hospital mortality rate was 20%, and the surgical rate was 35%. Factors independently associated with surgical management on multivariable analysis were age >or= 60 years (p = 0.03), the presence of emesis (p = 0.01), and a WBC > 12 c/mm3 (p = 0.03). Pre-existing sepsis was independently associated with mortality (p = 0.03) while controlling for surgery. Patients with the concomitant presence of PI, a WBC > 12 c/mm3, and/or emesis in the >60-year-old age group were most likely to have surgical intervention, whereas PI patients with sepsis had the highest risk for death. A management algorithm is proposed, but further research will be needed to determine which patients with PI may benefit most from surgery.

17665262
Malignant degeneration of pilonidal disease in an immunosuppressed patient: report of a case and review of the literature.
This report was designed to discuss the case of a patient taking immunosuppression after transplant who developed squamous-cell carcinoma in a chronic pilonidal cyst and to examine the reported literature on malignant degeneration of pilonidal disease. We performed a comprehensive literature review and examined the medical record of a patient taking immunosuppressive medications after renal transplant who developed squamous-cell carcinoma in a chronic pilonidal cyst located at the superior gluteal cleft. Pilonidal disease is a common condition, and it is important to know that malignancy can arise when the disease is chronic. Immunosuppression and human papillomavirus infection may be predisposing factors to malignant degeneration of pilonidal cysts and may accelerate the transformation.

17469119
Surgery in malignant pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.
Because of their rarity and indolent nature, optimal management of malignant pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors remains controversial. The purpose of this study is to review a series of patients with these tumors and investigate the role of surgery in the treatment. A retrospective study of 73 patients (ages 24-86 years; 36 women) undergoing treatment at a tertiary academic medical center was performed. Patient demographics, diagnostic tests, operations, pathologic findings, adjuvant treatments, and survival were reviewed. Seventy-four percent of patients had advanced disease with hepatic metastases and 30% had functional tumors. Fifty-seven percent of the patients underwent pancreatic resections. Two 60-day mortalities occurred and the postoperative complication rate was 27%. Overall 5-year survival rate was 44%. There was no difference in survival between patients with functional and nonfunctional tumors. Patients undergoing resection, even in metastatic disease, had better survival than patients who had no resection (60% vs. 30%, P = 0.025). Recurrence occurred in 20% of patients who underwent a curative resection. Patients with malignant pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors commonly present with advanced disease. Although, curative resection is not frequent, survival benefit may be obtainable with aggressive surgical management even in the face of metastatic disease.

17458600
Internal hernias: clinical findings, management, and outcomes in 49 nonbariatric cases.
Internal hernia, the protrusion of a viscus through a peritoneal or mesenteric aperture, is a rare cause of small bowel obstruction. We report the clinical presentation, surgical management, and outcomes of one of the largest series of nonbariatric internal hernias. Ten-year retrospective review of patients at our institution yielded 49 cases of internal hernias. Majority of patients presented with symptoms of acute (75%) or intermittent (22%) small bowel obstruction. While 16% of CT scans were suspicious for internal hernia, in no cases the preoperative diagnosis of internal hernia was made. The most frequent internal hernias were transmesenteric (57.0%) and 34 hernias (69%) were caused by previous surgery. All internal hernias were reduced and the defects were repaired. Compromised bowel was present in 22 cases and 11 patients underwent small bowel resection. The mean postoperative hospitalization was 10.9 days. The overall mortality rate from our series is 2%, and the morbidity rate is 12%. Transmesenteric hernias, as complications of previous surgeries, are the most prevalent internal hernias. Preoperative diagnosis of internal hernia is extremely difficult because of the nonspecific clinical presentation. However, if discovered promptly, internal hernias can be repaired with acceptable morbidity and mortality.

17368303
Three-dimensional imaging improves surgical performance for both novice and experienced operators using the da Vinci Robot System.
This study was designed to evaluate the impact of 3-dimensional vision on the performance of resident and experienced surgeons using the da Vinci Robot System (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA). Four tasks were performed by 12 surgeons with varying experience. Performance times and errors were recorded using both 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional vision for each task. Performance time and error rates for all 4 skills confirm a significant advantage using 3-dimensional vision. Performance times were reduced by 34% to 46% using 3-dimensional imaging for all participants with statistical significance. Error rates were reduced by 44% and 66%. Independent of the biomechanical advantages of the da Vinci Robot System, 3-dimensional vision allows for significant improvement in performance times and error rates for both inexperienced residents and advanced laparoscopic surgeons.

20890623
Assessing the risk of clopidogrel-related bleeding complications in patients undergoing inguinal herniorrhaphy.
To date, no studies have investigated how the preoperative management of clopidogrel, an irreversible antiplatelet agent, influences the outcome following minor operative procedures. The purpose of this study is to determine if clopidogrel use within 7 days of inguinal herniorrhaphy increases the postoperative risk for bleeding-related morbidity or mortality. A retrospective chart review was performed of 46 patients on clopidogrel who underwent inguinal herniorrhaphy from 2004 to 2008. Patients were grouped based on the last administered dose of clopidogrel; <7 days (A) and ? 7 days (B). Of the 46 patients, 20 were in group A and 26 were in group B. No significant differences in operative blood loss, perioperative transfusion requirement, postoperative bleeding complications, intensive care unit (ICU) requirements, mortality, or 30-day readmission/reoperation rates were demonstrated between patients in groups A and B. Patients in group A had a significantly increased postoperative admission rate (65% vs. 15%, P = 0.0002) and increased mean hospital stay (1.0 vs. 0.15 days, P = 0.003). However, urinary retention, pain management, and the monitoring of other conditions accounted for over 80% of these admissions. One patient in group A (5%) developed a postoperative hematoma, which is consistent with the complication rate seen in the general population after inguinal herniorrhaphy. Overall, no difference in admission secondary to hematoma or postoperative bleeding was demonstrated. Clopidogrel use within 7 days of inguinal herniorrhaphy did not increase the risk for perioperative bleeding complications. No mortalities, readmissions, or ICU requirements occurred, regardless of the timing of clopidogrel cessation. The increased risk for hospital admission and length of stay seen in group A is likely to be attributable to nonbleeding-related patient factors rather than clopidogrel use. Thus, it may not be necessary to interrupt clopidogrel therapy prior to inguinal herniorrhaphy in high-risk patients.

19078885
Minimally invasive surgery for splenic malignancies.
While minimally invasive surgery, i.e. laparoscopy, has become well-accepted in the treatment algorithm for malignancies of the gastrointestinal tract and gynecologic tumors, the role of laparoscopy for malignancies involving the spleen is less clear. Initially described in 1992 for benign hematologic disease, laparoscopic splenectomy (LS) for splenic malignancy was avoided secondary to the severe hematologic disease, profound cytopenia, and massive splenomegaly frequently seen in these patients. As experience with LS grew and larger data were generated, it became clear that hematologic malignancy and splenomegaly could be safely managed laparoscopically. In experienced hands, LS can be used for the diagnosis and treatment of both lymphoproliferative and myeloproliferative disorders affecting spleen, in addition to splenic tumors of both primary and metastatic origin. LS can be performed from a lateral or anterior approach, and hand-assisted laparoscopic splenectomy can provide significant benefit in cases of massive splenomegaly. Preoperative imaging for accurate splenic measurement is invaluable to guide surgical planning. Triple vaccination should be given to all patients prior to surgery, and splenic artery embolization before surgery should be considered in patients with massive splenomegaly to reduce intraoperative bleeding. LS can be performed safely for nearly all cases of malignancy involving the spleen, and potentially offers significant advantages of decreased pain and recovery time while maintaining equivalent complications and survival compared to open splenectomy.

17332970
Hemoperitoneum following inguinal hernia repair: a case report.
Traditional inguinal herniorrhaphy continues to be one of the most common surgeries performed in the USA today. The procedure has developed into a straightforward, ambulatory procedure with postoperative complications being very rare. We describe the first report in the literature of the serious complication of hemoperitoneum after open inguinal hernia repair attributed to injury of the artery of Sampson.

