21496949
A randomized controlled trial of oral phosphate binders in the treatment of pseudoxanthoma elasticum.
BACKGROUND: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a rare connective tissue disorder involving fragmentation and mineralization of elastic fibers predominantly in the skin, eyes, and cardiovascular system. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to assess the efficacy of sevelamer hydrochloride on the reversal of elastic fiber calcification and clinical lesions of PXE. METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, two-part prospective study. In the first year, 40 patients with PXE were randomized to receive either sevelamer hydrochloride (800 mg by mouth three times daily) or placebo in a 1:1 ratio. In the second year, all patients received sevelamer hydrochloride (800 mg by mouth three times daily). RESULTS: In the first year, the placebo and treatment groups' mean calcium scores decreased from 29.52 to 15.97 (41.93% mean improvement) and 27.48 to 16.75 (38.37% mean improvement), respectively. In the second year, the mean calcium scores decreased to 13.36 (53.94%) and 14.03 (51.35%) in these groups. The mean clinical score in the placebo group decreased from 6.25 to 6.05 at year 1 (2% improvement) whereas the mean clinical score in the sevelamer hydrochloride group decreased from 7.10 to 6.55 (7% improvement). In year 2, the scores in the original placebo and sevelamer hydrochloride groups decreased to 5.33 (14% improvement) and 5.72 (19% improvement), respectively. LIMITATIONS: Magnesium stearate in our placebo and active drugs may have played a confounding role in this study, contributing to the small differences observed in these two groups. CONCLUSION: Sevelamer hydrochloride produced a reduction in both calcification levels and clinical scores; however, this difference was not statistically significant compared with placebo. Future clinical studies should examine the inhibitory role and potential therapeutic effect of magnesium in PXE.

21173303
UV-A and UV-B penetration of normal human cadaveric fingernail plate.
To assess the extent to which UV-A and UV-B radiation can penetrate the human fingernail plate. The Dermalite UV light machine (National Biological, Beachwood, Ohio) was used as the source of UV radiation. The amount of UV-A and UV-B penetrating the nail plate was measured using a radiometer and compared with a control. Academic phototherapy clinic. Ten cadaver fingernails were obtained from 1 cadaver from the National Disease Research Interchange. Because the objective was to determine transmission through normal fingernails, grossly diseased or deformed nails were not used. The percentage of UV light penetration through each fingernail was calculated by dividing the amount of radiation measured when the fingernail was in front of the light by the amount of radiation measured when there was nothing in front of the light (UV with nail divided by UV without nail). All 10 fingernails completely blocked the UV-B light, reading 0 mW/cm(2) on the radiometer. The mean penetration of UV-A light through the fingernails was 1.65%, ranging from 0.56% for the right fifth digit to 2.43% for the left second digit. The nail plate completely blocked UV-B light, and only a minimal amount of UV-A light penetrated the nails. If UV is required to directly penetrate the nail to treat nail bed psoriasis, then these data suggest that therapeutic efficacy may be compromised by the intervening nail plate. This minimal penetration of UV-A light may explain why therapies such as psoralen-UV-A (PUVA) have low efficacy for the treatment of nail psoriasis.

21049712
Optimizing topical therapies for treating psoriasis: a consensus conference.
In 2010, an expert committee of physicians and researchers in the field of dermatology working together as the Psoriasis Process of Care Consensus Panel developed consensus guidelines for the treatment of psoriasis. As much as possible, the guidelines were evidence based but also included the extensive clinical experience of the dermatologists. Psoriasis is a lifelong disease that requires long-term treatment and 80% of psoriasis patients have mild to moderate disease. Topical therapies play an important role in the treatment of psoriasis, especially in patients with mild to moderate disease. Patients usually start with monotherapy; however, in more severe cases (> 10% body surface area [BSA], severely impaired quality of life [QOL], or recalcitrant psoriatic lesions), multiple treatment modalities may be used as part of combination, sequential, or rotational therapeutic regimens. Main treatment options include topical steroids, systemic therapies, topical vitamin D treatments such as vitamin D3 ointment, retinoids, phototherapy, and biologic therapies. Other topical therapies include the following steroid-sparing agents: coal tar, anthralin, calcineurin inhibitors, keratolytics, and emollients. Therapeutic considerations also should focus on adherence, improving QOL, and promoting a good patient-physician relationship.

20566928
Fatal influenza A(H1N1) respiratory tract infection in a patient having psoriasis treated with infliximab.
The use of biologic agents represents a remarkable advance for patients with psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis who have experienced an incomplete response to other therapeutic modalities. Decreased mortality and improved quality of life have been reported in patients undergoing treatment with these agents. Increased risk of bacterial, viral, granulomatous, and opportunistic infections also has been associated with the use of these medications. Enhanced patient education, watchful monitoring to promote early detection of infections, discontinuation of the medication when clinical symptoms are identified, and immediate availability of supportive care are advised to balance the benefit of treatment with biologic agents against the potential risk of infection. Herein, we discuss the risk of infection and the monitoring and vaccination guidelines in patients having psoriasis treated with biologic agents. A woman with obesity and psoriasis that had previously been successfully treated with efalizumab (Raptiva) for 3 years was started on a regimen of infliximab (Remicade) to treat a flare. She died 1 week after her first infusion of infliximab and was found to have had influenza A(H1N1). We report the first case to date of a patient with psoriasis who died of influenza A(H1N1) respiratory tract infection while undergoing treatment with infliximab. Further observations are needed to make a causal association.

17367040
Compatibility of topical therapies for psoriasis: challenges and innovations.
Topical treatments remain the most widely prescribed medications for psoriasis, particularly for patients with mild to moderate or localized disease. In addition, topical therapies can substantially improve outcomes when used alone or in combination with systemic or biologic agents in patients with moderate to severe or more extensive disease. Combinations of different topical treatments frequently are prescribed to enhance clinical effectiveness and decrease potential side effects. However, certain topical agents become ineffective when used together or in combination with other therapies, such as phototherapy. These topical agents should be combined only with treatments that have been demonstrated to have no effect on the chemical stability or clinical effectiveness of topical agents. This article reviews the compatibility of different topical agents and identifies those agents that can be effectively and safely combined with each other and with phototherapy.

17367039
Advances in first-line topical therapies: the role of a 2-compound ointment for psoriasis vulgaris.


