18589359
Surgical management and outcomes of patients with duodenal Crohn's disease.
Duodenal Crohn's disease (DCD) has been reported to occur in 0.5% to 4% of patients with Crohn's disease. When patients fail to respond to conservative therapy or severe narrowing of the duodenum develops, operation is required. The recent literature is limited in description of surgical treatment of such patients. We reviewed our experience with surgical management and outcomes in patients with DCD, including outcomes of laparoscopic bypass procedures. A retrospective review was undertaken of all patients who underwent surgical intervention for DCD between 1995 and 2006. Data collected included demographics, clinical presentation, operative and hospital course, and postoperative followup. Thirty patients had surgical intervention for DCD during the selected period. Four patients had duodenoenteric fistulas, resulting from complications of their disease in the distal gastrointestinal tract. Operations done for intrinsic DCD were: open bypass (n = 11), laparoscopic bypass (n = 13), and stricturoplasty (n = 2). Only one vagotomy was done. Mean followup was 58 months (range 6 to 144 months). Patients resumed oral diet 3.0 days after laparoscopic bypass, with mean discharge of 6.9 days, as compared with 4.4 days and 12.2 days after open bypass, respectively. In the early postoperative period (0 to 30 days), six major complications (n=5, 19%): persistent obstruction, anastomotic leak, small bowel obstruction, anastomotic bleeding (two patients), and respiratory failure, developed in four patients in the open (36%) and one patient in the laparoscopic (8%) bypass group. There were two more complications during longterm followup, for an overall major morbidity rate of 27%. Two patients experienced recurrence requiring revision (one in the open group and one in the laparoscopic group). Gastroduodenal ulcers requiring operation did not develop in any of the patients. Surgery is a viable and safe option for patients with intractable duodenal Crohn's disease. The laparoscopic approach during a bypass procedure, as opposed to an open bypass, may result in faster recovery, less morbidity, and comparable recurrence rate. There is no role for vagotomy in bypass procedures.

18435885
Laparoscopic-assisted ileocolic resection for Crohn's disease.
This study reviews our experience with laparoscopic-assisted ileocolic resection in patients with Crohn's disease. The adequacy and safety of this procedure as measured by intraoperative and postoperative complications were evaluated. Special attention was paid to the group in which laparoscopy was not feasible and conversion to laparotomy was necessary. Between 1992 and 2005, 168 laparoscopic-assisted ileocolic resections were performed on 167 patients with Crohn's ileal or ileocolic disease. Follow-up data were complete in 158 patients. In 38 patients (24%), conversion to laparotomy was necessary. Previous resection was not a predictor of conversion to laparotomy. Average ileal and colonic length of resected specimens was 20.9 cm and 6.5 cm, respectively, in the laparoscopic group, versus 24.9 cm and 10.6 cm in the converted group. Twenty of 120 specimens (16.6%) in the laparoscopic group were found to have margins microscopically positive for active Crohn's disease. None of the 38 specimens in the converted group had positive ileal margins. Laparoscopic-assisted ileocolic resection can be safely performed in patients with Crohn's disease ileitis. The finding of positive surgical margins following laparoscopic resections compared with none among conventional resections has to be thoroughly evaluated.

