21304363
Completely intracorporeal retraction of the gallbladder for laparoendoscopic single site (LESS) surgery.
Laparoendoscopic single site surgery (LESS) cholecystectomy requires a creative solution to retract the gallbladder. Transabdominal suture retraction is a commonly used technique to achieve adequate exposure of the critical structures within Calot's triangle. To avoid the multiple punctures of the gallbladder and abdominal wall required by such suture retraction, we developed a novel internal retractor specifically for use during LESS cholecystectomy. This retractor consists of a laparoscopic bulldog clamp fitted with a small metal hook, and was successfully used in a recent case of LESS cholecystectomy.

19996287
Immune stimulatory receptor CD40 is required for T-cell suppression and T regulatory cell activation mediated by myeloid-derived suppressor cells in cancer.
Immune tolerance to tumors is often associated with accumulation of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and an increase in the number of T-regulatory cells (Treg). In tumor-bearing mice, MDSCs can themselves facilitate the generation of tumor-specific Tregs. In this study, we demonstrate that expression of the immune stimulatory receptor CD40 on MDSCs is required to induce T-cell tolerance and Treg accumulation. In an immune reconstitution model, adoptive transfer of Gr-1+CD115+ monocytic MDSCs derived from CD40-deficient mice failed to recapitulate the ability of wild-type MDSCs to induce tolerance and Treg development in vivo. Agonistic anti-CD40 antibodies phenocopied the effect of CD40 deficiency and also improved the therapeutic efficacy of IL-12 and 4-1BB immunotherapy in the treatment of advanced tumors. Our findings suggest that CD40 is essential not only for MDSC-mediated immune suppression but also for tumor-specific Treg expansion. Blockade of CD40-CD40L interaction between MDSC and Treg may provide a new strategy to ablate tumoral immune suppression and thereby heighten responses to immunotherapy.

19325923
Current recommendations on diagnosis and management of right-sided diverticulitis.
We present the case of a 52-year-old female with recurrent symptomatic ascending colon diverticulitis who ultimately underwent elective laparoscopic right hemicolectomy. The following is a case report and literature review pertaining to right colonic diverticular disease.

18435881
Postoperative pain after laparoscopic ventral hernia repair: a prospective comparison of sutures versus tacks.
Mesh fixation in laparoscopic ventral hernia repair typically involves the use of tacks, transabdominal permanent sutures, or both of these. We compared postoperative pain after repair with either of these 2 methods. Patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair at the Mount Sinai Medical Center were prospectively enrolled in the study. They were sorted into 2 groups (1) those undergoing hernia repairs consisting primarily of transabdominal suture fixation and (2) those undergoing hernia repairs consisting primarily of tack fixation. The patients were not randomized. The technique of surgical repair was based on surgeon preference. A telephone survey was used to follow-up at 1 week, 1 month, and 2 months postoperatively. From 2004 through 2005, 50 patients were enrolled in the study. Twenty-nine had hernia repair primarily with transabdominal sutures, and 21 had repair primarily with tacks. Both groups had similar average age, BMI, hernia defect size, operative time, and postoperative length of stay. Pain scores at 1 week, 1 month, and 2 months were similar. Both groups also had similar times to return to work and need for narcotic pain medication. Patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair with primarily transabdominal sutures or tacks experience similar postoperative pain. The choice of either of these fixation methods during surgery should not be based on risk of postoperative pain.

18376688
Recurrence after laparoscopic ventral hernia repair: a prospective pilot study of suture versus tack fixation.
Mesh fixation in laparoscopic ventral hernia repair requires the use of tacks and/or permanent transabdominal sutures. Sutures pass through all fascial and muscle layers of the anterior abdominal wall, whereas tacks secure the mesh simply to peritoneum. Controversy exists regarding the optimal fixation method. In this pilot study, we compared recurrence rates between these two techniques. Patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair at the Mount Sinai Medical Center were prospectively and nonrandomly enrolled in the study and underwent either suture-fixation or tack-fixation. Office charts, computed tomography, and telephone interviews were used to determine recurrence events. chi2 and Student's t tests were performed to compare group characteristics and multivariate Cox regression analysis was used to assess for recurrence predictors after adjusting for potential confounders. From 2004 to 2005, 27 patients had suture repairs and 21 had tack repairs. The two groups had similar demographic, history, and operative variables. At a mean follow-up of 18 months, the recurrence rate was 14 per cent. In multivariate analyses, fixation method did not significantly affect recurrence. In this pilot study, patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair with primarily transabdominal sutures or tacks experienced similar recurrence rates. Future studies will be needed to validate these findings.

18347864
Laparoscopic cortical-sparing adrenalectomy for bilateral pheochromocytoma.
A 32-year-old female with asthma was hospitalized for pneumonia in 2/06. She underwent a CT scan of the chest which revealed an incidental finding of bilateral adrenal masses. On further questioning, she admitted to palpitations and flushing. She was normotensive. Biochemical workup was significant for elevated urinary norepinephrine and normetanephrines, and plasma catecholamine level. MIBG scan showed positive uptake in the left adrenal gland consistent with pheochromocytoma. T2 weighted MRI showed bilateral adrenal masses, left greater than right. After adequate alpha blockade with phenoxybenzamine, the patient underwent a laparoscopic left adrenalectomy. Pathology revealed a 3.5 cm pheochromocytoma. The patient then underwent a right cortical-sparing adrenalectomy to avoid complete adrenal insufficiency and Addisonian crisis. The choice of operation was made realizing the potential for increased bleeding, which was further complicated by the patient's Jehovah's Witness beliefs, which prohibit transfusion of any blood products. At surgery, a small, well-circumscribed mass of the inferior right adrenal gland was found, and excised in its entirety. A postoperative ACTH-stimulation test showed appropriate cortisol response. Pathology revealed a 1.5 cm pheochromocytoma, and the patient recovered uneventfully. Cortical-sparing adrenalectomy has been reported with success rates of 65-100% in avoiding exogenous steroid dependence.(1,2) Bilateral pheochromocytoma remains the most common indication. Risks for both recurrence and malignancy require lifelong follow-up in these patients.

17939416
Eikenella corrodens causing necrotizing fasciitis after an elective inguinal hernia repair in an adult: a case report and literature review.
We report an unusual case of necrotizing fasciitis in a 43-year-old man after elective inguinal hernia repair. The patient presented to the emergency department 9 days postoperatively with high fevers, tachycardia, and crepitus along his abdominal wall. He was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics and underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy as well as a wide debridement of all necrotic tissue. Cultures grew out Eikenella corrodens, which, to our knowledge, has only been reported in one other case as a cause of necrotizing fasciitis. Patients can develop necrotizing fasciitis after elective, clean procedures and should be adequately resuscitated, undergo immediate surgical debridement, and receive antibiotics. Laparoscopy can be useful in determining if intraabdominal pathology is the cause of the infection and a wound vacuum-assisted device is a cost-effective way to decrease healing times.

