20959164
Two themes on the assembly of the Drosophila eye.
Cells are sequentially recruited during formation of the Drosophila compound eye. A few simple rules are reiteratively utilized to control successive steps of eye assembly. Two themes emerge: the interplay between cell signaling and competence determines diversity of cell types and selective cell adhesion determines spatial patterns of cells. Cell signaling through competence creates signaling relays, which sequentially trigger differentiation of all cell types. Selective cell adhesion, on the other hand, provides forces to drive cells into energy-favored spatial configurations. Organ formation is nevertheless a complex process. The complexity lies in the spatial, temporal, and quantitative precision of gene expression. Many challenging questions remain.

20599904
Preferential adhesion maintains separation of ommatidia in the Drosophila eye.
In the Drosophila eye, neighboring ommatidia are separated by inter-ommatidial cells (IOCs). How this ommatidial spacing emerges during eye development is not clear. Here we demonstrate that four adhesion molecules of the Irre cell recognition module (IRM) family play a redundant role in maintaining separation of ommatidia. The four IRM proteins are divided into two groups: Kirre and Rst are expressed in IOCs, and Hbs and Sns in primary pigment cells (1 degrees s). Kirre binds Hbs and Sns in vivo and in vitro. Reducing activity of either Rst or Kirre alone had minimal effects on ommatidial spacing, but reducing both together led to direct ommatidium:ommatidium contact. A similar phenotype was also observed when reducing both Hbs and Sns. Consistent with the role of these factors in sorting ommatidia, mis-expression of Hbs plus Sns within a single IOC led to complete separation of the cell from neighboring ommatidia. Our results indicate mutual preferential adhesion between ommatidia and IOCs mediated by four IRM proteins is both necessary and sufficient to maintain separation of ommatidia.

20368355
EKLF directly activates the p21WAF1/CIP1 gene by proximal promoter and novel intronic regulatory regions during erythroid differentiation.
The switch from proliferation to differentiation during the terminal stages of erythropoiesis is a tightly controlled process that relies in part on transcription factor-mediated activation of cell cycle components. EKLF is a key transcription factor that is necessary for the initial establishment of the red cell phenotype. Here, we find that EKLF also plays a role during the subsequent differentiation process, as it induces p21(WAF1/CIP1) expression independent of p53 to regulate the changes in the cell cycle underlying erythroid maturation. EKLF activates p21 not only by directly binding to an EKLF site within a previously characterized GC-rich region in the p21 proximal promoter but also by occupancy at a novel, phylogenetically conserved region that contains consensus CACCC core motifs located downstream from the p21 TATA box. Our findings demonstrate that EKLF, likely in coordination with other transcription factors, directly contributes to the complex set of events that occur at the final erythroid cell divisions and accentuates terminal differentiation directly by activation of CDK inhibitors such as p21.

