19223385
Carotid artery pseudo-occlusion: does end-diastolic velocity suggest need for treatment?
We reviewed our institution's experience with carotid artery pseudo-occlusion (CAPO), to investigate whether internal carotid artery (ICA) end-diastolic velocity (EDV) as measured by duplex ultrasonography, was a predictor of need for further intervention. From February 2003 to January 2008, 7478 patients underwent duplex ultrasonographic evaluation of their carotid arteries. Diagnosis of CAPO included the appearance of a narrow flow jet (string sign) on power doppler images, low velocities in the ICA and additional criteria listed below. Ten patients (0.13%) were identified as having a CAPO. All patients were asymptomatic and had an EDV<78 cm/s. Occlusion or functional occlusion was identified in nine patients on contrast imaging studies. Eight of these patients were treated medically without neurologic complication on follow-up. Two patients were treated with interventions and were asymptomatic at follow up. The mean follow up for the entire group was 12 months. Although this is a low volume study, there is evidence to suggest that asymptomatic patients with low EDV in the setting of carotid artery pseudo-occlusion found of duplex, may be safely managed medically.

18083340
Endovascular stent-graft repair of failed endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair.
Despite high initial technical success, the long-term durability of endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) continues to be a concern. Following EVAR, patients can experience endoleaks, device migration, device fractures, or aneurysm growth that may require intervention. The purpose of this study was to review all patients treated with secondary endovascular devices at our institution for failed EVAR procedures. Over an 8-year period, 988 patients underwent EVAR, of whom 42 (4.3%) required secondary interventions involving placement of additional endovascular devices. Data regarding patient characteristics, aneurysm size, initial device type, time until failure, failure etiology, secondary interventions, and outcomes were reviewed. The mean time from initial operation until second operation was 34.1 months. Failures included type I endoleaks in 38 patients (90.5%), type III endoleaks in two patients (4.8%), and enlarging aneurysms without definite endoleaks in two patients (4.8%). The overall technical success rate for secondary repair was 92.9% (39/42). Perioperative complications occurred in nine patients (21.4%), including wound complications (n = 6), cerebrovascular accident (CVA) (n = 1), foot drop (n = 1), and death (n = 1). Mean follow-up following secondary repair was 16.4 months (range 1-50). Eighty-six percent of patients treated with aortouni-iliac devices had successful repairs compared to 45% of patients treated with proximal cuffs. Ten patients (23.8%) had persistent or recurrent type I or type III endoleaks following revision. Of these, four had tertiary interventions, including two patients who had additional devices placed. Failures following EVAR occur in a small but significant number of patients. When anatomically possible, endovascular revision offers a safe means of treating these failures. Aortouni-iliac devices appear to offer a more durable repair than the proximal cuff for treatment of proximal type I endoleaks. Midterm results indicate that these patients may require additional procedures but have a low rate of aneurysm-related mortality. Longer-term follow-up is necessary to determine the durability of these endovascular revisions.

17942851
Endovascular treatment of visceral artery aneurysms.
Visceral artery aneurysms, although uncommon, can present with life-threatening hemorrhage. The increasing use of imaging studies has allowed for earlier identification and intervention of these aneurysms, thus avoiding the high morbidity and mortality associated with rupture. The treatment options for visceral artery aneurysms range from conventional open surgical repair to minimally invasive techniques using covered stents or embolization materials. Anatomic features and patient selection determine which treatment option would result in the most durable treatment and outcome. This article reviews our experience with the endovascular treatment of visceral artery aneurysms.

