19382130
The MMSE orientation for time domain is a strong predictor of subsequent cognitive decline in the elderly.
The mini-mental state exam (MMSE) has been used to address questions such as determination of appropriate cutoff scores for differentiation of individuals with intact cognitive function from patients with dementia and rate of cognitive decline. However, little is known about the relationship of performance in specific cognitive domains to subsequent overall decline. To examine the specific and/or combined contribution of four MMSE domains (orientation for time, orientation for place, delayed recall, and attention) to prediction of overall cognitive decline on the MMSE. Linear mixed models were applied to 505 elderly nursing home residents (mean age = 85, > 12 years education = 27%; 79% F, mean follow-up = 3.20 years) to examine the relationship between baseline scores of these domains and total MMSE scores over time. Orientation for time was the only domain significantly associated with MMSE decline over time. Combination of poor delayed recall with either attention or orientation for place was associated with significantly increased decline on the MMSE. The MMSE orientation for time predicts overall decline on MMSE scores over time. A good functioning domain added to good functioning delayed recall was associated with slower rate of decline.

18520427
Cognitive functioning among individuals with traumatic brain injury, Alzheimer's disease, and no cognitive impairments.
To compare patterns of cognitive functioning in older adults with traumatic brain injury (TBI), Alzheimer's disease (AD), and no neurological disorder (ND). Group comparison. Outpatient setting of a large urban tertiary care medical center. Older adults: 56 with TBI, 64 with AD, and 50 with neurological disorder. None. Older adults with AD and TBI had lower scores in most areas of cognitive functioning examined than the individuals with neurological disorder. Individuals with AD had lower scores in memory, processing speed, and verbal fluency than did individuals with TBI. Specifically, individuals with AD did not retain learned information over time. Cognitive impairments were present in older adults with AD and TBI. However, individuals with TBI were better able to learn and retain new information than were individuals with AD.

18028386
New insights into the link between cardiovascular disease and depression.
Although the association between depression and cardiovascular disease (CVD) is well documented, the underlying mechanisms for this relationship remain unclear. In this paper, we present three possible models which account for the comorbidity between depression and cardiovascular disease. The first model outlines depression as a risk factor for CVD and the second model presents CVD as a risk factor for depression. The third model proposes a common underlying pathway related to the effects of chronic stress on the body in manifesting as depression or cardiovascular disease. If the proposed model holds true, it may be possible that an intervention initiated before overt manifestations of CVD or depression become apparent, may delay or prevent the onset of these serious clinical entities.

