18794864
A sodium-mediated structural switch that controls the sensitivity of Kir channels to PtdIns(4,5)P(2).
Inwardly rectifying potassium (Kir) channels are gated by the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P(2)). Among them, Kir3 requires additional molecules, such as the betagamma subunits of G proteins or intracellular sodium, for channel gating. Using an interactive computational-experimental approach, we show that sodium sensitivity of Kir channels involves the side chains of an aspartate and a histidine located across from each other in a crucial loop in the cytosolic domain, as well as the backbone carbonyls of two more residues and a water molecule. The location of the coordination site in the vicinity of a conserved arginine shown to affect channel-PtdIns(4,5)P(2) interactions suggests that sodium triggers a structural switch that frees the crucial arginine. Mutations of the aspartate and the histidine that affect sodium sensitivity also enhance the channel's sensitivity to PtdIns(4,5)P(2). Furthermore, on the basis of the molecular characteristics of the coordination site, we identify and confirm experimentally a sodium-sensitive phenotype in Kir5.1.

18690051
Stoichiometry of Kir channels with phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate.
Phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP(2)) is the most abundant phosphoinositide in the plasma membrane of cells and its interaction with many ion channel proteins has proven to be a critical factor enabling ion channel gating. All members of the inwardly rectifying potassium (Kir) channel family depend on PIP(2) for their activity, displaying distinct affinities and stereospecificities of interaction with the phosphoinositide. Here, we explored the stoichiometry of Kir channels with PIP(2). We first showed that PIP(2) regulated the activity of Kir3.4 channels mainly by altering their bursting behavior. Detailed burst analysis indicates that the channels assumed up to four open states and a connectivity of four between open and closed states depending on the available PIP(2) levels. Moreover, by controlling the number of PIP(2)-sensitive subunits in the stoichiometry of a tetrameric Kir2.1 channel, we showed that characteristic channel activity was obtained when at least two wild-type subunits were present. Our studies support a kinetic model for gating of Kir channels by PIP(2), where each of the four open states corresponds to the channel activated by one to four PIP(2) molecules.

18690025
Potassium channel gating in the absence of the highly conserved glycine of the inner transmembrane helix.
Potassium channel activation regulates cellular excitability, such as in neuronal and cardiac cells. Regulation of ion channel activity relies on a switching mechanism between two major conformations, the open and closed states, known as gating. It has been suggested that potassium channels are generally gated via a pivoted mechanism the pore-lining helix (TM2) in the proximity of a glycine that is conserved in about 80% of potassium channels, even though about 20% of the channels lack a glycine at this position. Yet, as we show in G-protein gated potassium (Kir3) channels that lack a glycine at this position, the betagamma subunits of G-proteins can still stimulate channel activity. Our results suggest that the effect of mutation of the central glycine (at position 175 in Kir3.4) on betagamma-induced whole-cell currents is related to the extent of the interaction between residues located at the position of the central glycine and two residues, one located in the signature sequence of the selectivity filter (T149 in Kir3.4) and the other in the pore helix (E147 in Kir3.4). Our results also suggest that interactions with position 149 are more detrimental to channel function than interactions with position 147. The ability of Gbetagamma to overcome such restraining interactions is likely to depend on a combination of characteristics specific to each residue.

17588168
Molecular characteristics of phosphoinositide binding.
Phosphoinositides in general and phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P(2) or PIP(2)) in particular have been recently found to function as important regulators of ion channels. Yet, while specific residues have been identified that affect channel-PIP(2) interactions, the precise binding site of PIP(2) has not been determined in any case. In addition to binding ion channels, however, phosphoinositides interact with a plethora of other proteins, and in a number of cases, the crystallographic structures of the complexes have been determined. Based on a database of 25 complexed crystallographic structures, we have addressed the molecular characteristics of phosphoinositide binding to proteins. Implications to phosphoinositide binding to ion channels are also discussed.

17520276
Phosphoinositide-mediated gating of inwardly rectifying K(+) channels.
Phosphoinositides, such as phosphatidylinositol-bisphosphate (PIP(2)), control the activity of many ion channels in yet undefined ways. Inwardly, rectifying potassium (Kir) channels were the first shown to be dependent on direct interactions with phosphoinositides. Alterations in channel-PIP(2) interactions affect Kir single-channel gating behavior. Aberrations in channel-PIP(2) interactions can lead to human disease. As the activity of all Kir channels depends on their interactions with phosphoinositides, future research will aim to understand the molecular events that occur from phosphoinositide binding to channel gating. The determination of atomic resolution structures for several mammalian and bacterial Kir channels provides great promise towards this goal. We have mapped onto the three-dimensional channel structure the position of basic residues identified through mutagenesis studies that contribute to the sensitivity of a Kir channel to PIP(2). The localization of these putative PIP(2)-interacting residues relative to the channel's permeation pathway has given rise to a testable model, which could account for channel activation by PIP(2).

17495041
Diverse Kir modulators act in close proximity to residues implicated in phosphoinositide binding.
Inwardly rectifying potassium (Kir) channels were the first shown to be directly activated by phosphoinositides in general and phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP(2)) in particular. Atomic resolution structures have been determined for several mammalian and bacterial Kir channels. Basic residues, identified through mutagenesis studies to contribute to the sensitivity of the channel to PIP(2), have been mapped onto the three dimensional channel structure and their localization has given rise to a plausible model that can explain channel activation by PIP(2). Moreover, mapping onto the three-dimensional channel structure sites involved in the modulation of Kir channel activity by a diverse group of regulatory molecules, revealed a striking proximity to residues implicated in phosphoinositide binding. These observations support the hypothesis that the observed dependence of diverse modulators on channel-PIP(2) interactions stems from their localization within distances that can affect PIP(2)-interacting residues.

