20729750
?2-Adrenergic receptor signaling in the cardiac myocyte is modulated by interactions with CXCR4.
Chemokines are small secreted proteins with chemoattractant properties that play a key role in inflammation, metastasis, and embryonic development. We previously demonstrated a nonchemotactic role for one such chemokine pair, stromal cell-derived factor-1? and its G-protein coupled receptor, CXCR4. Stromal cell-derived factor-1/CXCR4 are expressed on cardiac myocytes and have direct consequences on cardiac myocyte physiology by inhibiting contractility in response to the nonselective ?-adrenergic receptor (?AR) agonist, isoproterenol. As a result of the importance of ?-adrenergic signaling in heart failure pathophysiology, we investigated the underlying mechanism involved in CXCR4 modulation of ?AR signaling. Our studies demonstrate activation of CXCR4 by stromal cell-derived factor-1 leads to a decrease in ?AR-induced PKA activity as assessed by cAMP accumulation and PKA-dependent phosphorylation of phospholamban, an inhibitor of SERCA2a. We determined CXCR4 regulation of ?AR downstream targets is ?2AR-dependent. We demonstrated a physical interaction between CXCR4 and ?2AR as determined by coimmunoprecipitation, confocal microscopy, and BRET techniques. The CXCR4-?2AR interaction leads to G-protein signal modulation and suggests the interaction is a novel mechanism for regulating cardiac myocyte contractility. Chemokines are physiologically and developmentally relevant to myocardial biology and represent a novel receptor class of cardiac modulators. The CXCR4-?2AR complex could represent a hitherto unknown target for therapeutic intervention.

20687183
Role of antibodies in developing drugs that target G-protein-coupled receptor dimers.
G-protein-coupled receptors are important molecular targets in drug discovery. These receptors play a pivotal role in physiological signaling pathways and are targeted by nearly 50% of currently available drugs. Mounting evidence suggests that G-protein-coupled receptors form dimers, and various studies have shown that dimerization is necessary for receptor maturation, signaling, and trafficking. However, the physiological implications of dimerization in vivo have not been well explored because detection of GPCR dimers in endogenous systems has been a challenging task. One exciting new approach to this challenge is the generation of antibodies against specific G-protein-coupled receptor dimers. Such antibodies could be used as tools for characterization of heteromer-specific function; as reagents for their purification, tissue localization, and regulation in vivo; and as probes for mapping their functional domains. In addition, such antibodies could serve as alternative ligands for G-protein-coupled receptor heteromers. Thus, heteromer-specific antibodies represent novel tools for the exploration and manipulation of G-protein-coupled receptor-dimer pharmacology.

20647592
Increased abundance of opioid receptor heteromers after chronic morphine administration.
The mu and delta types of opioid receptors form heteromers that exhibit pharmacological and functional properties distinct from those of homomeric receptors. To characterize these complexes in the brain, we generated antibodies that selectively recognize the mu-delta heteromer and blocked its in vitro signaling. With these antibodies, we showed that chronic, but not acute, morphine treatment caused an increase in the abundance of mu-delta heteromers in key areas of the central nervous system that are implicated in pain processing. Because of its distinct signaling properties, the mu-delta heteromer could be a therapeutic target in the treatment of chronic pain and addiction.

19956087
Modulation of opiate-related signaling molecules in morphine-dependent conditioned behavior: conditioned place preference to morphine induces CREB phosphorylation.
Opiate addiction is a chronic, relapsing behavioral disorder where learned associations that develop between the abused opiate and the environment in which it is consumed are brought about through Pavlovian (classical) conditioning processes. However, the signaling mechanisms/pathways regulating the mechanisms that underlie the responses to opiate-associated cues or the development of sensitization as a consequence of repeated context-independent administration of opiates are unknown. In this study we examined the phosphorylation levels of various classic signaling molecules in brain regions implicated in addictive behaviors after acute and repeated morphine administration. An unbiased place conditioning protocol was used to examine changes in phosphorylation that are associated with (1) the expression of the rewarding effects of morphine and (2) the sensitization that develops to this effect. We also examined the effects of a delta-receptor antagonist on morphine-induced conditioned behavior and on the phosphorylation of classic signaling molecules in view of data showing that blockade of delta-opioid receptor (deltaOR) prevents the development of sensitization to the rewarding effects of morphine. We find that CREB phosphorylation is specifically induced upon the expression of a sensitized response to morphine-induced conditioned behavior in brain areas related to memory consolidation, such as the hippocampus and cortex. A similar effect is also observed, albeit to a lesser extent, in the case of the GluR1 subunit of AMPA glutamate receptor. These increases in the phosphorylation levels of CREB and pGluR1 are significantly blocked by pretreatment with a deltaOR antagonist. These results indicate a critical role for phospho-CREB, AMPA, and deltaOR activities in mediating the expression of a sensitized response to morphine-dependent conditioned behavior.

18836069
Cell surface targeting of mu-delta opioid receptor heterodimers by RTP4.
Mu opioid receptors are G protein-coupled receptors that mediate the pain-relieving effects of clinically used analgesics, such as morphine. Accumulating evidence shows that mu-delta opioid heterodimers have a pharmacologic profile distinct from those of the mu or delta homodimers. Because the heterodimers exhibit distinct signaling properties, the protein and mechanism regulating their levels have significant effects on morphine-mediated physiology. We report the characterization of RTP4, a Golgi chaperone, as a regulator of the levels of heterodimers at the cell surface. We show that the association with RTP4 protects mu-delta receptors from ubiquitination and degradation. This leads to increases in surface heterodimer levels, thereby affecting signaling. Thus, the oligomeric organization of opioid receptors is controlled by RTP4, and this governs their membrane targeting and functional activity. This work is the first report of the identification of a chaperone involved in the regulation of the biogenesis of a family A GPCR heterodimer. The identification of such factors as RTP4 controlling dimerization will provide insight into the regulation of heterodimers in vivo. This has implications in the modulation of pharmacology of their endogenous ligands, and in the development of drugs with specific therapeutic effects.

18673273
Antibodies against G-protein coupled receptors: novel uses in screening and drug development.
Antibodies are components of the body's humoral immune system that are generated in response to foreign pathogens. Modern biomedical research has employed these very specific and efficient molecules designed by nature in the diagnosis of diseases, localization of gene products as well as in the rapid screening of targets for drug discovery and testing. In addition, the introduction of antibodies with fluorescent or enzymatic tags has significantly contributed to advances in imaging and microarray technology, which are revolutionizing disease research and the search for effective therapeutics. More recently antibodies have been used in the isolation of dimeric G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) complexes. In this review, we discuss antibodies as powerful research tools for studying GPCRs, and their potential to be developed as drugs themselves.

18256033
Post-activation-mediated changes in opioid receptors detected by N-terminal antibodies.
The majority of studies examining activity-induced conformational changes in G protein-coupled receptors have focused on transmembrane helices or intracellular regions. Relatively few studies have examined the involvement of the extracellular region in general and the N-terminal region in particular in this process. To begin to address this, we generated a series of antibodies to the N-terminal region of opioid receptors. Characterization of these antibodies revealed that they differentially recognize activated receptors. Recently, we generated monoclonal antibodies that recognize regions proximal to glycosylation sites in the receptor N terminus. Characterization of these antibodies revealed that agonist treatment leads to a decrease in epitope recognition by the antibody presumably because of a movement of the region of the N terminus proximal to glycosylation sites. The time course of the decrease in antibody recognition suggested that it could be due to a post-activation-mediated event. Examination of the involvement of receptor residues in the C-tail and beta-arrestin binding using site-directed mutagenesis and cells or tissues lacking beta-arrestin 2 suggests a role for these desensitization-related mechanisms in governing antibody binding to the receptor. Thus, these N-terminally directed antibodies can differentially recognize post-activation-mediated changes in the C-terminal (intracellular) region of the receptor. Therefore, these conformation-sensitive antibodies represent powerful reagents to probe receptor activation states and provide a potential tool for identifying and characterizing new compounds of therapeutic interest.

17148456
Conformation state-sensitive antibodies to G-protein-coupled receptors.
A growing body of evidence indicates that G-protein-coupled receptors undergo complex conformational changes upon agonist activation. It is likely that the extracellular region, including the N terminus, undergoes activation-dependent conformational changes. We examined this by generating antibodies to regions within the N terminus of micro-opioid receptors. We find that antibodies to the midportion of the N-terminal tail exhibit enhanced recognition of activated receptors, whereas those to the distal regions do not. The enhanced recognition is abolished upon treatment with agents that block G-protein coupling or deglycosylate the receptor. This suggests that the N-terminal region of mu receptors undergoes conformational changes following receptor activation that can be selectively detected by these region-specific antibodies. We used these antibodies to characterize micro receptor type-specific ligands and find that the antibodies accurately differentiate ligands with varying efficacies. Next, we examined if these antibodies can be used to investigate the extent and duration of activation of endogenous receptors. We find that peripheral morphine administration leads to a time-dependent increase in antibody binding in the striatum and prefrontal cortex with a peak at about 30 min, indicating that these antibodies can be used to probe the spatio-temporal dynamics of native mu receptors. Finally, we show that this strategy of targeting the N-terminal region to generate receptor conformation-specific antisera can be applied to other G(alpha)(i)-coupled (delta-opioid, CB1 cannabinoid, alpha(2A)-adrenergic) as well as G(alpha)(s)-(beta(2)-adrenergic) and G(alpha)(q)-coupled (AT1 angiotensin) receptors. Taken together, these studies describe antisera as tools that allow, for the first time, studies probing differential conformation states of G-protein-coupled receptors, which could be used to identify molecules of therapeutic interest.

