21298472
Quality of Mental Health Care at a Student-Run Clinic: Care for the Uninsured Exceeds that of Publicly and Privately Insured Populations.
Diagnosing and treating depression in a primary care practice is an important, yet difficult task, especially for safety-net practices serving the uninsured. In the United States healthcare system, there is a mismatch between the need for mental health care and access to services. This disparity is most striking among the uninsured. Mental health disorders are more prevalent among the uninsured, and even when diagnosed with mental illness, they are less likely to obtain necessary treatment than insured patients. Given the increasing burden of depression on society, growing numbers of uninsured and negative repercussions of untreated mental illness, improvements in screening and management protocols are becoming more important in primary care practices serving this population. The quality of depression treatment at commercial and public insurance plans in New York City (NYC) and New York State (NYS) were compared to that of the East Harlem Health Outreach Partnership (EHHOP), the student-run clinic of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine. Based on the comparison, the study made recommendations for an integrated, on-site mental health service program at the community health clinic. A cohort of 49 depressed patients were evaluated and treated at the EHHOP clinic. The quality of the mental health care was evaluated according to variables from the Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS). Indicators of quality included demographics, method of diagnosis, type of pharmacological treatment, referral to specialty care, patient adherence to follow-up care and adherence to pharmacologic treatment. When compared to insured patients in NYS, more EHHOP patients had the appropriate number of physician contacts after being diagnosed with depression than patients with commercial health plans (P = 0.008) and Medicaid (P = 0.09). Similarly, a greater number of EHHOP patients had better acute phase (P = 0.001; P = 0.096) and continuous phase (P = 0.049; P = 0.88) pharmacologic treatment than patients with commercial health plans and Medicaid, respectively. EHHOP meets and, in some areas, exceeds the quality of depression treatment when compared to insured populations. Even though EHHOP already surpasses these indicators, the clinic can improve its diagnostic capabilities, prescription medication adherence, and referral care follow-through by creating an on-site mental health clinic.

20168011
Quality of diabetes care at a student-run free clinic.
Student-run clinics are emerging safety-net practices for the uninsured; despite the over 110 clinics that currently operate across the United States, however, no data exist on the quality of care being delivered at such sites. The East Harlem Health Outreach Partnership (EHHOP) of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York is a medical student-run, attending-supervised free clinic that offers primary care to the uninsured of surrounding East Harlem. The aim of this study was to evaluate diabetes care quality at the EHHOP clinic. Diabetes management was assessed using common quality-of-care indicators such as glycosylated hemoglobin level and blood pressure control. Clinic rates of such diabetes quality-of-care indicators ranged from 12% to 96%, and in most areas was comparable to or better than averages previously reported for uninsured populations.

19642148
Student-run health clinic: novel arena to educate medical students on systems-based practice.
In recent decades, the United States has experienced substantial growth in the number of student-run clinics for the indigent. Today, over 49 medical schools across the country operate over 110 student-run outreach clinics that provide primary care services to the poor and uninsured. Despite this development, little research has been published on the educational value of such student-led endeavors. Although much has been surmised, no general methodology for categorizing the learning experience in these clinics has been established. This article represents the first literature review of the novel method of educating students through the operation of a clinic for the underserved. It highlights the student-run clinic as a unique enhancement of medical education that may supplant current curricular arenas in teaching students about systems-based practice principles such as cost containment and financing, resource allocation, interdisciplinary collaboration, patient advocacy, and monitoring and delivery of quality care. The novelty of the student-run clinic is that students place themselves at the forefront of problem solving and system navigation to effectively care for severely disadvantaged populations. This article underscores the student-run clinic as a potentially ideal experiential learning method for preparing young physicians to confront a US healthcare system currently facing crises in cost, quality of care, and high rates of uninsurance. The article stresses the need for outcomes research on the long-term effectiveness of the student-run clinic experience in affecting medical student practice behaviors and attitudes in patient care settings that extend beyond the student-run clinic.

18225454
Falls in the community-dwelling older adult: a review for primary-care providers.
Falls in the elderly are an important independent marker of frailty. Up to half of elderly people over 65 experience a fall every year. They are associated with high morbidity and mortality and are responsible for greater than 20 billion dollars a year in healthcare costs in the United States. This article presents a review and guide for the primary care provider of the predisposing and situational risk factors for falls; comprehensive assessment for screening and tailored intervention; and discussion of single and multicomponent measures for fall prevention and management in the older person living in the community. Interventions for the cognitively impaired and demented elderly will also be addressed.

