21056818
Anesthesia for patients undergoing orthopedic oncologic surgeries.
When planning an anesthetic for patients undergoing orthopedic oncologic surgeries, numerous factors must be considered. Preoperative evaluation may elucidate significant co-morbidities or side effects secondary to chemotherapy or radiation, which can affect anesthetic choices. Procedures vary in length and complexity and pose challenges in both positioning and in planning to minimize blood loss. Many anesthetic techniques are available to provide both intraoperative anesthesia and postoperative analgesia, while the type of thromboprophylaxis and analgesic adjuvants that will be administered needs to be defined. This review focuses on approaches to use when caring for patients undergoing orthopedic oncologic procedures.

20304356
Treating stridor with opioids: a challenging case of paradoxical vocal cord movement.
A 61 year-old patient with a history of anxiety disorder presented with stridor after an uneventful laparotomy with a general anesthetic. Postoperative analgesia was withheld secondary to intermittent oxygen desaturation. She was unresponsive to standard therapies, including racemic epinephrine and albuterol nebulizers. An otolaryngology consultant performed fiberoptic laryngoscopy and paradoxical vocal cord movement was diagnosed. When fentanyl was subsequently administered to treat her pain, the stridor resolved.

19490464
The use of cerebral oximetry as a monitor of the adequacy of cerebral perfusion in a patient undergoing shoulder surgery in the beach chair position.
Four cases of ischemic injury have been reported in patients undergoing orthopedic surgery in the upright position. We describe the use of cerebral oximetry as a monitor of the adequacy of cerebral perfusion in a 63-year-old woman who underwent arthroscopic rotator cuff surgery in a beach chair under general anesthesia. During positioning, a decrease in blood pressure was accompanied by a decrease in cerebral oxygen saturation (S(ct)O(2)) and was treated with phenylephrine. When spontaneous ventilation resumed, an increase in end-tidal carbon dioxide was accompanied by an increase in S(ct)O(2). Cerebral oximetry may prove useful as a guide monitor and manage nonsupine patients.

18617124
The safety and efficacy of regional anesthesia in an office-based setting.
To determine the safety and efficacy of regional anesthesia techniques when administered in the office-based setting. Retrospective chart review. Free-standing orthopedic office with an operating room suite. A total of 238 patients underwent 242 anesthetics. Types of anesthetics delivered were quantified. Regional anesthetics were further divided into specific nerve blocks. Times from anesthetic start to surgical start and from surgical end to anesthetic end were calculated. Adverse outcomes were ascertained and followed. Of the 242 anesthetics administered, 123 were peripheral nerve blocks, two were neuraxial blocks, 140 were monitored anesthesia care cases, and 17 were general anesthetics (14 Laryngeal Mask Airway cases, two mask ventilation cases, and one endotracheal intubation). The average times from anesthesia start to surgery start were as follows: monitored anesthesia cases, 19+/-7 min (median, 20 min); regional anesthesia cases, 29+/-11 min (median, 30 min); and general anesthesia cases, 31+/-11 min (median, 30 min). The average time from surgery end to anesthesia end for monitored anesthesia cases was 9+/-3 min (median, 10 min); regional anesthesia, 9+/-3 min (median, 10 min); and general anesthesia, 12+/-4 min (median, 20 min). Two transient nerve injuries occurred, both of which resolved. On the basis of our experience, we believe that regional anesthesia can be delivered efficiently and safely for orthopedic procedures in the office-based environment, and we encourage its wider use.

18194349
Median arcuate ligament syndrome--a novel treatment using an intrathecal morphine pump to relieve intractable visceral pain.
Median arcuate ligament syndrome, which presents with intractable visceral pain, is difficult to both diagnose and treat. This case report describes the first use of an intrathecal morphine pump as an effective therapeutic intervention. We describe a 39-year-old female who presented with a four-year history of misdiagnosed debilitating abdominal pain. After multiple failed attempts at medical management and surgeries, a trial of intrathecal narcotics provided significant relief. Six months after insertion of an intrathecal morphine pump, the patient was pain-free and had resumed all activities of daily living. The use of an intrathecal narcotic pump should be considered for treatment of patients with intractable visceral pain secondary to median arcuate ligament syndrome.

18044279
Management of the patient reporting an allergy to penicillin.
Recent emphasis on the prevention of surgical wound infection has highlighted the role of the anesthesiologist as the physician responsible for administering appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis. Patients often report a distant or unclear history of penicillin allergy. Administering an antibiotic to which the patient has a true allergy can provoke a life threatening reaction. The anesthesiologist should be aware of the prevalence, severity, and manifestations of allergies to antibiotics, as well as the available alternatives. Unnecessary administration of more powerful broad-spectrum antibiotics leads to the development of antimicrobial resistance and should be avoided. It is the anesthesiologists' duty to balance these issues when selecting appropriate antibiosis.

17986160
The ultrasound-guided supraclavicular-interscalene (UGSCIS) block: a case report.
Providing complete anesthesia to the entire upper extremity remains challenging. We present the use of a novel, updated, regional anesthetic technique-an ultrasound-guided supraclavicular-interscalene block (UGSCIS)-to provide anesthesia and analgesia to a patient with end-stage liver disease who required fixation of a pathologic fracture of the humerus.

