20195782
Validation of the group-based medical mistrust scale among urban black men.
Socioculturally relevant measures of medical mistrust are needed to better address health disparities, especially among Black men, a group with lower life expectancy and higher death rates compared to other race/gender groups. The study aim was to investigate the psychometric properties of the Group-Based Medical Mistrust Scale (GBMMS) in a Black male sample. Data were collected as part of a randomized controlled trial testing educational strategies to support Black men's decisions about prostate cancer screening. Participants included 201 Black men ages 40-75 years recruited in New York City during 2006-2007. The primary measures included: race-based medical mistrust, health care participation, avoidance of health care, perceived access to health care, health care satisfaction, racial identity, residential racial segregation, attitudes towards prostate cancer screening, and past prostate cancer screening behavior. An exploratory factor analysis suggested a three-factor structure. Confirmatory factor analysis supported the three-factor model. Internal consistency was high for the total GBMMS and the three sub-scales: Suspicion, Discrimination, and Lack of Support. Construct validity was supported by: significant positive correlations between GBMMS and avoidance of health care and racial identity as well as significant negative correlations with health care access, health care satisfaction, and attitudes about prostate cancer screening. ANOVA showed that the GBMMS was associated with greater residential racial segregation. Higher total GBMMS scores were associated with not visiting a physician in the last year and not having a regular physician. The present findings provide strong additional evidence that the GBMMS is a valid and reliable measure that may be used among urban Black men.

20036097
Impact of a brief intervention on patient communication and barriers to pain management: results from a randomized controlled trial.
This study examined the impact of a brief pain communication/education intervention on patient outcomes in breast cancer. We hypothesized that our intervention would improve patient communication and reduce misconceptions ("Barriers") concerning pain management, and that patients with lower Barriers, or who perceived their physician as being more facilitative and receptive, would report better outcomes. Female breast cancer patients with persistent pain (n=89) were randomly assigned to either a 30-min in-person pain education/communication intervention or control condition and followed for 12 weeks. Intervention group patients reported a significant decrease in pain Barriers but not in other outcomes. Overall, patients with lower barrier scores reported less distress and better emotional well-being. Patients who scored higher in active communication (e.g., asking questions, giving information) reported fewer Barriers and better pain relief. Individuals who perceived their physicians as being more receptive reported better pain management while those who perceived their physicians as being both more receptive and facilitative were more satisfied with their health care. A brief education/communication intervention reduced patients' Barriers to pain management but did not impact other patient outcomes. Pain outcomes may be improved by addressing patients' pain misconceptions and emphasizing a receptive and responsive communication style.

19621259
Understanding the barriers and facilitators of colorectal cancer screening among low income immigrant hispanics.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) screening rates are low among Hispanics; thus understanding screening barriers and facilitators is essential. A survey, based on blended health promotion theories, was conducted with low income, mostly immigrant, Hispanics at community based organizations and health clinics in New York City. Correlates of undergoing colonoscopy screening were examined. Four hundred men (28%) and women were interviewed. Older age, longer US residence, having a regular health care provider and provider recommendation predicted colonoscopy receipt (P values <0.01). Greater fear and worry concerning colonoscopy and fewer perceived screening benefits were associated with reduced screening likelihood (P values <0.05). In a multivariate model, colonoscopy receipt was negatively associated with Medicaid and positively associated with English preference, physician recommendation for and encouragement of screening and less fear. Interventions that educate physicians and patients regarding colonoscopy screening guidelines, increase physicians' screening referrals, and reduce patients' fear are needed.

18304882
A program to enhance completion of screening colonoscopy among urban minorities.
Although colonoscopy is becoming the preferred screening test for colorectal cancer, screening rates, particularly among minorities, are low. Little is known about the uptake of screening colonoscopy or the factors that predict colonoscopy completion among minorities. This study investigated the use of patient navigation within an open-access referral system and its effects on colonoscopy completion rates among urban minorities. This was a cohort study that took place at a teaching hospital in New York. Participants were mostly African Americans and Hispanics directly referred for screening colonoscopy by primary care clinics from November 2003 to May 2006. Once referred, a bilingual Hispanic female patient navigator facilitated the colonoscopy completion. Completion rates, demographic factors associated with completing colonoscopy, endoscopic findings, and patient satisfaction were analyzed. Of 1169 referrals, 688 patients qualified for and 532 underwent navigation. Two thirds (66%) of navigated patients completed screening colonoscopies, 16% had adenomas, and only 5% had inadequate bowel preps. Women were 1.31 times more likely to complete the colonoscopy than men (P = .014). Hispanics were 1.67 times more likely to complete the colonoscopy than African Americans (P = .013). Hispanic women were 1.50 times more likely to complete the colonoscopy than Hispanic men (P = .009). Patient satisfaction was 98% overall, with 66% reporting that they definitely or probably would not have completed their colonoscopy without navigation. By using a patient navigator, the majority of urban minorities successfully completed their colonoscopies, clinically significant pathology was detected, and patient satisfaction was enhanced. This approach may help increase adherence with screening colonoscopy efforts in other clinical settings.

17621377
Psychological distress in long-term survivors of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
The prevalence of psychological distress is higher in cancers with poorer prognoses and speculated as higher in those receiving more aversive treatments. Since hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) is one of the most taxing cancer treatments to endure and is therefore likely to have more long-term sequelae, this study examined psychological distress symptoms in long-term HSCT survivors who were at least 1 year post-transplant. Participants in this cross-sectional study were recruited from urban medical centers as part of a larger study of HSCT survivors. The sample comprised 236 adults who were on average 3.4 years since transplant. Psychological distress was measured by a commonly used self-report questionnaire, the Brief Symptom Inventory. Clinically elevated psychological distress caseness was present in 43% of long-term HSCT survivors. Elevations were highest on clinical subscales of obsessive-compulsiveness, somatization, and psychoticism. However, item-level analyses revealed that the content of the most frequently reported symptoms included trouble with memory and feelings of loneliness. Results of this study suggest that HSCT survivors may experience memory and existential concerns and that such symptoms may not represent psychiatric sequelae.

17372796
Randomized controlled trial of a computer-based, tailored intervention to increase smoking cessation counseling by primary care physicians.
The primary care visit represents an important venue for intervening with a large population of smokers. However, physician adherence to the Smoking Cessation Clinical Guideline (5As) remains low. We evaluated the effectiveness of a computer-tailored intervention designed to increase smoking cessation counseling by primary care physicians. Physicians and their patients were randomized to either intervention or control conditions. In addition to brief smoking cessation training, intervention physicians and patients received a one-page report that characterized the patients' smoking habit and history and offered tailored recommendations. Physician performance of the 5As was assessed via patient exit interviews. Quit rates and smoking behaviors were assessed 6 months postintervention via patient phone interviews. Intervention effects were tested in a sample of 70 physicians and 518 of their patients. Results were analyzed via generalized and mixed linear modeling controlling for clustering. Intervention physicians exceeded controls on "Assess" (OR 5.06; 95% CI 3.22, 7.95), "Advise" (OR 2.79; 95% CI 1.70, 4.59), "Assist-set goals" (OR 4.31; 95% CI 2.59, 7.16), "Assist-provide written materials" (OR 5.14; 95% CI 2.60, 10.14), "Assist-provide referral" (OR 6.48; 95% CI 3.11, 13.49), "Assist-discuss medication" (OR 4.72;95% CI 2.90, 7.68), and "Arrange" (OR 8.14; 95% CI 3.98, 16.68), all p values being < 0.0001. Intervention patients were 1.77 (CI 0.94, 3.34,p = 0.078) times more likely than controls to be abstinent (12 versus 8%), a difference that approached, but did not reach statistical significance, and surpassed controls on number of days quit (18.4 versus 12.2, p < .05) but not on number of quit attempts. The use of a brief computer-tailored report improved physicians' implementation of the 5As and had a modest effect on patients' smoking behaviors 6 months postintervention.

17219398
Optimism and life events as predictors of fear appraisals in mothers of children undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Although mothers' fear appraisals about their child's future health and well-being affect their own psychological adjustment to their child's hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), little is known about antecedents of maternal fear appraisals. This longitudinal study investigated several potential antecedents of these fear appraisals: maternal optimism, recent negative life events, lifetime history of traumatic events, and medical characteristics of the child's disease and HSCT course. One hundred-forty mothers were interviewed during their child's hospitalization for HSCT and at 3-and 6-months post-HSCT. Structural equation modeling was used to test a model of hypothesized relations. Consistent with predictions, lower optimism and a greater number of negative life events were independently associated with greater maternal fear appraisals. Contrary to expectations, lifetime history of trauma was not associated with maternal fear appraisals. Mothers' fear appraisals during their child's hospitalization were, in turn, associated with their fear appraisals up to 6 months later. These data identify a subset of mothers who may be particularly in need of an intervention to increase optimistic coping strategies, improve coping with negative life events, and reduce fear appraisals to improve their adjustment following their child's HSCT.

