21142238
Discriminatory power of stoichiometry-driven protein folding?


20740566
Simulaid: a simulation facilitator and analysis program.
Simulaid performs a large number of simulation-related tasks: interconversion and modification of structure and trajectory files, optimization of orientation, and a large variety of analysis functions. The program can handle structures in PDB (Berman et al., Nucleic Acids Res 2000, 28, 235), Charmm (Brooks et al., J Comput Chem 4, 187) CRD, Amber (Case et al.), Macromodel (Mohamadi et al., J Comput Chem 1990, 11, 440), Gromos/Gromacs (Hess et al.), InsightII (InsightII. Accelrys Inc.: San Diego, 2005), Grasp (Nicholls et al., Proteins: Struct Funct Genet 1991, 11, 281) .crg, Tripos (Tripos International, S. H. R., St. Louis, MO) .mol2 (input only), and in the MMC (Mezei, M.; MMC: Monte Carlo program for molecular assemblies. Available at: http://inka.mssm.edu/~mezei/mmc) formats; and trajectories in the formats of Charmm, Amber, Macromodel, and MMC. Analysis features include (but are not limited to): (1) simple distance calculations and hydrogen-bond analysis, (2) calculation of 2-D RMSD maps (produced both as text file with the data and as a color-coded matrix) and cross RMSD maps between trajectories, (3) clustering based on RMSD maps, (4) analysis of torsion angles, Ramachandran (Ramachandran and Sasiskharan, Adv Protein Chem 1968, 23, 283) angles, proline kink (Visiers et al., Protein Eng 2000, 13, 603) angles, pseudorotational (Altona and Sundaralingam, J Am Chem Soc 1972, 94, 8205; Cremer and Pople, J Am Chem Soc 1975, 97, 1354) angles, and (5) analysis based on circular variance (Mezei, J Mol Graphics Model 2003, 21, 463). Torsion angle evolutions are presented in dial plots (Ravishanker et al., J Biomol Struct Dyn 1989, 6, 669). Several of these features are unique to Simulaid.

20696915
Severe anemia in the Nan mutant mouse caused by sequence-selective disruption of erythroid Kruppel-like factor.
Studies of mouse models of anemia have long provided fundamental insights into red blood cell formation and function. Here we show that the semidominant mouse mutation Nan ("neonatal anemia") carries a single amino acid change (E339D) within the second zinc finger of the erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF), a critical erythroid regulatory transcription factor. The mutation alters the DNA-binding specificity of EKLF so that it no longer binds promoters of a subset of its DNA targets. Remarkably, even when mutant Nan and wild-type EKLF alleles are expressed at equivalent levels, the mutant form selectively interferes with expression of EKLF target genes whose promoter elements it no longer binds. This interference yields a distorted genetic output and selective protein deficiencies that differ from those seen in EKLF-heterozygous and EKLF-null red blood cells and presents a unique and unexpected mechanism of inherited disease.

20338845
A molecular dynamics investigation of lipid bilayer perturbation by PIP2.
Phosphoinositides like phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP(2)) are negatively charged lipids that play a pivotal role in membrane trafficking, signal transduction, and protein anchoring. We have designed a force field for the PIP(2) headgroup using quantum mechanical methods and characterized its properties inside a lipid bilayer using molecular dynamics simulations. Macroscopic properties such as area/headgroup, density profiles, and lipid order parameters calculated from these simulations agree well with the experimental values. However, microscopically, the PIP(2) introduces a local perturbation of the lipid bilayer. The average PIP(2) headgroup orientation of 45 degrees relative to the bilayer normal induces a unique, distance-dependent organization of the lipids that surround PIP(2). The headgroups of these lipids preferentially orient closer to the bilayer normal. This perturbation creates a PIP(2) lipid microdomain with the neighboring lipids. We propose that the PIP(2) lipid microdomain enables the PIP(2) to function as a membrane-bound anchoring molecule.

20205801
Dockres: a computer program that analyzes the output of virtual screening of small molecules.
ABSTRACT: This paper describes a computer program named Dockres that is designed to analyze and summarize results of virtual screening of small molecules. The program is supplemented with utilities that support the screening process. Foremost among these utilities are scripts that run the virtual screening of a chemical library on a large number of processors in parallel. Dockres and some of its supporting utilities are written Fortran-77; other utilities are written as C-shell scripts. They support the parallel execution of the screening. The current implementation of the program handles virtual screening with Autodock-3 and Autodock-4, but can be extended to work with the output of other programs. Analysis of virtual screening by Dockres led to both active and selective lead compounds. Analysis of virtual screening was facilitated and enhanced by Dockres in both the authors' laboratories as well as laboratories elsewhere.

19731376
The energetics of the acetylation switch in p53-mediated transcriptional activation.
Targeted therapeutic intervention in receptor-ligand interactions of p53-mediated tumor suppression can impact progression of disease, aging, and variation in genetic expression. Here, we conducted a number of molecular simulations, based on structures of p53 in complex with its transcriptional coactivating CBP bromodomain, determined by NMR spectroscopy, to investigate the energetics of the binding complex. Building on the observation that acetylation of K382 in p53 serves as the essential triggering switch for a specific interaction with CBP, we assessed the differential effect of acetylation on binding from simulations of an octapeptide derived from p53 with acetylated and nonacetylated K382 (residues 379-386). Cluster analysis of the simulations shows that acetylation of the free peptide does not significantly change the population of the preferred conformation of the peptide in solution for binding to CBP. Conversion of the acetylated K382 to nonacetylated form with free energy perturbation (FEP) simulations of the p53 CBP complex and the free peptide showed that the relative contribution of the acetyl group to binding is 4.8 kcal/mol. An analysis of residue contributions to the binding energy using an MM-GBSA approach agrees with the FEP results and sheds additional light on the origin of selectivity in p53 binding to the CBP bromodomain.

19242538
Computer aided identification of small molecules disrupting uPAR/alpha5beta1--integrin interaction: a new paradigm for metastasis prevention.
BACKGROUND: Disseminated dormant cancer cells can resume growth and eventually form overt metastases, but the underlying molecular mechanism responsible for this change remains obscure. We previously established that cell surface interaction between urokinase receptor (uPAR) and alpha5beta1-integrin initiates a sequel of events, involving MAPK-ERK activation that culminates in progressive cancer growth. We also identified the site on uPAR that binds alpha5beta1-integrin. Disruption of uPAR/integrin interaction blocks ERK activation and forces cancer cells into dormancy. METHODS AND PRINCIPLE FINDINGS: Using a target structure guided computation docking we identified 68 compounds from a diversity library of 13,000 small molecules that were predicted to interact with a previously identified integrin-binding site on uPAR. Of these 68 chemical hits, ten inhibited ERK activation in a cellular assay and of those, 2 compounds, 2-(Pyridin-2-ylamino)-quinolin-8-ol and, 2,2'-(methylimino)di (8-quinolinol) inhibited ERK activation by disrupting the uPAR/integrins interaction. These two compounds, when applied in vivo, inhibited ERK activity and tumor growth and blocked metastases of a model head and neck carcinoma. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We showed that interaction between two large proteins (uPAR and alpha5beta1-integrin) can be disrupted by a small molecule leading to profound downstream effects. Because this interaction occurs in cells with high uPAR expression, a property almost exclusive to cancer cells, we expect a new therapy based on these lead compounds to be cancer cell specific and minimally toxic. This treatment, rather than killing disseminated metastatic cells, should induce a protracted state of dormancy and prevent overt metastases.

19086158
The PT1-Ca2+ Gla domain binds to a membrane through two dipalmitoylphosphatidylserines. A computational study.
Binding of vitamin K-dependent proteins to cell membranes containing phosphatidylserine (PS) via gamma-carboxyglutamic acid (Gla) domains is one of the essential steps in the blood coagulation pathway. During activation of the coagulation cascade, prothrombin is converted to thrombin by prothrombinase, a complex consisting of serine protease FXa and cofactor FVa, anchored to anionic phospholipids on the surface of activated platelets in the presence of calcium ions. To investigate the binding of the Gla domain of prothrombin fragment 1 (PT1) to anionic lipids in the presence of Ca2+, we have conducted MD simulations of the protein with one and two dipalmitoylphosphatidylserines (DPPS) in a dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) bilayer membrane. The results show a well-defined phosphatidylserine binding site, which agrees generally with crystallographic studies [Huang, M., et al. (2003) Nat. Struct. Biol. 10, 751-756]. However, in the presence of the lipid membrane, some of the interactions observed in the crystal structure adjust during the simulations possibly because in our system the PT1-Ca2+ complex is embedded in a DPPC lipid membrane. Our simulations confirm the existence of a second phospholipid headgroup binding site on the opposite face of the PT1-Ca2+ complex as suggested by MacDonald et al. [(1997) Biochemistry 36, 5120-5127]. The serine headgroup in the second site binds through a Gla domain-bound calcium ion Ca1, Gla30, and Lys11. On the basis of free energy simulations, we estimate the energy of binding of the PT1-Ca2+ complex to a single DPPS to be around -11.5 kcal/mol. The estimated free energy of binding of a DPPS lipid to the second binding site is around -8.8 kcal/mol and is in part caused by the nature of the second site and in part by entropic effects.

19053280
The PT1-Ca(2+) Gla Domain Binds to a Membrane through Two Dipalmitoylphosphatidylserines. A Computational Study (dagger).
Binding of vitamin K-dependent proteins to cell membranes containing phosphatidylserine (PS) via gamma-carboxyglutamic acid (Gla) domains is one of the essential steps in the blood coagulation pathway. During activation of the coagulation cascade, prothrombin is converted to thrombin by prothrombinase, a complex consisting of serine protease FXa and cofactor FVa, anchored to anionic phospholipids on the surface of activated platelets in the presence of calcium ions. To investigate the binding of the Gla domain of prothrombin fragment 1 (PT1) to anionic lipids in the presence of Ca(2+), we have conducted MD simulations of the protein with one and two dipalmitoylphosphatidylserines (DPPS) in a dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) bilayer membrane. The results show a well-defined phosphatidylserine binding site, which agrees generally with crystallographic studies [Huang, M., et al. (2003) Nat. Struct. Biol. 10, 751-756]. However, in the presence of the lipid membrane, some of the interactions observed in the crystal structure adjust during the simulations possibly because in our system the PT1-Ca(2+) complex is embedded in a DPPC lipid membrane. Our simulations confirm the existence of a second phospholipid headgroup binding site on the opposite face of the PT1-Ca(2+) complex as suggested by MacDonald et al. [(1997) Biochemistry 36, 5120-5127]. The serine headgroup in the second site binds through a Gla domain-bound calcium ion Ca1, Gla30, and Lys11. On the basis of free energy simulations, we estimate the energy of binding of the PT1-Ca(2+) complex to a single DPPS to be around -11.5 kcal/mol. The estimated free energy of binding of a DPPS lipid to the second binding site is around -8.8 kcal/mol and is in part caused by the nature of the second site and in part by entropic effects.

18957407
Prediction of protein loop structures using a local move Monte Carlo approach and a grid-based force field.
We have developed an improved local move Monte Carlo (LMMC) loop sampling approach for loop predictions. The method generates loop conformations based on simple moves of the torsion angles of side chains and local moves of backbone of loops. To reduce the computational costs for energy evaluations, we developed a grid-based force field to represent the protein environment and solvation effect. Simulated annealing has been used to enhance the efficiency of the LMMC loop sampling and identify low-energy loop conformations. The prediction quality is evaluated on a set of protein loops with known crystal structure that has been previously used by others to test different loop prediction methods. The results show that this approach can reproduce the experimental results with the root mean square deviation within 1.8 A for all the test cases. The LMMC loop prediction approach developed here could be useful for improvement in the quality the loop regions in homology models, flexible protein-ligand and protein-protein docking studies.

18624811
Effective mast cell degranulating peptide inhibitors of the IgE/Fc epsilonRI receptor interaction.
Previous studies with mast cell degranulating (MCD) peptide have shown that peptide [Ala(12)]MCD 8 was an inhibitor of IgE binding to mast cell receptors. In an attempt to produce increased inhibition, analogs were synthesized that maintained the alanine residue in position 12 in the MCD peptide sequence and were further modified at both termini. Analogs modified at the C-terminus were [Ala(12),desLys(21)]MCD 2 and [Ala(12),D-Lys(21)]MCD 4. N-terminus modifications were [desLys(6)-Arg(7)-His(8),Ala(12)]MCD 1, [Ala(6), Ala(12)]MCD 6, and [Val(6),Ala(12)]MCD 7. To assess the role of the Proline(12), analogs [D-Ala(12)]MCD 3 and [Meleu(12)]MCD 5 were also synthesized. The analogs were tested for binding to the IgE receptor in cultured mast cells. Inhibitory activity of IgE-caused degranulation was measured using a beta-hexosaminidase assay. Circular dichroism (CD) and molecular modeling of selected analogs were used to follow possible structural differences among these analogs. All analogs showed binding affinity to the IgE receptor and inhibition of IgE-induced mast cell degranulation at different levels. Differences in inhibition were most likely because of diverse interactions of the analogs with the receptor as inferred by the CD and modeling studies. Based on the results of the beta-hexosaminidase assay, analog [Val(6), Ala(12)]MCD 7 proved to be an excellent inhibitor of IgE-mediated mast cell degranulation.

18507370
Homology modeling and site-directed mutagenesis to identify selective inhibitors of endothelin-converting enzyme-2.
Endothelin-converting enzyme-2 (ECE-2), a member of M13 family of zinc metallopeptidases, has previously been shown to process a number of neuropeptides including those derived from prodynorphin, proenkephalin, proSAAS, and amyloid precursor protein. ECE-2, unlike ECE-1, exhibits restricted neuroendocrine distribution and acidic pH optimum; it is consistent with a role in the regulation of neuropeptide levels in vivo. Here, we report the generation of a three-dimensional (3D) molecular model of ECE-2 using the crystal structure of neprilysin (EC 3.4.24.11) as a template. On the basis of the predictions made from the molecular model, we mutated and tested two residues, Trp 148 and Tyr 563, in the catalytic site. The mutation of Tyr 563 was found to significantly affect the catalytic activity and inhibitor binding. The molecular model was used to virtually screen a small molecule library of 13 000 compounds. Among the top-scoring compounds three were found to inhibit ECE-2 with high affinity and exhibited specificity for ECE-2 compared to neprilysin. Thus, the model provides a new useful tool to probe the active site of ECE-2 and design additional selective inhibitors of this enzyme.

18338226
Modeling dimerizations of transmembrane proteins using Brownian dynamics simulations.
The dimerizations of membrane proteins, Outer Membrane Phospholipase A (OMPLA) and glycophorin A (GPA), have been simulated by an adapted Brownian Dynamics program. To mimic the membrane protein environment, we introduced a hybrid electrostatic potential map of membrane and water for electrostatic interaction calculations. We added a van der Waals potential term to the force field of the current version of the BD program to simulate the short-range interactions of the two monomers. We reduced the BD sampling space from three dimensions to two dimensions to improve the efficiency of BD simulations for membrane proteins. The OMPLA and GPA dimers predicted by our 2D-BD simulation and structural refinement is in good agreement with the experimental structures. The adapted 2D-BD method could be used for prediction of dimerization of other membrane proteins, such as G protein-coupled receptors, to help better understanding of the structures and functions of membrane proteins.

18004775
Human uroporphyrinogen III synthase: NMR-based mapping of the active site.
Uroporphyrinogen III synthase (URO-synthase) catalyzes the cyclization and D-ring isomerization of hydroxymethylbilane (HMB) to uroporphyrinogen (URO'gen) III, the cyclic tetrapyrrole and physiologic precursor of heme, chlorophyl, and corrin. The deficient activity of human URO-synthase results in the autosomal recessive cutaneous disorder, congenital erythropoietic porphyria. Mapping of the structural determinants that specify catalysis and, potentially, protein-protein interactions is lacking. To map the active site and assess the enzyme's possible interaction in a complex with hydroxymethylbilane-synthase (HMB-synthase) and/or uroporphyrinogen-decarboxylase (URO-decarboxylase) by NMR, an efficient expression and purification procedure was developed for these cytosolic enzymes of heme biosynthesis that enabled preparation of special isotopically-labeled protein samples for NMR characterization. Using an 800 MHz instrument, assignment of the URO-synthase backbone (13)C(alpha) (100%), (1)H(alpha) (99.6%), and nonproline (1)H(N) and (15)N resonances (94%) was achieved as well as 85% of the side-chain (13)C and (1)H resonances. NMR analyses of URO-synthase titrated with competitive inhibitors N(D)-methyl-1-formylbilane (NMF-bilane) or URO'gen III, revealed resonance perturbations of specific residues lining the cleft between the two major domains of URO synthase that mapped the enzyme's active site. In silico docking of the URO-synthase crystal structure with NMF-bilane and URO'gen III was consistent with the perturbation results and provided a 3D model of the enzyme-inhibitor complex. The absence of chemical shift changes in the (15)N spectrum of URO-synthase mixed with the homogeneous HMB-synthase holoenzyme or URO-decarboxylase precluded occurrence of a stable cytosolic enzyme complex.

17956630
Pspace: a program that assesses protein space.
ABSTRACT: We describe a computer program named Pspace designed to a) obtain a reliable basis for the description of three-dimensional structures of a given protein family using homology modeling through selection of an optimal subset of the protein family whose structure would be determined experimentally; and b) aid in the search of orthologs by matching two sets of sequences in three different ways. The prioritization is established dynamically as new sequences and new structures are becoming available through ranking proteins by their value in providing structural information about the rest of the family set. The matching can give a list of potential orthologs or it can deduce an overall optimal matching of two sets of sequences. The various covering strategies and ortholog searches are tested on the bromodomain family. The possibility of extending this approach to the space of all proteins is discussed.

17951731
Statistical thermodynamics through computer simulation to characterize phospholipid interactions in membranes.
This chapter describes the major issues that are involved in the statistical thermodynamics of phospholipid membranes at the atomic level. The ingredients going into models of lipid bilayers are summarized: force fields, representation of long-range interactions, and boundary conditions. Next, the choice of thermodynamic ensembles, and the two main options for the generation of a representative sample of configurations: molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo are discussed. The final issue that is dealt with describes the various ways the generated ensembles can be analyzed.

17505540
Calculation of the free energy and cooperativity of protein folding.
Calculation of the free energy of protein folding and delineation of its pre-organization are of foremost importance for understanding, predicting and designing biological macromolecules. Here, we introduce an energy smoothing variant of parallel tempering replica exchange Monte Carlo (REMS) that allows for efficient configurational sampling of flexible solutes under the conditions of molecular hydration. Its usage to calculate the thermal stability of a model globular protein, Trp cage TC5b, achieves excellent agreement with experimental measurements. We find that the stability of TC5b is attained through the coupled formation of local and non-local interactions. Remarkably, many of these structures persist at high temperature, concomitant with the origin of native-like configurations and mesostates in an otherwise macroscopically disordered unfolded state. Graph manifold learning reveals that the conversion of these mesostates to the native state is structurally heterogeneous, and that the cooperativity of their formation is encoded largely by the unfolded state ensemble. In all, these studies establish the extent of thermodynamic and structural pre-organization of folding of this model globular protein, and achieve the calculation of macromolecular stability ab initio, as required for ab initio structure prediction, genome annotation, and drug design.

17277191
Association free energy of dipalmitoylphosphatidylserines in a mixed dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine membrane.
Blood coagulation is strongly dependent on the binding of vitamin K-dependent proteins to cell membranes containing phosphatidylserine (PS) via gamma-carboxyglutamic acid (Gla) domains. The process depends on calcium, which can induce nonideal behavior in membranes through domain formation. Such domain separation mediated by Ca(2+) ions or proteins can have an important contribution to the thermodynamics of the interaction between charged peripheral proteins and oppositely charged membranes. To characterize the properties of lipid-lipid interactions, molecular dynamics, and free energy simulations in a mixed bilayer membrane containing dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine and dipalmitoylphosphatidylserine were carried out. The free energy of association between dipalmitoylphosphatidylserines in the environment of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholines has been calculated by using a novel approach to the dual topology technique of the PS-PC hybrid. Two different methods, free energy perturbation and thermodynamic integration, were used to calculate the free energy difference. In thermodynamic integration runs three schemes were applied to evaluate the integral at the limits of lambda --> 0 or lambda --> 1. Our studies show that the association of two PSs in the environment of PCs is repulsive in the absence of Ca(2+) and becomes favorable in their presence. We also show that the mixed component membrane should exhibit nonideal behavior that will lead to PS clustering.

