18045356
Interaction of vitamins C and E as better cosmeceuticals.
Although many cosmeceutical formulations contain vitamin C and/or vitamin E, very few are actually effective in topical application. First because there is only a low concentration, second because the stability is compromised as soon as the product is opened and exposed to air and light, and third because the form of the molecule (an ester or a mixture of isomers) is not absorbed or metabolized effectively by the skin. However, when a stable formulation delivers a high concentration of the nonesterified, optimal isomer of the antioxidant, vitamins C and E do indeed inhibit the acute ultraviolet (UV) damage of erythema, sunburn, and tanning as well as chronic UV photoaging and skin cancer. Both are highly effective depigmenting agents. Topical vitamin C also increases collagen synthesis in both young and old fibroblasts. Because vitamin C regenerates oxidized vitamin E, the combination in a cosmeceutical formulation is synergistic - particularly in UV protection.

20823789
Photoaging: the role of oxidative stress.
Our skin suffers from daily exposure to oxidative stress, primarily from exposure to the sun's damaging ultraviolet (UV) rays. This results in the appearance of premature aging. The mechanisms of this photodamage to all layers of the skin by the various wavelengths (UVB and UVA) will be clarified. Recent research further demonstrates a synergistic enhancement of oxidative damage when the skin is exposed to UVA in combination with environmental urban pollutants (including cigarette smoke). The fact that photoaging is largely caused by oxidative damage is confirmed by the demonstration that treatment with topical antioxidants can prevent and even partially reverse UV-induced photodamage. Research substantiating the efficacy of vitamins C and E and of selenium will be reviewed.

19651790
Synergistic damage by UVA radiation and pollutants.
Not only is skin cancer by far the most common human cancer but also the incidence of skin cancer has been increasing at an alarming rate in recent decades. Fortunately, most people now realize that sun exposure causes unattractive photoaging and skin cancer, so they do apply sunscreens conscientiously. However, until recently, most sunscreens did not adequately protect against ultraviolet A (UVA) radiation. Although UVA is indeed less erythrogenic and less carcinogenic than UVB, UVA directly causes photoaging and enhances UVB-induced skin cancer. Furthermore, recent research demonstrates that UVA combined with environmental pollutants (including cigarette smoke) significantly increases the risk of skin cancer. Similarly, previous research demonstrated another synergy between environmental pollutants and UV: When ozone exposure precedes UV exposure, there is enhancement of UV-induced depletion of protective vitamin E from the skin's stratum corneum. This article reviews experimental evidence that environmental pollutants (such as benzo[a]pyrene (BaP), a commonly used index of environmental pollution) are photosensitizers that generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) when exposed to UVA radiation. This in turn causes oxidative and genetic damage, leading to unattractive photodamage and carcinogenesis.

