21455042
Hepatitis C treatment completion in individuals with psychiatric comorbidity and depression.
Hepatitis C virus is a common bloodborne pathogen. Patient, provider, and health care system factors combine to constrain access to treatment and have led to low rates of treatment initiation and continuation among medically eligible individuals. Behavioral health comorbidity, which is common in the patient population, has historically been an exclusion criterion and is one such barrier to care. We implemented an interdisciplinary nurse-managed primary care-based hepatitis C evaluation and treatment program to address behavioral health needs concurrently in an effort to increase treatment initiation and continuation rates among comorbid individuals. We found no association between having a psychiatric or substance use history and treatment discontinuation in our patient cohort. Likewise, there was no association in our cohort between becoming depressed or anxious while undergoing treatment and treatment discontinuation. The results of our study concur with others that have shown that addressing behavioral health comorbidities concurrently with hepatitis C evaluation and treatment may improve treatment continuation rates among comorbid patients, thereby helping to remove barriers to treatment of chronic hepatitis C.

20732520
Predictors of major morbidity and mortality after pneumonectomy utilizing the Society for Thoracic Surgeons General Thoracic Surgery Database.
Pneumonectomy is associated with a significant incidence of perioperative morbidity and mortality. The purpose of this study is to identify the risk factors responsible for adverse outcomes in patients after pneumonectomy utilizing The Society of Thoracic Surgeons General Thoracic Surgery Database (STS GTDB). All patients who had undergone pneumonectomy between January 2002 and December 2007 were identified in the STS GTDB. Among 80 participating centers, 1,267 patients were selected. Logistic regression analysis was performed on preoperative variables for major adverse outcomes. The rate of major adverse perioperative events was 30.4%, including 71 patients who died (5.6%). Major morbidity was defined as pneumonia, adult respiratory distress syndrome, empyema, sepsis, bronchopleural fistula, pulmonary embolism, ventilatory support beyond 48 hours, reintubation, tracheostomy, atrial or ventricular arrhythmias requiring treatment, myocardial infarct, reoperation for bleeding, and central neurologic event. Patients with major morbidity had a longer mean length of stay compared with patients without major morbidity (13.3 versus 6.1 days, p < 0.001). Independent predictors of major adverse outcomes were age 65 years or older (p < 0.001), male sex (p = 0.026), congestive heart failure (p = 0.04), forced expiratory volume in 1 second less than 60% of predicted (p = 0.01), benign lung disease (p = 0.006), and requiring extrapleural pneumonectomy (p = 0.018). Among patients with lung carcinoma, those receiving neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy were more at risk for major morbidity than patients without induction therapy (p = 0.049). The mortality rate after pneumonectomy by thoracic surgeons participating in the STS database compares favorably to that in previously published studies. We identified risk factors for major adverse outcomes in patients undergoing pneumonectomy.

20662744
Perennial allergen-specific immunoglobulin E levels among inner-city elderly asthmatics.
The role of allergen sensitization has been well established among children and young adults with asthma. Some studies have suggested that allergens play a less important role among older patients with asthma. However, whether older asthmatics have a lower prevalence of allergen sensitization than younger adults remains controversial. The aim of this study was to access the prevalence of sensitization to indoor allergens in older compared to younger inner-city adults with persistent asthma. The authors used data collected as part of a cohort study of inner-city adults with persistent asthma. Sensitization to indoor allergens (specifically Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, D. farinae, cat, mouse, Aspergillus fumigates, Alternaria, German and American cockroaches) was evaluated by specific immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies measured from peripheral blood. Univariate and multiple regression analyses were used to compare ratios of sensitization according to age (? 35, 36-59, ? 60 years of age). Of the 245 patients in the study, 19% were over the age of 60 years. Overall 73%, 61%, and 41% of patients ? 35, 36-59, and ? 60 years old, respectively were sensitized to at least one indoor allergen (p = .01). Multivariate analysis showed that patients ? 60 years of age were significantly less likely to be sensitized (odds ratio 0.32, 95% confidence interval 0.11 to 0.89) compared to younger adults after controlling for potential confounders. Allergen sensitization is less common in older patients with persistent asthma. However, sensitization to any indoor allergen is relatively frequent in the elderly. Physicians should consider routinely accessing exposure and sensitization to these allergens as part of the evaluation of older inner-city patients with persistent asthma.

20104622
Predictors of serious injury among hospitalized patients evaluated for falls.
Inpatient falls are common and result in significant patient morbidity. To identify predictors of serious injury being found on imaging studies of inpatients evaluated after a fall. Retrospective study. : An 1171-bed urban academic medical center. All inpatients who fell on thirteen medical and surgical units from January 1 to December 31, 2006. Patient characteristics, circumstances surrounding falls, fall-related injuries, and length of stay were collected through review of incident reports and computerized medical records. Primary outcome of fall-related injury was determined by evidence of injury on imaging studies within two weeks of the fall. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression were used to calculate adjusted odds ratios (ORs) for injury after an inpatient fall. A total of 513 patients had 636 falls during the study time period. Fall incidence rate was 1.97 falls per 1,000 patient days. 95 patients (19%) fell multiple times (range, 2-6 events); 74% of the falls occurred in patients who were previously assessed as being "at risk" by the nursing staff. Multivariate analysis, adjusting for age and sex, found evidence of trauma after a fall (OR = 24.6, P < 0.001) and ambulatory status (OR = 7.3, P < 0.01) to be independent predictors of injury being found on imaging studies. Inpatient falls are common despite high-risk patients being identified. After adjusting for age and sex, evidence of trauma and ambulatory status were independent predictors of an injury being found on imaging studies after an inpatient fall.

19408051
Effect of age on survival of clinical stage I non-small-cell lung cancer.
Elderly patients with early-stage lung cancer are less likely to undergo tumor resection because of concerns about their ability to tolerate surgery or perceived limited life expectancy. The objective of this study was to evaluate the impact of age and competing risks on outcomes of elderly patients with stage I non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We identified 27,859 cases of histologically confirmed, stage I NSCLC from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results registry. Patients were grouped by age (<60, 61-69, 70-79, >or=80 years) and surgical resection status. Relative survival rates were compared amongst treatment groups by age strata to determine the potential impact of surgery and the contribution of competing risks to overall mortality. Patients aged <60, 61-69, 70-79, and >or=80 years represented 20%, 32%, 37%, and 11% of cases. The rate of surgical resections declined from 95% of patients <60 years, to 79% of patients aged >or=80 years. While 5-year relative survival rates were somewhat lower among males >or=80 years compared with those <60 years (63.5% versus 69.2%), there were no significant differences in relative survival among resected women or unresected patients, regardless of sex. Most deaths in unresected patients were attributed to lung cancer across all age groups. Elderly patients who undergo resection achieve relative survival rates that are comparable to their younger counterparts. In unresected patients, lung cancer is the major source of mortality, even in the oldest age groups, suggesting that elderly patients with stage I lung cancer should receive aggressive surgical management when possible.

18852403
Validation of a hepatitis C screening tool in primary care.
Although hepatitis C virus (HCV) has an estimated national prevalence of 1.8%, testing rates are lower than those recommended by guidelines, particularly in primary care. A critical step is the ability to identify patients at increased risk who should be screened. We sought to prospectively derive and validate a clinical predication tool to assist primary care providers in identifying patients who should be tested for HCV antibodies. A total of 1000 randomly selected patients attending an inner-city primary care clinic filled out a 27-item questionnaire assessing 5 HCV risk factor domains: work, medical, exposure, personal care, and social history. Afterward, the patients underwent HCV antibody testing. Multivariable logistic regression analysis was performed to identify risk factors associated with HCV antibodies. There was an 8.3% (95% confidence interval, 6.7%-10.2%) prevalence of HCV antibodies. The patients who were HCV antibody positive were more likely to be male, older, and insured by Medicaid (P < or = .02). Those who had risk factors within the medical, exposure, and social history domains were more likely to be HCV antibody positive. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for the screening tool based on these 3 domains was 0.77. With an increasing number of positive domains, there was a higher likelihood of HCV antibody positivity. Only 2% of patients with 0 risk factors had HCV antibodies. A prediction tool can be used to accurately identify patients at high risk of HCV who may benefit from serologic screening. Future studies should assess whether wider use of this tool may lead to improved outcomes.

18491194
Tips for teachers of evidence-based medicine: clinical prediction rules (CPRs) and estimating pretest probability.
Clinical prediction rules (CPR) are tools that clinicians can use to predict the most likely diagnosis, prognosis, or response to treatment in a patient based on individual characteristics. CPRs attempt to standardize, simplify, and increase the accuracy of clinicians' diagnostic and prognostic assessments. The teaching tips series is designed to give teachers advice and materials they can use to attain specific educational objectives. In this article, we present 3 teaching tips aimed at helping clinical learners use clinical prediction rules and to more accurately assess pretest probability in every day practice. The first tip is designed to demonstrate variability in physician estimation of pretest probability. The second tip demonstrates how the estimate of pretest probability influences the interpretation of diagnostic tests and patient management. The third tip exposes learners to various examples and different types of Clinical Prediction Rules (CPR) and how to apply them in practice. PILOT TESTING: We field tested all 3 tips with 16 learners, a mix of interns and senior residents. Teacher preparatory time was approximately 2 hours. The field test utilized a board and a data projector; 3 handouts were prepared. The tips were felt to be clear and the educational objectives reached. Potential teaching pitfalls were identified. Teaching with these tips will help physicians appreciate the importance of applying evidence to their every day decisions. In 2 or 3 short teaching sessions, clinicians can also become familiar with the use of CPRs in applying evidence consistently in everyday practice.

