21316153
Neuropathic pain- and glial derived neurotrophic factor-associated regulation of cadherins in spinal circuits of the dorsal horn.
Neuropathic pain is associated with reorganization of spinal synaptic circuits, implying that adhesion proteins that normally build and modify synapses must be involved. The adhesion proteins E- and N-cadherin delineate different synapses furnished by nociceptive primary afferents, but dynamic aspects of cadherin localization in relationship to onset, maintenance or reversibility of neuropathic pain are uncharacterized. Here, we find very different responses of these cadherins to L5 spinal nerve transection (SNT)-induced mechanical allodynia and to intrathecal glial derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), which has potent analgesic effects in this pain model. In L5, E-cadherin is rapidly eliminated in patches within lamina IIi contemporaneously with the onset of mechanical allodynia. Intrathecal GDNF in conjunction with, or at 7 days after, L5 SNT prevents or reverses both the loss of E-cadherin and abnormal pain sensation. In contrast, N-cadherin undergoes a delayed and transient increase uniformly across lamina I-II that is insensitive to GDNF. Some N-cadherin-labeled profiles codistribute with GAP-43, suggesting a role in axon sprouting. Patterns of immunolabeling for GDNF receptor components GFR?1, NCAM, and RET after L5 SNT suggest that GFR?1 and NCAM are the principal receptors operative in this model. In addition, GFR?1 codistributes with E-cadherin, but not N-cadherin, profiles. Together, these data indicate strikingly divergent patterns of temporal and molecular regulation of different cadherins at distinct nociceptive circuits in response to spinal nerve injury, suggesting that the two cadherins and the circuits with which they are affiliated participate in different aspects of synaptic and circuit reorganization associated with neuropathic pain.

19301425
N-cadherin mediates interaction between precursor cells in the subventricular zone and regulates further differentiation.
Neurogenesis and cell differentiation in the brain continues throughout life. In the subventricular zone and rostral migratory stream, precursor cells contact each other. Cell-cell interactions mediated via adhesion molecules are no doubt involved in establishing and maintaining the neurogenic ability of these cells. Here, we demonstrate that N-cadherin plays important roles in forming cell clusters and in regulating cell differentiation. N-cadherin is abundantly expressed in chain migrating cells in the subventricular zone and rostral migratory stream but is down-regulated after cells exit these regions. We also show that neurosphere formation is inhibited via suppression of N-cadherin function and that N-cadherin expression is decreased after induction of neurosphere differentiation. Furthermore, we demonstrate that functional blockade of N-cadherin can enhance glial cell differentiation in explant cultures of precursors from the subventricular zone.

