21490970
Identification of a gene regulatory network necessary for the initiation of oligodendrocyte differentiation.
Differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) into mature oligodendrocytes requires extensive changes in gene expression, which are partly mediated by post-translational modifications of nucleosomal histones. An essential modification for oligodendrocyte differentiation is the removal of acetyl groups from lysine residues which is catalyzed by histone deacetylases (HDACs). The transcriptional targets of HDAC activity within OPCs however, have remained elusive and have been identified in this study by interrogating the oligodendrocyte transcriptome. Using a novel algorithm that allows clustering of gene transcripts according to expression kinetics and expression levels, we defined major waves of co-regulated genes. The initial overall decrease in gene expression was followed by the up-regulation of genes involved in lipid metabolism and myelination. Functional annotation of the down-regulated gene clusters identified transcripts involved in cell cycle regulation, transcription, and RNA processing. To define whether these genes were the targets of HDAC activity, we cultured rat OPCs in the presence of trichostatin A (TSA), an HDAC inhibitor previously shown to inhibit oligodendrocyte differentiation. By overlaying the defined oligodendrocyte transcriptome with the list of 'TSA sensitive' genes, we determined that a high percentage of 'TSA sensitive' genes are part of a normal program of oligodendrocyte differentiation. TSA treatment increased the expression of genes whose down-regulation occurs very early after induction of OPC differentiation, but did not affect the expression of genes with a slower kinetic. Among the increased 'TSA sensitive' genes we detected several transcription factors including Id2, Egr1, and Sox11, whose down-regulation is critical for OPC differentiation. Thus, HDAC target genes include clusters of co-regulated genes involved in transcriptional repression. These results support a de-repression model of oligodendrocyte lineage progression that relies on the concurrent down-regulation of several inhibitors of differentiation.

21425269
Progressive multiple sclerosis and gray matter pathology: an MRI perspective.
The evidence suggesting a role of extensive cortical demyelization and atrophy in progressive multiple sclerosis is rapidly increasing. Although conventional magnetic resonance imaging has had a huge impact on multiple sclerosis by enabling an earlier diagnosis, and by providing surrogate markers for monitoring disease response to anti-inflammatory/immunomodulatory treatments, it is limited by the low pathological specificity and the low sensitivity to both diffuse damage in normal-appearing white matter and focal and diffuse damage in gray matter. Advanced magnetic resonance imaging techniques can partially overcome these limitations by providing markers more specific to the underlying pathologic substrates and more sensitive to the structural and functional "occult" brain tissue damage in patients with multiple sclerosis. This review describes brain and spinal cord imaging studies of multiple sclerosis with particular emphasis on gray matter imaging in both secondary progressive and primary progressive multiple sclerosis, discusses the clinical implications of gray matter damage, and outlines current magnetic resonance imaging developments at high and ultrahigh magnetic field strength.

21425267
Axonal damage in multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis is a debilitating disease of the central nervous system that has been characteristically classified as an immune-mediated destruction of myelin, the protective coating on nerve fibers. Although the mechanisms responsible for the immune attack to central nervous system myelin have been the subject of intense investigation, more recent studies have focused on the neurodegenerative component, which is cause of clinical disability in young adults and appears to be only partially controlled by immunomodulatory therapies. Here, we review distinct, but not mutually exclusive, mechanisms of pathogenesis of axonal damage in multiple sclerosis patients that are either consequent to long-term demyelination or independent from it. We propose that the complexity of axonal degeneration and the heterogeneity of the underlying pathogenetic mechanisms should be taken into consideration for the design of targeted therapeutic intervention.

21368055
Changed histone acetylation patterns in normal-appearing white matter and early multiple sclerosis lesions.
The epigenetic identity of oligodendrocytes is modulated by posttranslational modifications of histones. Acetylation of histone H3 results from the balance between the activity of histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases and modulates transcriptional activation. We have previously shown that, in rodents, histone deacetylation favors oligodendrocyte differentiation, whereas acetylation is associated with increased levels of transcriptional inhibitors of oligodendrocyte differentiation. Here, we report, in humans brains, a shift toward histone acetylation in the white matter of the frontal lobes of aged subjects and in patients with chronic multiple sclerosis (MS). Increased immunoreactivity for acetylated histone H3 was observed in the nuclei of NogoA+ oligodendrocytes in a subset of MS samples. These changes were associated with high levels of transcriptional inhibitors of oligodendrocyte differentiation (i.e., TCF7L2, ID2, and SOX2) and higher HAT transcript levels (i.e., CBP, P300) in female MS patients compared with non-neurological controls and correlated with disease duration. Chromatin immunoprecipitation from samples of MS patients revealed enrichment of acetyl-histone H3 at the promoter of the increased target genes (i.e., TCF7L2). The data in chronic lesions contrasted with findings in early MS lesions, where a marked oligodendroglial histone deacetylation was observed. Together, these data suggest that histone deacetylation is a process that occurs at the early stages of the disease and whose efficiency decreases with disease duration.

21057508
Yy1 as a molecular link between neuregulin and transcriptional modulation of peripheral myelination.
Fast axonal conduction depends on myelin, which is formed by Schwann cells in the PNS. We found that the transcription factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1) is crucial for peripheral myelination. Conditional ablation of Yy1 in the Schwann cell lineage resulted in severe hypomyelination, which occurred independently of altered Schwann cell proliferation or apoptosis. In Yy1 mutant mice, Schwann cells established a 1:1 relationship with axons but were unable to myelinate them. The Schwann cells expressed low levels of myelin proteins and of Egr2 (also called Krox20), which is an important regulator of peripheral myelination. In vitro, Schwann cells that lacked Yy1 did not upregulate Egr2 in response to neuregulin1 and did not express myelin protein zero. This phenotype was rescued by overexpression of Egr2. In addition, neuregulin-induced phosphorylation of YY1 was required for transcriptional activation of Egr2. Thus, YY1 emerges as an important activator of peripheral myelination that links neuregulin signaling with Egr2 expression.

20930523
HDAC1 in axonal degeneration: A matter of subcellular localization.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a disease characterized by inflammatory demyelination and a strong neurodegenerative component. Axonal damage is characteristically detected in MS brains, although the pathogenic mechanisms are not clearly understood. Here, we discuss the importance of HDAC1 localization as one of the potential mechanisms initiating damage in demyelinating conditions. We suggest the occurrence of a two-stage mechanism of damage. The first event is a calcium-dependent HDAC1 nuclear export in a CRM1-dependent manner and the second event is the interruption of mitochondrial transport resulting from the cytoplasmic localization of HDAC1. In the cytosol of neurons challenged by cytokines and excitatory aminoacids, HDAC1 formed complexes with motor-protein and microtubules and this resulted in blockade of axonal transport and release of cargo from motor proteins. We suggest that these findings might be the framework for future studies and for the development of novel therapeutic targets for axonal damage in demyelinating conditions.

20885955
Epigenetic modifiers are necessary but not sufficient for reprogramming non-myelinating cells into myelin gene-expressing cells.
Modifications on specific histone residues and DNA methylation play an essential role in lineage choice and cellular reprogramming. We have previously shown that histone modifications or combinatorial codes of transcription factors (TFs) are critical for the differentiation of multipotential progenitors into myelinating oligodendrocytes. In this study we asked whether combining global manipulation of DNA methylation and histone acetylation together with the expression of oligodendrocyte-specific TFs, was sufficient to switch the identity of fibroblasts into myelin gene-expressing cells. Transfection of six oligodendrocyte-specific TFs (Olig1, Olig2, Sox10, Mash1, E47 and Nkx2.2) into NIH3T3 fibroblasts was capable of inducing expression of myelin gene promoter-driven reporters, but did not activate endogenous myelin gene expression. These results suggested the existence of a transcriptionally incompetent chromatin conformation in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis, we compared the histone code on the conserved regions of myelin genes (i.e. Mbp and Mag) in differentiating oligodendrocyte progenitors and NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Chromatin at myelin gene loci was characterized by the presence of repressive histone modifications (me3K9H3 and me3K27H3) in NIH3T3 fibroblasts and active histone marks (me3K4H3 and AcH3) in oligodendrocyte lineage cells. To induce a transcriptionally competent chromatin signature, NIH3T3 fibroblasts were treated with 5-azadeoxy-citidine (5-AzaC) to decrease DNA methylation, and trichostatin A (TSA) or sirtinol, to favor histone acetylation. Treatment with 5-AzaC/TSA but not sirtinol, resulted in the detection of endogenous myelin gene transcripts in fibroblasts, although not to the levels detected in myelinating cells. Transfection of oligodendrocyte-specific TFs after 5-AzaC/TSA treatment did not further increase myelin gene expression, nor did it reprogram the transcriptional network of NIH3T3 fibroblasts into that of oligodendrocytes. These results suggest that reprogramming of fibroblasts into myelin gene-expressing cells not only requires transcriptional activation, but also chromatin manipulations that go beyond histone acetylation and DNA methylation.

20227775
Epigenetic regulation of oligodendrocyte identity.
The interplay of transcription factors and epigenetic modifiers, including histone modifications, DNA methylation and microRNAs during development is essential for the acquisition of specific cell fates. Here, we review the epigenetic "programming" of stem cells into oligodendrocytes, by analyzing three sequential stages of lineage progression. The first transition from pluripotent stem cells to neural precursors is characterized by repression of pluripotency genes and restriction of the lineage potential to the neural fate. The second transition from multipotential precursors to oligodendrocyte progenitors is associated with the progressive loss of plasticity and the repression of neuronal and astrocytic genes. The last step of differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitors into myelin-forming cells is defined by a model of derepression of myelin genes.

20123018
HDAC inhibitors and neurodegeneration: at the edge between protection and damage.
The use of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) as a therapeutic tool for neurodegenerative disorders has been examined with great interest in the last decade. The functional response to treatment with broad-spectrum inhibitors however, has been heterogeneous: protective in some cases and detrimental in others. In this review we discuss potential underlying causes for these apparently contradictory results. Because HDACs are part of repressive complexes, the functional outcome has been characteristically attributed to enhanced gene expression due to increased acetylation of lysine residues on nucleosomal histones. However, it is important to take into consideration that the up-regulation of diverse sets of genes (i.e. pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic) may orchestrate different responses in diverse cell types. An alternative possibility is that broad-spectrum pharmacological inhibition may target nuclear or cytosolic HDAC isoforms, with distinct non-histone substrates (i.e. transcription factors; cytoskeletal proteins). Thus, for any given neurological disorder, it is important to take into account the effect of HDACIs on neuronal, glial and inflammatory cells and define the relative contribution of distinct HDAC isoforms to the pathological process. This review article addresses how opposing effects on distinct cell types may profoundly influence the overall therapeutic potential of HDAC inhibitors when investigating treatments for neurodegenerative disorders.

20045420
Primary brain tumors, neural stem cell, and brain tumor cancer cells: where is the link?
The discovery of brain tumor-derived cells (BTSC) with the properties of stem cells has led to the formulation of the hypothesis that neural stem cells could be the cell of origin of primary brain tumors (PBT). In this review we present the most common molecular changes in PBT, define the criteria of identification of BTSC and discuss the similarities between the characteristics of these cells and those of the endogenous population of neural stem cells (NPCs) residing in germinal areas of the adult brain. Finally, we propose possible mechanisms of cancer initiation and progression and suggest a model of tumor initiation that includes intrinsic changes of resident NSC and potential changes in the microenvironment defining the niche where the NSC reside.

19853663
Defining the chromatin landscape in demyelinating disorders.
An intricate network of epigenetic factors regulates cell differentiation by modulating the chromatin structure and ultimately affecting gene expression. This review describes the chromatin landscape defining oligodendrocyte progenitor differentiation during development and remyelination. We shall discuss the current knowledge regarding modifications of chromatin components during the progression of progenitors into myelinating cells and discuss the potential contribution of histone variants, microRNAs, and DNA methylation. We shall also briefly address how changes to this chromatin landscape can disturb this natural progression and alter the capacity to remyelinate.

19795505
Cell-context specific role of the E2F/Rb pathway in development and disease.
Development of the central nervous system (CNS) requires the generation of neuronal and glial cell subtypes in appropriate numbers, and this demands the careful coordination of cell-cycle exit, survival, and differentiation. The E2F/Rb pathway is critical for cell-cycle regulation and also modulates survival and differentiation of distinct cell types in the developing and adult CNS. In this review, we first present the specific temporal patterns of expression of the E2F and Rb family members during CNS development and then discuss the genetic ablation of single or multiple members of these two families. Overall, the available data suggest a time-dependent and cell-context specific role of E2F and Rb family members in the developing and adult CNS.

