20647262
Predictive model for postoperative delirium in cardiac surgical patients.
Delirium is a common complication following cardiac surgery, and the predictors of delirium remain unclear. The authors performed a prospective observational analysis to develop a predictive model for postoperative delirium using demographic and procedural parameters. A total of 112 adult postoperative cardiac surgical patients were evaluated twice daily for delirium using the Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS) and Confusion Assessment Model for the ICU (CAM-ICU). The incidence of delirium was 34% (n = 38). Increased age (odds ratio [OR] = 2.5; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.6-3.9; P < .0001, per 10 years) and increased duration of surgery (OR = 1.3; 95% CI = 1.1-1.5; P = .0002, per 30 minutes) were independently associated with postoperative delirium. Gender, BMI, diabetes mellitus, preoperative ejection fraction, surgery type, length of cardiopulmonary bypass, intraoperative blood component administration, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II score, Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score, and Charlson Comorbidity Index, were not independently associated with postoperative delirium.

20579669
Noninvasive cerebral oxygenation may predict outcome in patients undergoing aortic arch surgery.
Surgical repair of the aortic arch remains technically challenging and is associated with considerable morbidity and mortality. Cerebral oximetry is a noninvasive technology that can monitor the regional oxygen saturation of the frontal cortex. We hypothesized that magnitude and duration of decreased intraoperative regional oxygen saturation was associated with postoperative organ dysfunction. Additionally, we sought to identify regional oxygen saturation threshold values that are predictive of organ dysfunction. The intraoperative regional oxygen saturation values of 30 patients undergoing aortic arch surgery were recorded and analyzed. Postoperative complications were categorized as "major" and "minor." Severe adverse outcome, extubation time, intensive care unit length of stay, and hospital length of stay data were collected and compared with the integrals of regional oxygen saturation and time (area under the threshold) spent beneath predetermined absolute threshold limits. Twenty subjects underwent hemiarch replacement, and 10 subjects received total aortic arch replacements. There were 30 major and 29 minor complications identified. Sixteen (53.3%) patients had at least 1 major complication. Logistic regression showed statistically significant associations between area under the threshold and severe adverse outcome incidence for regional oxygen saturation thresholds of 60% (P = .038) and 65% (P = .025). Patients who spent more than 30 minutes under the absolute threshold of 60% had an extended hospital stay of 4 days leading to an additional cost of $8300.00. Our findings lend evidence to support the association of decreased perioperative cerebral oxygenation values with poor outcomes after aortic arch surgery.

19020149
A mission-based productivity compensation model for an academic anesthesiology department.
We replaced a nearly fixed-salary academic physician compensation model with a mission-based productivity model with the goal of improving attending anesthesiologist productivity. The base salary system was stratified according to rank and clinical experience. The supplemental pay structure was linked to electronic patient records and a scheduling database to award points for clinical activity; educational, research, and administrative points systems were constructed in parallel. We analyzed monthly American Society of Anesthesiologist (ASA) unit data for operating room activity and physician compensation from 2000 through mid-2007, excluding the 1-yr implementation period (July 2004-June 2005) for the new model. Comparing 2005-2006 with 2000-2004, quarterly ASA units increased by 14% (P = 0.0001) and quarterly ASA units per full-time equivalent increased by 31% (P < 0.0001), while quarterly ASA units per anesthetizing location decreased by 10% (P = 0.046). Compared with a baseline year (2001), Instructor and Assistant Professor faculty compensation increased more than Associate Professor and Professor faculty (P < 0.001) in both pre- and postimplementation periods. There were larger compensation increases for the postimplementation period compared with preimplementation across faculty rank groupings (P < 0.0001). Academic and educational output was stable. Implementing a productivity-based faculty compensation model in an academic department was associated with increased mean supplemental pay with relatively fewer faculty. ASA units per month and ASA units per operating room full-time equivalent increased, and these metrics are the most likely drivers of the increased compensation. This occurred despite a slight decrease in clinical productivity as measured by ASA units per anesthetizing location. Academic and educational output was stable.

18693874
Extraction and mapping of drug names from free text to a standardized nomenclature.
Free text fields are often used to store clinical drug data in electronic health records. The use of free text facilitates rapid data entry by the clinician. Errors in spelling, abbreviations, and jargon, however, limit the utility of these data. We designed and implemented an algorithm, using open source tools and RxNorm, to extract and normalize drug data stored in free text fields of an anesthesia electronic health record. The algorithm was developed using a training set containing drug data from 49,518 cases, and validated using a validation set containing data from 14,655 cases. Overall sensitivity and specificity for the validation set were 92.2% and 95.7% respectively. The mains sources of error were misspellings and unknown but valid drug names. These preliminary results demonstrate that free text clinical drug data can be efficiently extracted and mapped to a controlled drug nomenclature.

17869986
Changing patterns of postoperative nausea and vomiting prophylaxis drug use in an academic anesthesia practice.
To characterize the evolution of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) prophylactic drug use. Retrospective data extraction and analysis of electronic anesthesia records. Anesthesia department of an urban academic medical center. 144,134 anesthetics given by 57 attending anesthesiologists were studied. Administered doses of droperidol, ondansetron, dexamethasone, and metoclopramide were tabulated for each year for each practitioner. Ondansetron use in the periods before and after the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) warning concerning droperidol was 8% and 35%, respectively. Use of PONV prophylaxis increased for all included patient and anesthetic factors. Among those who used droperidol before the revised FDA warning, 61% stopped using it altogether. Afterwards, 75% (27-100%) of droperidol use was in combination with another agent. We found a significant and sustained decrease in droperidol use after the FDA-mandated labeling revision. We also found a significant increase in ondansetron use--an increase that exceeded the amount needed to substitute for the decreased droperidol use. The changes may be related to multiple factors, including the FDA warning, a trend toward more PONV prophylaxis, and the increasing predominance of serotonin antagonists for this indication.

17513642
The effect of an interactive visual reminder in an anesthesia information management system on timeliness of prophylactic antibiotic administration.
To reduce the incidence of surgical site infection, preoperative antibiotics should be administered within 60 min before surgical incision. The purpose of this study was to determine whether adding a visual interactive electronic reminder with a message related to antibiotic administration to our anesthesia information management system would increase compliance with prophylactic antibiotic guidelines. We retrospectively studied electronic anesthesia records of ambulatory and day-of-surgery admission surgical cases in which one of our usual prophylactic antibiotics was administered from June 2004 through December 2005, an interval that includes cases both before and after the February 2005 implementation of the new reminder. Compliance was defined as documented antibiotic administration within 60 min before the surgical procedure starting time. Noncompliant cases were divided into those in which dosing was too early or too late. Compliance for 4987 cases before and 9478 cases after the reminder was implemented increased from 82.4% to 89.1% (P < 0.01). This increase was found both for attending anesthesiologists assisted by a resident or nurse anesthetist (82.9% before vs 89.1% after, P < 0.01) and for attending anesthesiologists working alone (80.1% before vs 89.3% after, P < 0.01). The improvement in compliance was associated with a decrease in the incidence of antibiotics administered too late (i.e., after surgical incision) (15.2% before vs 8.1% after, P < 0.01), but with no significant change in the incidence of antibiotics administered too early (i.e., more than 60 min before skin incision) (2.4% before vs 2.8% after, P = 0.07). The implementation of a visual interactive electronic reminder regarding administration of preoperative antibiotics in an anesthesia information management system was associated with a sustained increase in compliance with surgical prophylactic antibiotic administration timing guidelines.

