21492014
Spiking neurons and the first passage problem.
We derive a model of a neuron's interspike interval probability density through analysis of the first passage problem. The fit of our expression to retinal ganglion cell laboratory data extracts three physiologically relevant parameters, with which our model yields input-output features that conform to laboratory results. Preliminary analysis suggests that under common circumstances, local circuitry readjusts these parameters with changes in firing rate and so endeavors to faithfully replicate an input signal. Further results suggest that the so-called principle of sloppy workmanship also plays a role in evolution's choice of these parameters.

20195371
Structural analysis of biodiversity.
Large, recently-available genomic databases cover a wide range of life forms, suggesting opportunity for insights into genetic structure of biodiversity. In this study we refine our recently-described technique using indicator vectors to analyze and visualize nucleotide sequences. The indicator vector approach generates correlation matrices, dubbed Klee diagrams, which represent a novel way of assembling and viewing large genomic datasets. To explore its potential utility, here we apply the improved algorithm to a collection of almost 17,000 DNA barcode sequences covering 12 widely-separated animal taxa, demonstrating that indicator vectors for classification gave correct assignment in all 11,000 test cases. Indicator vector analysis revealed discontinuities corresponding to species- and higher-level taxonomic divisions, suggesting an efficient approach to classification of organisms from poorly-studied groups. As compared to standard distance metrics, indicator vectors preserve diagnostic character probabilities, enable automated classification of test sequences, and generate high-information density single-page displays. These results support application of indicator vectors for comparative analysis of large nucleotide data sets and raise prospect of gaining insight into broad-scale patterns in the genetic structure of biodiversity.

19798412
A scalable method for analysis and display of DNA sequences.
Comparative DNA sequence analysis provides insight into evolution and helps construct a natural classification reflecting the Tree of Life. The growing numbers of organisms represented in DNA databases challenge tree-building techniques and the vertical hierarchical classification may obscure relationships among some groups. Approaches that can incorporate sequence data from large numbers of taxa and enable visualization of affinities across groups are desirable. Toward this end, we developed a procedure for extracting diagnostic patterns in the form of indicator vectors from DNA sequences of taxonomic groups. In the present instance the indicator vectors were derived from mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase I (COI) sequences of those groups and further analyzed on this basis. In the first example, indicator vectors for birds, fish, and butterflies were constructed from a training set of COI sequences, then correlations with test sequences not used to construct the indicator vector were determined. In all cases, correlation with the indicator vector correctly assigned test sequences to their proper group. In the second example, this approach was explored at the species level within the bird grouping; this also gave correct assignment, suggesting the possibility of automated procedures for classification at various taxonomic levels. A false-color matrix of vector correlations displayed affinities among species consistent with higher-order taxonomy. The indicator vectors preserved DNA character information and provided quantitative measures of correlations among taxonomic groups. This method is scalable to the largest datasets envisioned in this field, provides a visually-intuitive display that captures relational affinities derived from sequence data across a diversity of life forms, and is potentially a useful complement to current tree-building techniques for studying evolutionary processes based on DNA sequence data.

19365075
Symmetry, probability, and recognition in face space.
The essential midline symmetry of human faces is shown to play a key role in facial coding and recognition. This also has deep and important connections with recent explorations of the organization of primate cortex, as well as human psychophysical experiments. Evidence is presented that the dimension of face recognition space for human faces is dramatically lower than previous estimates. One result of the present development is the construction of a probability distribution in face space that produces an interesting and realistic range of (synthetic) faces. Another is a recognition algorithm that by reasonable criteria is nearly 100% accurate.

17496382
On the dimensionality of face space.
The dimensionality of face space is measured objectively in a psychophysical study. Within this framework, we obtain a measurement of the dimension for the human visual system. Using an eigenface basis, evidence is presented that talented human observers are able to identify familiar faces that lie in a space of roughly 100 dimensions and the average observer requires a space of between 100 and 200 dimensions. This is below most current estimates. It is further argued that these estimates give an upper bound for face space dimension and this might be lowered by better constructed "eigenfaces" and by talented observers.

17171720
Survival and apoptotic pathways initiated by TNF-alpha: modeling and predictions.
We present a mathematical model which includes TNF-alpha initiated survival and apoptotic cascades, as well as nuclear transcription of IkappaB. These pathways play a crucial role in deciding cell fate in response to inflammation and infection. Our model incorporates known specific protein-protein interactions as identified by experiments. Using these biochemical interactions, we develop a mathematical model of the NF-kappaB-mediated survival and caspase-mediated apoptosis pathways. Using mass action kinetics, we follow the formation of the survival and late complexes as well as the dynamics of DNA fragmentation. The effect of TNF-alpha concentration on DNA fragmentation is modeled and compares well with experiment. Nuclear transcription is also modeled phenomenologically by means of time lagged cytosolic concentrations. This results in transcription related concentrations undergoing under-damped oscillations, in qualitative and quantitative agreement with experiment. Using a tumor cell as a hypothetical model, we explore the interplay between the components of the survival and apoptotic pathways. Results are presented which make predictions on the limits of cellular oscillations in terms of time delay, initial concentration ratios and other features of the model. The model also makes clear predictions on cell viability in terms of DNA damage within the framework of TNF-alpha stimulus duration.

