17878776
Arthroscopically-assisted treatment of pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures.
Pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures are common injuries. Current treatment recommendations include nonoperative treatment for nondisplaced Milch type 1 fractures; however, truly nondisplaced fractures may be rare. Although closed reduction and percutaneous pinning under arthrographic visualization are most commonly used, anatomical reconstitution of the articular surface may require a lateral Kocher approach. This approach may compromise the vascularity of the distal fragment. To avoid this catastrophic complication while still obtaining anatomical articular surface reduction, we have investigated a new technique in which the lateral condyle fracture is reduced arthroscopically, allowing visualization of the articular surface without the soft tissue dissection required with open approaches. The fracture is then percutaneously pinned and immobilized as previously recommended. Six skeletally immature patients with lateral humeral condyle fractures underwent arthroscopic reduction and percutaneous pinning. The mean age of the patients was 48 months (range, 21-69 months). There were 2 girls and 4 boys. Surgery was performed on 4 left and 2 right elbows. The mean follow-up was 32 weeks (range, 21-44 weeks). Postoperatively, all patients were placed in a long arm cast for 4 weeks. Pins and casts were removed at 4 weeks, and motion was begun. Elbow radiographs were evaluated for fracture healing, articular congruity, malunion, growth disturbance, and presence of avascular necrosis. Range of motion, function, pain, and cosmetic deformity were recorded. All patients had full active and passive range of motion. There was no difference in range of motion compared with the contralateral side (P < 0.05). All fractures healed radiographically by 4 weeks. There were no cases of nonunion or malunion. No patients developed cubitus varus. One patient developed radiolucency of the capitellum. There were no other complications. Arthroscopic reduction and percutaneous fixation of pediatric lateral humeral condyle fractures may offer a safe and effective alternative to open treatment with decreased soft tissue stripping and a possibly decreased risk of malunion or avascular necrosis. Level IV.

