21617149
Hypertension Impairs Vascular Reactivity in the Pediatric Brain.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Chronic hypertension impairs cerebrovascular regulation in adults, but its effects on the pediatric population are unknown. The objective of this study was to investigate cerebrovascular abnormalities in hypertensive children and adolescents. METHODS: Sixty-four children and adolescents aged 7 to 20 years underwent transcranial Doppler examinations of the middle cerebral artery at the time of rebreathing CO(2). Time-averaged maximum mean cerebral blood flow velocity and end-tidal CO(2) were used to quantify cerebrovascular reactivity during hypercapnia. Patients were clinically categorized as hypertensive, prehypertensive, or white coat hypertensive based on 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure measurements. Their reactivities were compared with 9 normotensive control subjects and evaluated against baseline mean blood pressure z-scores and loads. RESULTS: Untreated hypertensive children had significantly lower hypercapnic reactivity than normotensive children (2.556±1.832 cm/s · mm Hg versus 4.256±1.334 cm/s · mm Hg, P<0.05). Baseline mean diastolic blood pressure z-scores (r=-0.331, P=0.037) and diastolic blood pressure loads (r=-0.351, P=0.026) were inversely related to reactivity. CONCLUSIONS: Untreated hypertensive children and adolescents have blunted reactivity to hypercapnia, indicating deranged vasodilatory reactivity. The inverse relationship between diastolic blood pressure indices and reactivity suggests that diastolic blood pressure may be a better predictor of cerebral end organ damage than systolic blood pressure.

20736985
Dyslipidemia in children with chronic kidney disease.
Dyslipidemia, a known risk factor for atherosclerosis, is frequent among both adults and children with chronic kidney disease. Here, we describe the prevalence and pattern of dyslipidemia from a cross-sectional analysis of 391 children aged 1-16 years, enrolled in the multicenter Chronic Kidney Disease in Children (CKiD) study, with a median glomerular filtration rate (GFR), measured by the plasma disappearance of iohexol, of 43?ml/min per 1.73?m2. Multivariate analysis was applied to adjust for age, gender, body mass index (BMI), GFR, and the urinary protein/creatinine ratio. Proteinuria was in the nephrotic range in 44 and the BMI exceeded the 95th percentile in 57 patients of this cohort. Baseline lipid analysis found a high prevalence of hypertriglyceridemia in 126, increased non-HDL-C in 62, and reduced HDL-C in 83. Overall, 177 children had dyslipidemia, of whom 79 had combined dyslipidemia. Lower GFR was associated with higher triglycerides, lower HDL-C, and higher non-HDL-C. Nephrotic-range proteinuria was significantly associated with dyslipidemia and combined dyslipidemia. Compared with children with a GFR>50, children with a GFR<30 had significantly increased odds ratios for any dyslipidemia or for combined dyslipidemia. Hence, among children with moderate chronic kidney disease, dyslipidemia is common and is associated with lower GFR, nephrotic proteinuria, and non-renal factors including age and obesity.

