20730542
MRI pelvic landmark angles in the assessment of apical pelvic organ prolapse.
PURPOSE: The aim of the study was to evaluate the utility of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) pelvic landmark angles and lines in the assessment of apical vault prolapse. METHODS: Seventeen women were evaluated as part of a prospective surgical trial. Baseline data are presented as a pilot study of the utility of MRI in addition to this evaluation of 6 nulliparous volunteers without prolapse and 11 parous women with symptomatic >/= stage II uterine prolapse. Each patient underwent assessment for pelvic organ prolapse quantification (POPQ) and pelvic MRI. Pelvic landmark angles and lines were measured. Mann-Whitney Rank sum test and Spearman's Rank order correlation test were used to assess agreement. RESULTS: Women with prolapse had a significantly larger h angle, g angle, and e angle at rest than those without prolapse. Correlation between apical vault descent was measured clinically by POPQ point C with MRI measurements: h angle (r = 0.61, p = 0.01), g angle (r = 0.64, p = 0.005), and e angle (r = 0.62, p = 0.007). CONCLUSION: MRI measurements of pelvic landmark angles reliably differentiate between women with and without uterine prolapse and correlate best with POPQ point C.

20052574
Use of pelvic organ prolapse staging systems in published articles of selected specialized journals.
A standardized system for reporting pelvic organ prolapse is important for clinical communication, patient follow-up, and meaningful comparisons between studies. In 1996, the description of the Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantification system (POPQ) was published. We hypothesized that its use in published articles of specialized journals would increase over time. Articles from eight journals in 2004 and 2007 were included if any attempt to grade prolapse was mentioned. Reviews, editorials, and abstracts were excluded. Use of POPQ increased from 64.9% to 82.1% (p = 0.01) while other systems decreased. POPQ was used more frequently in the US than other countries. Urologists used POPQ less and Baden-Walker more frequently than other specialists. Use of POPQ has increased in the period studied. This trend was observed in all the subgroups analyzed, showing that POPQ is being adopted as the universal language of prolapse in the published literature.

