21376214
Metastatic osteosarcoma presenting as a singlepulmonary microembolus.
There are only a few published reports of tumor emboli from osteosarcoma. We are reporting a 17-year-old adolescent boy with a history of localized osteosarcoma who developed a symptomatic pulmonary artery tumor embolus. He was initially diagnosed with a pulmonary thromboembolism. This is the first reported case of a single tumor embolus developing after surgical resection of a tumor with 100% necrosis after chemotherapy and no evidence of metastatic disease at the time of surgery. Pulmonary tumor embolism should be considered in the differential diagnosis in patients with cancer who present with dyspnea. The differentiation of tumor embolus from other causes of dyspnea is important for treatment plan.

19023578
Diagnostic challenges in a child with familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 3 (FHLH3) presenting with fulminant neurological disease.
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHLH) is an autosomal recessively inherited multisystem disease characterized by fever, rash, splenomegaly, cytopenias, and variable central nervous system (CNS) manifestations. We report the case of a 3-year-old boy who presented with splenomegaly and normocytic anemia 4 months after returning to the US from a region endemic for Leishmania infection. The child later developed progressive neurological impairment and had radiologic evidence of widespread demyelinating disease. Gene studies showed homozygosity for a mutation at Munc13-4, confirming FHLH type 3. The diagnostic uncertainty that accompanies FHLH was compounded by our patient's travel history and CNS disease mimicking acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM). Diagnostic criteria for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis were not consistently met, despite aggressive disease. FHLH may present with fulminant demyelinating disease, mimicking ADEM, and without necessarily meeting previously defined clinical and laboratory criteria. We strongly recommend expeditious molecular testing and genetic counseling for FHLH mutations in cases of undiagnosed inflammatory CNS disease in the pediatric population.

