21410022
Surgical resection for advanced gallbladder carcinoma. The Mount Sinai experience.
Advanced gallbladder cancer (GC) carries dismal prognosis, due to its extent at diagnosis and the low R0 resection performance rate. Thirty-two GC patients referred to our Department with an intention to treat between 1993 and 2005. All patients had advanced T stage (> or = T3). Pathological findings, surgical procedures and survival data were analyzed. Seventeen radical procedures (16 hepatectomies and 1 cholecystectomy with common bile duct resection), 4 palliative procedures (12.5%) and 11 surgical explorations (34.4%) were performed (53.1%, resectability rate). Hepatectomies were performed with 0% mortality, 11.8% morbidity and 94.1% resectability rate. The respective 1-, 3- and 5- year survival rates were 71.4%, 28.6% and 14.3%. Radical lymph node dissection (p = 0.03), absence of perineural tumor invasion (p = 0.03) and patients' age <70 years (p < 0.01) were non-independently associated with favorable prognosis in the hepatectomy-treated group of GC patients. GC patients with stage > or = IIA should be treated with hepatectomy combined with radical lymphadenectomy in order to achieve better staging and disease control. Incorporating the caudate lobe, more than 4 liver segments, or part of the extrahepatic biliary tree in the resection specimen in selected patients, might help eliminate perineural metastatic spread and achieve improved overall survival.

19536893
Phase 1 study of concurrent sunitinib and image-guided radiotherapy followed by maintenance sunitinib for patients with oligometastases: acute toxicity and preliminary response.
To determine the safety and maximum-tolerated dose of concurrent sunitinib and image-guided radiotherapy (IGRT) followed by maintenance sunitinib in oligometastastic patients. Eligible patients had 1 to 5 sites of metastatic cancer measuring<or=6 cm. The most common treatment sites were bone, liver, and lung. Patients were treated with concurrent sunitinib (Day 1 through Day 28) and IGRT (40-50 Gy in 10 fractions starting on Day 8) followed by maintenance sunitinib (50 mg daily, 4 weeks on/2 weeks off starting on Day 43). The starting dose was sunitinib 25 mg and IGRT 40 Gy. Doses were escalated in a ping-pong design with incremental increases in either sunitinib or IGRT. Twenty-one patients with 36 metastatic lesions were enrolled, with a median follow-up of 10 months. No dose limiting toxicities (DLT) were noted at dose levels 1 or 2 (SU 37.5 mg/RT 40 Gy). One of 10 patients at dose level 3 (SU 37.5 mg/RT 50 Gy) and 2 of 5 patients at dose level 4 (SU 50 mg/RT 50 Gy) experienced DLTs comprising grade 4 myelosuppression and grade 3 nausea. At last follow-up, 8 patients are alive without evidence of progression. The 1-year local, progression-free, and overall survival were 85%, 44%, and 75%, respectively. Addition of SU (25 to 37.5 mg) to IGRT is tolerable in patients with oligometastases, without potentiation of RT toxicity. On the basis of promising antitumor responses observed with this novel combination, a multi-institutional phase 2 trial using SU 37.5 mg/RT 50 Gy is ongoing.

19524573
A system of classifying microvascular invasion to predict outcome after resection in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) recurs in approximately 70% of cases after resection. Vascular invasion by tumor cells can be classified as gross or microscopic (microvascular invasion [mVI]) and is a risk factor for recurrence. We examined a large cohort of patients with HCC who were treated by resection to identify features of mVI that correlated with recurrence and survival. We reviewed the records of all HCC resections performed at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine between January 1990 and March 2006 to identify those with mVI, established by histologic analysis. The numbers and sizes of vessels invaded, invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall, distance from the tumor, and satellite nodules were recorded. Of the 384 patients who underwent resection for HCC, 131 (34.1%) met the entry criteria. The median follow-up period was 28.9 months. There were 68 recurrences and 54 deaths. In multivariate analysis, invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall predicted recurrence (hazard ratio, 1.8; P = .02), and invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall (hazard ratio, 2.2; P = .018) and invasion of a vessel that was more than 1 cm from the tumor (hazard ratio, 2.1; P = .015) predicted survival. A risk score that assigned points for the presence of each variable correlated with recurrence (P = .028) and survival (P < .0001). A novel classification system that includes invasion of a vessel with a muscular wall and invasion of a vessel that is more than 1 cm from the tumor can accurately predict risk of recurrence and survival of patients with mVI after resection of HCC.

18291258
Fifteen-year, single-center experience with the surgical management of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: operative results and long-term outcome.
Limited data exist regarding the role of extended liver resection for the management of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC), most of which derive from small single-center or larger multicenter series. In the current report, we present our experience with the surgical management of ICC, analyze operative results, and investigate prognostic factors in resected patients. A total of 72 patients underwent operative exploration for ICC between 1991 and 2005; 54 patients were resected, and 18 patients were deemed unresectable based on intraoperative findings. Demographics, pathology, anatomic characteristics, operative results, and survival were analyzed. The resectability rate was 71%, with negative margins achieved in 78% of the resected patients. Extended liver resections were performed in 24 (44%) of the 72 patients. Perioperative mortality after resection was 7%, with 11% morbidity. The 1-, 3- and 5-year survival rates after resection were 80%, 49% and 25%, respectively, and were significantly greater than for patients with unresectable disease (P < .001). R1 liver resections conferred increased 5-year survival compared with patients deemed unresectable (P = .03). None of the factors evaluated proved to be independent prognostic factors on multivariate analysis. R0 resection of ICC provides the best chance for prolonged survival, whereas R1 resection appears to be superior to nonoperative treatment. Declining operative mortality as a result of improved intraoperative and perioperative care justifies the performance of extended liver resections in these patients, although benefit has to be evaluated with respect to nodal involvement.

17429765
The role of fibrin sealants in hepatic surgery.
The repair of all tissue disruption begins with hemostasis and tissue sealing. Fibrin sealant is a concentrated mix of the factors required for the body to initiate this process. By applying this mixture directly to the site of injury, clotting and wound healing can be facilitated. Studies have demonstrated that fibrin sealant is effective in controlling bleeding and inducing tissue sealing in many organs. It is particularly useful in hepatobiliary surgery due to the soft nature of liver parenchyma and its propensity to bleed and leak bile. This chapter will discuss the basic science foundation of fibrin sealants and their applications in hepatic surgery.

18589189
The Mount Sinai experience with orthotopic liver transplantation for benign tumors: brief report and literature review: case reports.
Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) is performed for benign hepatic lesions that are symptomatic, too large to be resected, have a malignant transformation potential, cause debilitating/life-threatening manifestations, or in patients experiencing posthepatectomy acute liver failure. Among benign tumors, polycystic liver disease (PLD) is the most common indication for OLT alone, or combined liver-kidney transplantation. Our 10-year experience with OLT for benign tumors includes two patients with PLD and one with a benign giant fibrous tumor. In this report, we present our experience with OLT for benign liver tumors, commenting on relevant published studies.

18589139
Effect of ischemia-reperfusion on the incidence of acute cellular rejection and timing of histologic hepatitis C virus recurrence after liver transplantation.
Because of a critical shortage of deceased donor (DD) livers, more extended criteria allografts are being utilized; these allografts are at increased risk for ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI). We assessed whether, in a large cohort of patients transplanted for hepatitis C virus (HCV) either via a DD or live donor (LD), there was a relationship between the degree of IRI and the frequency and timing of acute cellular rejection (ACR) and histologic HCV recurrence. During an 8-year study, patients were separated into four groups based on peak alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels and three groups based on severity of IRI on postreperfusion liver biopsy. The mean follow-up time of 433 DD and 44 LD recipients was 1212 days. We noted a strong correlation in DD between peak ALT and the histologic degree of IRI (P = .01). There was no difference in the incidence or grade of ACR among the four groups. There was no correlation between the severity of IRI and the incidence or time to histologic recurrence of HCV. The magnitude of peak ALT correlated with the severity of IRI on postreperfusion liver biopsy. Among this large HCV cohort, there was no correlation between the severity of IRI and the incidence or timing of histologic HCV recurrence or incidence of ACR.

18029133
Liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma: Are the Milan criteria still valid?
Liver transplantation (LT) offers excellent results for candidates with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) selected according to the Milan criteria. A selection strategy exclusively based on the Milan criteria, however, maintains a dangerous risk of prognostic inaccuracy due to the intrinsic diagnostic limitations of imaging procedures and to the surrogate nature of size and number of tumors with respect to more direct markers of biological aggressiveness like tumor grade, and vascular invasion. Moreover, the use of Milan criteria as dropout criteria seems to overestimate the risk of tumor biological progression before LT. The basis for allocation of donor liver to patients with HCC will undoubtedly evolve over coming years beyond the simple across-the-board application of Milan criteria taking into account the following key concepts: (1) a reliable prognostic staging system for HCC will help to optimize allocation of the various therapeutic alternatives to HCC patients; (2) new molecular biomarkers may improve the prognostic accuracy of selection criteria for LT; (3) aggressive multimodality neoadjuvant therapy can downstage HCC and limit tumor progression before LT, and treatment response may inform about tumor biology; and (4) Prioritization of HCC patients for LT should take into account not only tumor characteristics, but also response to neoadjuvant therapy, time on the waiting list, and the suitability of alternative donor sources including split/living donor LT, and marginal livers.

