20538187
Long-term safety of NGX-4010, a high-concentration capsaicin patch, in patients with peripheral neuropathic pain.
Postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) and painful human immunodeficiency virus-associated distal sensory polyneuropathy (HIV-DSP) are peripheral neuropathic pain syndromes that are difficult to treat. Current treatment options are often limited by poor tolerability. The objective of the current open-label study was to assess the safety of repeated applications of NGX-4010, a high-concentration capsaicin patch (capsaicin 8%), over one year, in patients with moderate to severe PHN or HIV-DSP. Patients had successfully completed a previous NGX-4010 study and had a pain level appropriate for further treatment. Eligible patients had not been treated with NGX-4010 within 12 weeks of study initiation. Patients received pretreatment with a topical local anesthetic (lidocaine 4%) for 60 minutes followed by either a 60-minute (PHN and HIV-DSP patients) or a 90-minute (HIV-DSP patients) treatment with NGX-4010. Patients could receive up to three additional treatments at intervals of > or = 12 weeks. Regardless of the number of treatments received, all patients were followed up for 48 weeks except for those withdrawing early. A total of 106 patients were enrolled and received a total of 293 NGX-4010 treatments. The most frequently reported treatment-emergent adverse events were transient, mild-to-moderate application site erythema, pain, edema, and papules. Small, transient pain-related increases in blood pressure during and immediately after NGX-4010 application were observed. There was no evidence of an increased incidence of adverse events, dermal irritation, intolerability, or impaired neurological function with repeated treatments. It is concluded that repeated treatments with NGX-4010 administered over a one-year period are generally safe and well tolerated.

19771594
Neuromuscular diseases associated with HIV-1 infection.
Neuromuscular disorders are common in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV); they occur at all stages of disease and affect all parts of the peripheral nervous system. These disorders have diverse etiologies including HIV itself, immune suppression and dysregulation, comorbid illnesses and infections, and side effects of medications. In this article, we review the following HIV-associated conditions: distal symmetric polyneuropathy; inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy; mononeuropathy; mononeuropathy multiplex; autonomic neuropathy; progressive polyradiculopathy due to cytomegalovirus; herpes zoster; myopathy; and other, rarer disorders.

19589300
HIV-related neurocognitive impairment in the HAART era.
Neurocognitive impairment is common in people living with HIV and AIDS. Prior to highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), cognitive impairment primarily affected patients with advanced disease, and was a more rapidly progressive illness. With the use of HAART, cognitive impairment improved, along with the overall health of HIV-positive patients. However, it is still a prevalent problem, even in patients with desirable CD4+ count and undetectable plasma viral load. In this review, we address the nature of HIV-related neurocognitive impairment in the HAART era, including its etiology, pathology, appropriate diagnostic tools for clinical practice and research, and rational treatment approaches.

19521250
The roles of ethnicity and antiretrovirals in HIV-associated polyneuropathy: a pilot study.
In the pre-highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) era, distal sensory polyneuropathy (DSP) was associated with markers of advanced HIV infection and the use of neurotoxic antiretrovirals (ARVs). As HAART became widespread, and the AIDS epidemic shifted into minority populations, the risk factors for DSP became less clear. We explore the roles of ethnicity and ARV in the development of DSP in an HAART era cohort. Data from 336 HIV-positive adults were obtained from the Manhattan HIV Brain Bank. One hundred four participants had no DSP at entry visit; at least 1 follow-up visit; and a self-identified ethnicity of non-Hispanic white, Hispanic, or African American. Fifty percent of participants developed DSP; of those, 67% were symptomatic. Participants who developed DSP were older (P = 0.02) and had higher CD4 counts (P = 0.001). ARV-DSP was more common in Hispanics (P = 0.02) and intravenous drug users (P = 0.02). There was a trend for higher pain scores in Hispanics with symptomatic DSP (P = 0.08). This study suggests that there are ethnic disparities in the clinical manifestations of HIV-related neuropathies including pain and the susceptibility to ARV-DSP. Further studies of larger cohorts are indicated to explore the etiology of these differences.

19196033
Pilot study of intravenous immunoglobulin in HIV-associated myelopathy.
There is no effective treatment for HIV-associated myelopathy (HIVM). The introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has made little difference to its natural history. Spinal cord pathology reveals vacuolization and inflammation. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) is used successfully in a number of inflammatory conditions associated with HIV. In view of the potential for reversibility of the inflammatory response in HIVM, we treated 17 patients with IVIg twice over a 56-day study period. There was improvement in composite Medical Research Council (MRC) strength scores 28 days following the first infusion (increase in score: 3.94; p = 0.021). The second infusion did not produce further improvement, however there was little reduction from peak strength. These pilot data suggest that further investigation of the use of IVIg in HIVM is warranted.

19154823
Botulinum toxin dilution and endplate targeting in spasticity: a double-blind controlled study.
To determine the effects of botulinum neurotoxin type A (BTX-A) dilution and endplate-targeting in spastic elbow flexors. Double blind randomized controlled trial; 4-month follow-up after a 160-unit injection of BTX-A into spastic biceps brachii (4 sites). Randomization into: group 1: 100 mouse units (MU)/mL dilution, 0.4cc/site, 4-quadrant injection; group 2: 100MU/mL dilution, 0.4cc/site, 4 sites along endplate band; group 3: 20MU/mL dilution, 2cc/site, 4-quadrant injection (n=7 per group). Institutional tertiary care ambulatory clinic. Referred sample of 21 adults with spastic hemiparesis. No participant withdrew due to adverse effects. A 160-unit injection of BTX-A of different dilutions and locations into biceps brachii. Primary: agonist and antagonist (cocontraction) mean rectified voltage (MRV) of elbow flexors/extensors during maximal isometric flexion/extension; secondary: maximal voluntary power of elbow flexion/extension; spasticity angle and grade in elbow flexors/extensors (Tardieu Scale); active range of elbow extension/flexion. BTX-A injection overall reduced agonist flexor MRV (-47.5%, P<0.0001), antagonist flexor MRV (-12%, P=.037), antagonist extensor MRV (-19%, P<.01), flexion maximal voluntary power (-33%, P<.001), elbow flexor spasticity angle (-30%, P<.001) and grade (-17%, P=.03), and increased extension maximal voluntary power (24%, P=.037) and active range of elbow extension (5.5%, 8 degrees , P=.002). Agonist and antagonist flexor MRV reductions in group 3 (-81% and -31%) were greater than in groups 1 and 2, whereas increase in active range of elbow extension was greater in group 2 (10%) than in groups 1 and 3 (P<.05, analysis of covariance [ANCOVA]). Elbow flexor spasticity was significantly reduced in groups 2 and 3 only (P<.05, ANCOVA). In spastic biceps, high-volume or endplate-targeted BTX-A injections achieve greater neuromuscular blockade, cocontraction and spasticity reduction, and active range of elbow extension improvement, than low volume, nontargeted injections.

18695060
Motor function and human immunodeficiency virus-associated cognitive impairment in a highly active antiretroviral therapy-era cohort.
Cognitive impairment has long been recognized as a manifestation of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. However, highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has altered the neurologic manifestations of HIV. To develop a measure to quantify the motor abnormalities included in the original descriptions of HIV-associated dementia (HAD); to determine whether motor, affective, and behavioral dysfunction predict cognitive impairment; and to determine whether quantitative motor testing is a helpful adjunct in the diagnosis of HAD in a complex population from the HAART era. Neurologic and neuropsychological data were collected from the Manhattan HIV Brain Bank, a longitudinal cohort study of patients with advanced HIV. The HIV-Dementia Motor Scale (HDMS) was developed and validated and cognitive and affective or behavioral function was quantified using global neuropsychological T scores, the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), and an independent assessment of apathy. Relationships among cognitive, motor, affective, and behavioral performance were examined using correlation, linear regression, and analyses of variance. An urban AIDS research center. A total of 260 HIV-positive, predominantly minority patients. The HDMS scores and global neuropsychological T scores. The HDMS and BDI scores were independent predictors of cognitive impairment. Significant cognitive impairment was found in patients with motor dysfunction. Patients diagnosed as having HAD had a greater degree of motor impairment than those with other neurocognitive diagnoses. Motor, affective, and behavioral abnormalities predict cognitive impairment in HIV-positive patients in this HAART-era cohort. The HDMS may be useful in the assignment of HIV-associated neurocognitive impairment in HIV populations in which normative data or neuropsychological test design is not optimal.

18657728
Diagnosis and management of HIV-associated neuropathy.
Distal sensory polyneuropathy (DSP) is the most common neurologic complication of HIV infection and a major cause of morbidity in HIV-infected patients. DSP may occur secondary to HIV (HIV-DSP) or be due to antiretroviral drug toxicity. Timely detection of the symptoms and signs of DSP in patients who have HIV may allow for the reversal of the toxic effects of antiretrovirals and for the initiation of symptomatic treatment. The pathogenic mechanism of HIV-DSP is likely multifactorial. Restorative therapies for DSP are not currently available but recent advances have led to novel symptomatic therapies. This article highlights the risk factors, pathogenesis, pathology, clinical features, diagnostic studies, differential diagnosis, and treatment of HIV-associated neuropathy.

18541884
Controlled trial of high-concentration capsaicin patch for treatment of painful HIV neuropathy.
HIV-associated distal sensory polyneuropathy (HIV-DSP) is a painful condition with limited effective treatment. Capsaicin desensitizes cutaneous nociceptors resulting in reduced pain. We report a placebo-controlled study of a high-concentration capsaicin dermal patch (NGX-4010) for the treatment of painful HIV-DSP. This double-blind multicenter study randomized 307 patients with painful HIV-DSP to receive NGX-4010 or control, a low-concentration capsaicin patch. After application of a topical anesthetic, NGX-4010 or control was applied once for 30, 60, or 90 minutes to painful areas on the feet. The primary efficacy endpoint was percent change in Numeric Pain Rating Scale (NPRS) from baseline in mean "average pain for past 24 hours" scores from weeks 2 to 12. A single NGX-4010 application resulted in a mean pain reduction of 22.8% during weeks 2 to 12 as compared to a 10.7% reduction for controls (p = 0.0026). Following a transient treatment-related pain increase, pain was reduced; significant improvement was apparent by week 2 and continued throughout the controlled 12-week observation period. Mean pain reductions in the NGX-4010 30-, 60- and 90-minute groups were 27.7%, 15.9%, and 24.7% (p = 0.0007, 0.287, and 0.0046 vs control). One third of NGX-4010-treated patients reported >or=30% pain decrease from baseline as compared to 18% of controls (p = 0.0092). Self-limited, mild-to-moderate local skin reactions were commonly observed. A single NGX-4010 application was safe and provided at least 12 weeks of pain reduction in patients with HIV-associated distal sensory polyneuropathy. These results suggest that NGX-4010 could provide a promising new treatment for painful HIV neuropathy.

18194751
Neuromuscular complications of human immunodeficiency virus infection.
Neurologic complications of HIV infection are common, and are a significant source of morbidity. The chronic nature of HIV today, the complexity of highly active antiretroviral therapy regimens, and the multiple and diffuse effects of HIV on the nervous system present an exciting diagnostic challenge, in which a systematic, comprehensive approach to diagnosis and treatment is necessary.

18090684
Anatomical localization of motor endplate bands in the human biceps brachii.
: Botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT) reduces disabling muscle contraction in numerous disorders with muscle overactivity. While motor endplates are the primary site of action for BoNT, their location is unknown in most human muscles. This study localized the motor endplate bands (MEB) within human biceps brachii (BB) muscles in relation to external landmarks. : Five human BB muscles were obtained from autopsy. Three muscles were processed for Sihler's stain, a nerve staining technique, and 2 were processed by whole-mount acetylcholinesterase stain. : The major MEB in BB is an inverted V-shaped band, 1 cm in width, located 7 cm superior to the olecranon laterally, 11 cm superior to the olecranon in the middle, and 8 cm above the olecranon medially. The ratio of MEB location to total olecranon-acromion length is 0.25 at the lateral edge, 0.39 in the midline, and 0.28 at the medial edge. : This study localized MEB in human BB in reference to external landmarks. This data should improve the feasibility of endplate targeting when injecting BoNT in BB, which might enhance the clinical efficacy of these injections.

17959343
An open-label pilot study of high-concentration capsaicin patch in painful HIV neuropathy.
Peripheral neuropathy is the most frequent neurological complication of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 infection and is commonly associated with the development of chronic pain. This open-label, 12-week pilot study assessed the efficacy, tolerability, and safety of a high-concentration capsaicin dermal patch (NGX-4010; capsaicin, 640microg/cm2, 8% w/w) to treat painful HIV-associated distal sensory polyneuropathy (DSP). Eligible patients had moderate-to-severe pain in both feet due to HIV-associated DSP or antiretroviral toxic neuropathy. Patients received a single 60-minute application of the investigational high-concentration capsaicin patch to the affected areas. The primary outcome measure was the mean percent change in numeric pain rating scale (NPRS) during weeks two to 12 postadministration. After a single 60-minute NGX-4010 application, the mean percent change from baseline in "average pain for past 24 hours" NPRS scores during weeks two to 12 was -40% (95% CI: -61%, -19%; P=0.0020). Similar results were observed for "worst pain for past 24 hours" and "pain now" scores. Eight of 12 patients (67%) were treatment responders (> or =30% pain decrease). Four of 12 patients (33%) experienced a > or =50% reduction in pain. Treatment was generally well tolerated. Treatment-associated pain was self-limited and could be managed with short-acting opioids. This study demonstrates that treatment of painful HIV-associated neuropathy with a single application of NGX-4010, a high-concentration capsaicin patch, was feasible, well tolerated, and associated with significant reduction in pain over the 12 weeks studied. No safety concerns were identified. Controlled studies of NGX-4010 for the treatment of painful HIV-associated neuropathy are warranted.

17714115
Safety profile of treatment in diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain.
New treatment options for diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain (DPNP) have recently been developed, including two Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved agents, duloxetine and pregabalin. As clinicians face a broader spectrum of efficacious treatments, side-effect profiles play an increasingly important role in the development of a pain management regimen. In this article we review the safety profile of agents commonly used in the treatment of DPNP.

17883996
Managing HIV peripheral neuropathy.
Peripheral nerve disorders are frequent complications of HIV disease. Distal symmetrical polyneuropathy (DSP) is the most common peripheral nerve disorder associated with HIV and occurs in over one third of infected patients but may occur in up to 67% if asymptomatic patients are included. Risk factors for DSP include increased age, advanced HIV disease, and history of "d-drugs" or other neurotoxic drugs. The primary manifestations of polyneuropathy are slowly progressive numbness and paresthesias, with burning sensations in the feet usually in a symmetrical pattern. The etiology of HIV-associated DSP is unknown, although neurotoxic effects of cytokines, toxicity of HIV proteins, and mitochondrial damage have been implicated. The current treatment for HIV-associated DSP is symptomatic, with pain modifying medications, including anti-inflammatory agents, opioids, antidepressants, antiepileptics, topical anesthetics, and capsaicin. Sustained virologic control may improve DSP. Novel therapies such as -acetyl-l-carnitine or neurotrophic factors are being studied for treatment of DSP.

17674313
Mirtazapine in progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy associated with polycythemia vera.
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a usually fatal cerebral white matter disease found in patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection and other immunocompromised states. We present the case of a 63-year-old woman with polycythemia vera who developed a progressive focal neurological deficit with white matter abnormalities on magnetic resonance images of the brain that was proved on biopsy to be PML. She was treated with the serotonin reuptake inhibitor mirtazapine and remains neurologically stable, with resolution of cerebral lesions, >2 years after diagnosis. We propose that mirtazapine should be investigated further for use in PML.

17617282
Fentanyl buccal tablet for the relief of breakthrough pain in opioid-tolerant adult patients with chronic neuropathic pain: a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
Patients with chronic noncancer pain, including neuropathic pain, may have transitory exacerbations of pain (median duration, 60 minutes), termed breakthrough pain (BTP), that may reach peak intensity within minutes. Typical short-acting oral opioids may not provide sufficiently rapid relief (30- to 60-minute onset of analgesia). The fentanyl buccal tablet (FBT) provides a rapid onset of analgesia (10-15 minutes) by enhancing fentanyl absorption across the buccal mucosa. This study evaluated the efficacy and tolerability of FBT in opioid-tolerant patients with BTP associated with chronic noncancer neuropathic pain. This was a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study in men and women aged 18 to 80 years who were opioid tolerant; had a >/= 3-month history of chronic persistent neuropathic pain associated with diabetic peripheral neuropathy, postherpetic neuralgia, traumatic injury, or complex regional pain syndrome; and reported having episodes of BTP. After an open-label titration period to identify an effective FBT dose (the dose at which the patient reported receiving adequate pain relief within 30 minutes after administration of a single tablet of that dose during at least 2 of 3 BTP episodes), patients were randomly assigned to treat 9 consecutive episodes of BTP over the next 21 days with 1 of 3 double-blind dose sequences of FBT and placebo tablets. Pain intensity (PI) (rated on an 11-point pain scale, from 0 = no pain to 10 = worst pain) and other outcomes were assessed before dosing and for 2 hours after dosing. The primary efficacy measure was the sum of PI differences (PIDs) for the first 60 minutes (SPID(60)). Secondary efficacy measures included the proportion of BTP episodes with >/= 33% and >/= 50% improvement in PI from baseline; PID at other time points (5, 10, 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, and 120 minutes after dosing); pain relief (PR) at the same time points (rated on a 5-point Likert scale from 0 = none to 4 = complete); proportion of BTP episodes with meaningful PR; time to meaningful PR; and proportion of BTP episodes in which supplemental medication was required after administration of study drug. Adverse events (AEs) spontaneously reported by the patient or elicited by the investigator were recorded throughout the study. Of 102 patients in the open-label titration period, 80 identified an effective dose of FBT and 79 entered the double-blind phase. Of these 79 patients, 77 (97%) completed the study and 75 (95%) were evaluable for efficacy. Of the 79 patients who entered the double-blind phase, 63% were women and 92% were white; their mean (SD) age was 48.3 (10.42) years, and their mean weight was 96.8 (33.42) kg. Baseline demographic and pain characteristics were similar between the overall population and the double-blind population. SPID(60) was significantly greater for BTP episodes treated with FBT compared with those in which placebo was administered (mean [SE], 9.63 [0.75] vs 5.73 [0.72], respectively; P < 0.001). Significant differences between FBT and placebo were seen beginning at 10 minutes for PID (mean, 0.740 [0.149] vs 0.427 [0.081]; P < 0.047) and PR (mean, 0.561 [0.087] vs 0.324 [0.056]; P < 0.001). A >/= 33% improvement in PI from baseline was seen in a greater proportion of BTP episodes treated with FBT compared with placebo from 10 minutes (9% vs 3%; P = 0.008) through 2 hours (66% vs 37%; P < 0.001). Patients were almost 4 times less likely to require supplemental opioids when BTP episodes were treated with FBT compared with placebo (odds ratio = 0.28; 95% Cl, 0.18-0.42). AEs were reported by 64 (63%) of 102 patients. The most commonly reported AEs were those typical of opioids (nausea [13%], dizziness [13%], somnolence [10%], and vomiting [5%]) and occurred more often during the dose-titration phase (55/102 [54%]) than during the double-blind phase (22/79 [28%]). In these opioid-tolerant patients with chronic neuropathic pain who identified an effective FBT dose, FBT had a rapid onset of action and was effective and well tolerated in the treatment of BTP.

