20014413
Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis: past, present, and future.
The presence of fetal cells in the maternal circulation was first noted by Georg Schmorl when he documented the presence of multinucleated syncytial giant cells of placental origin in the lung tissue of women who had died from complications of eclampsia. In the intervening century, advances in cellular and molecular biology further elucidated both the physiology and pathophysiology of communication within the fetomaternal unit. This concept is at the foundation of the rapidly expanding field of noninvasive prenatal diagnosis. However, the clinical utility of this phenomenon had been limited until the presence of cell-free fetal DNA circulating in the maternal plasma was reported in 1997 and fetal messenger RNA was demonstrated to circulate in the maternal plasma in 2000. These circulating nucleic acids are found free-floating in the maternal plasma, unencumbered by a surrounding fetal cell. The analysis of these 3 fetal markers (fetal cells, cell-free fetal DNA, and fetal messenger RNA) for diagnostic and screening purposes is now being developed. The scope of noninvasive prenatal diagnosis is not limited to only the diagnosis of fetal genetic traits and aneuploidies. Recently, researchers have focused their investigations on the role of cell-free fetal DNA and fetal messenger RNA in preeclampsia, intrauterine growth restriction, and preterm labor. These biomarkers, the result of inherent placental dysfunction or the byproducts of placental trophoblastic apoptosis, may allow for improvements in the diagnosis and management of high-risk pregnancies.

18639217
Chorionic villus sampling and the risk of adverse outcome in patients undergoing multifetal pregnancy reduction.
The objective of the study was to determine whether patients undergoing chorionic villus sampling (CVS) prior to MPR are at increased risk for adverse outcome compared to those who did not. We retrospectively identified multifetal pregnancy reduction (MPR) patients from an established database. Maternal demographic data were collected. Outcomes including complete pregnancy loss prior to 24 weeks' gestation, gestational age at delivery, and birthweight were analyzed. There was no significant difference in pregnancy loss between the 2 groups (CVS [4%] vs no CVS [7%], P = .098). When stratified by finishing number, there was a significantly lower loss rate in the singleton CVS group (2% vs 9%, P = .025) and no significant difference in reduced twins. There was no significant difference in the average gestational age of delivery or birthweight. CVS prior to MPR does not increase the risk of pregnancy loss. Our data suggest that CVS prior to singleton reduction may decrease the risk of adverse outcome.

17592059
Successful management of a consecutive cervical pregnancy by sonographically guided transvaginal local injection: case report and review of the literature.
The purpose of this study was to describe the successful management of a recurrent cervical pregnancy with local injection and to review similarly treated cases to determine adverse outcomes. A case of a recurrent cervical pregnancy treated with transvaginal local injection was reported. A MEDLINE English language search identified 90 cases of cervical pregnancy treated with local therapy. This literature was analyzed with regard to the various demographic and outcome variables described. Successful use of the transvaginal local approach is described. A review of cases identified a mean maternal age of 33.6 years with a mean gestational age at diagnosis of 7.5 weeks. Bleeding was the most common presenting sign (79%). The mean beta-human chorionic gonadotropin level at the time of diagnosis was 27,798 IU with an average time to resolution of 7.5 weeks. The most common risk factor was a history of curettage (69%), followed by previous cesarean delivery (35%). An additional dose of methotrexate was needed in 6% of cases. Bleeding requiring alternate procedures was present in 5% of cases. There were no complications in 81% of cases. The need for transfusion and development of infection were seen in 3% of cases each. There was 1 case (1.1%) requiring hysterectomy, and no maternal deaths were reported. Conservative management of cervical pregnancy using local injection has been reported to have a low complication rate and a high efficacy for cure.

