20465662
Evaluation of sensory irritation caused by topical medications using a novel technique.
Topical medications are often the first line therapy utilized by dermatologists for a variety of conditions. However, a common side effect of topical medications is application site irritation. The aim of this study was to evaluate and compare the sensory irritation caused by hydrocortisone butyrate lipocream 0.1% using a non-invasive and inexpensive technique. Twenty participants with corticosteroid-responsive dermatoses were enrolled. Three target areas of unaffected skin were abraded. A negative control (petrolatum ointment), a positive control (an over-the-counter [OTC] anti-itch preparation containing benzyl alcohol), and a test product (hydrocortisone butyrate lipocream 0.1%) were each applied to separate target areas on the legs. Participants rated the irritation of each target area using a 10-point scale (1 [no symptoms] to 10 [intolerable burning/ stinging requiring removal of the medication]). The mean irritation scores for petrolatum ointment, the OTC anti-itch preparation, and hydrocortisone butyrate lipocream 0.1% were 1.30, 5.70, and 1.95, respectively. The difference in irritation between the OTC anti-itch preparation and hydrocortisone butyrate lipocream 0.1% was highly significant (P < 0.0001). The difference in irritation between the OTC anti-itch preparation and petrolatum ointment also was highly significant (P < 0.0001). The difference in irritation between hydrocortisone butyrate lipocream 0.1% and petrolatum ointment also was statistically significant (P = 0.0265). Irritation scores were then standardized on a 10-point scale, with the irritation score of the negative control given a value of 1.00 and the irritation score of the positive control given a value of 10.00. The standardized irritation score of the test product, hydrocortisone butyrate lipocream 0.1%, was calculated to be 2.33. Our study, using a novel technique to measure sensory irritation, establishes hydrocortisone butyrate lipocream 0.1% to be minimally irritating. We hope to use this simple and easy-to-use assay to measure and compare the severity of the sensory irritation of various commercially available topical preparations. In doing so, we hope to ultimately create a sensory irritation ranking scale, which would enable physicians to choose less irritating products, thereby enhancing adherence to treatment regimens and patient satisfaction.

18937999
Placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized pilot study of imiquimod 5% cream applied once per week for 6 months for the treatment of actinic keratoses.
Imiquimod 5% cream applied twice weekly for 16 weeks is effective for treating actinic keratoses but may be limited by local side effects. We sought to explore the efficacy and safety of a once weekly for 24 weeks dosing regimen using a left versus right side of head design. Twenty patients were enrolled; 15 completed and 5 discontinued for reasons unrelated to adverse events. At the posttreatment visit (week 28), 7 (46.7%) of 15 patients had marked improvement or better on the imiquimod side versus one (6.7%) of 15 on the placebo side. The average investigator assessment scale score change was +2.20 for imiquimod compared with -0.27 for placebo (P = .0002, Wilcoxon signed rank test). Skin reactions were minimal or nonexistent in most patients. Limitations of the study include a small sample size and a lack of objective measure of local side effects. Imiquimod 5% cream applied once weekly for 24 weeks was convenient for patients and resulted in improvement of actinic keratoses with minimal side effects.

18806497
Cutaneous toxoplasmosis histologically mimicking graft-versus-host disease.
The dermatology service is frequently consulted to assess cutaneous eruptions after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. We describe a case of cutaneous toxoplasmosis in a stem cell transplant patient where toxoplasmosis trophozoites elicited a reaction pattern mimicking an interface dermatitis. At first blush, these findings may be misinterpreted as either a reaction to a drug or graft-versus-host disease. We hope that this case will prove helpful for dermatopathologists in asserting the correct diagnosis of cutaneous toxoplasmosis-if left untreated or treated incorrectly, this disease has a dismal prognosis.

18712029
A new standardized method of evaluating cutaneous irritation from topical medications.
We used a new technique to evaluate and compare cutaneous irritation from various topical medications. Twenty participants with corticosteroid-responsive dermatoses were enrolled. Three target areas of unaffected skin were abraded. A negative control (petrolatum ointment), a positive control (an over-the-counter [OTC] anti-itch preparation containing benzyl alcohol), and a test product (fluticasone propionate lotion 0.05%) were each applied to separate targetareas on the legs. Participants rated the irritation of each target area using a 10-point scale (1 [no symptoms] to 10 [intolerable burning/ stinging requiring removal of the medication]). The mean irritation scores for petrolatum ointment, the OTC anti-itch preparation, and fluticasone propionate lotion 0.05% were 1.20, 6.15, and 2.05, respectively. The difference in irritation between the OTC anti-itch preparation and fluticasone propionate lotion 0.05% was highly significant (P < .0001). The difference in irritation between the OTC anti-itch preparation and petrolatum ointment also was highly significant (P < .0001). The difference in irritation between fluticasone propionate lotion 0.05% and petrolatum ointment also was statistically significant (P = .0104). Irritation scores were then standardized on a 10-point scale, with the irritation score of the negative control given a value of 1.00 and the irritation score of the positive control given a value of 10.00. The standardized irritation score of the test product, fluticasone propionate lotion 0.05%, was calculated to be 2.55. Our assay was able to detect and quantify even minimal cutaneous irritation secondary to application of topical medications.

18666395
A single-center, double-blind, randomized trial of the atrophogenic effects of fluocinonide cream 0.1% versus clobetasol propionate cream 0.05% in participants with corticosteroid-responsive dermatoses.
To compare the atrophogenic effects of fluocinonide cream 0.1% versus clobetasol propionate cream 0.05%, 20 participants with corticosteroid-responsive dermatoses were randomly assigned to receive fluocinonide cream 0.1% on one arm and clobetasol propionate cream 0.05% on the other arm. Study medications were applied to disease-free target areas on the inner arms twice daily for 2 weeks. The epidermal thickness of pretreatment and posttreatment punch biopsy specimens was measured. Skin examinations were performed evaluating clinical signs of atrophy. No significant reduction in epidermal thickness was observed in the fluocinonide-treated sites (mean, -0.0318 mm; standard deviation, 0.0239; P=.1991). A significant reduction in epidermal thickness was seen in the clobetasol-treated sites (mean, -0.1825 mm; standard deviation, 0.0239; P<.0001). This reduction was significantly greater than results from sites treated with fluocinonide cream 0.1% (difference, -0.1507; standard deviation, 0.0131; P<.0001). Although topical corticosteroids often are the first-line treatment for patients with various dermatoses, a side effect of continuous use is cutaneous atrophy. Our study demonstrated that clobetasol propionate cream 0.05% caused a significantly greater reduction in epidermal thickness compared with fluocinonide cream 0.1% when used twice daily for 2 weeks (P<.001). However, neither drug caused significant clinical signs of atrophy.

18640521
Cutaneous manifestations of cardiovascular diseases.
Cardiovascular diseases may affect multiple organ systems including the skin. By identification of specific cutaneous findings, dermatologists may be the first physician to diagnose an underlying cardiovascular disease. This article discusses a number of cardiac disorders with prominent skin findings in addition to general dermatologic signs suggestive of cardiovascular disease.

