21109758
Fluid shear stress induces renal epithelial gene expression through polycystin-2-dependent trafficking of extracellular regulated kinase.
The cilium and cilial proteins have emerged as principal mechanosensors of renal epithelial cells responsible for translating mechanical forces into intracellular signals. Polycystin-2 (PC-2), a cilial protein, regulates flow/shear-induced changes in intracellular Ca(2+) ([Ca(2+)](i)) and recently has been implicated in the regulation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases. We hypothesize that fluid shear stress (FSS) activates PC-2 which regulates MAP kinase and, in turn, induces MAP kinase-dependent gene expression, specifically, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1). To test this, PC-2 expression was constitutively reduced in a murine inner medullary collecting duct (IMCD3) cell line, and the expression of FSS-induced MCP-1 expression and MAP kinase signaling compared between the parental (PC-2-expressing) and PC-2-deficient IMCD3 cells. FSS induces MAP kinase signaling and downstream MCP-1 mRNA expression in wild-type IMCD3 cells, while inhibitors of MAP kinase prevented the FSS-induced MCP-1 mRNA response. In contradistinction, FSS did not induce MCP-1 mRNA expression in PC-2-deficient cells, but did increase activation of the upstream MAP kinases. Wild-type cells exposed to FSS augmented the nuclear abundance of activated MAP kinase while PC-2-deficient cells did not. PC-2 regulates FSS-induced MAP kinase trafficking into the nucleus of CD cells.

19851105
Intratubular hydrodynamic forces influence tubulointerstitial fibrosis in the kidney.
Renal epithelial cells respond to mechanical stimuli with immediate transduction events (e.g. activation of ion channels), intermediate biological responses (e.g. changes in gene expression), and long-term cellular adaptation (e.g. protein expression). Progressive renal disease is characterized by disturbed glomerular hydrodynamics that contributes to glomerulosclerosis, but how intratubular biomechanical forces contribute to tubulointerstital inflammation and fibrosis is poorly understood. In-vivo and in-vitro models of obstructive uropathy demonstrate that tubular stretch induces robust expression of transforming growth factor beta-1, activation of tubular apoptosis, and induction of nuclear factor-kappaB signaling, which contribute to the inflammatory and fibrotic milieu. Nonobstructive structural kidney diseases associated with nephron loss follow a course characterized by compensatory increases of single nephron glomerular filtration rate and tubular flow rate. Resulting increases in tubular fluid shear stress reduce tissue-plasminogen activator and urokinase enzymatic activity, which diminishes breakdown of extracellular matrix. In models of high dietary Na intake, which increases tubular flow, urinary transforming growth factor beta-1 concentrations and renal mitogen-activated protein kinase activity are increased. In conclusion, intratubular biomechanical forces, stretch, and fluid shear stress generate changes in intracellular signaling and gene expression that contribute to the pathobiology of obstructive and nonobstructive kidney disease.

19234454
Electrochemical cues regulate assembly of the Frizzled/Dishevelled complex at the plasma membrane during planar epithelial polarization.
Dishevelled (Dsh) is a cytoplasmic multidomain protein that is required for all known branches of the Wnt signalling pathway. The Frizzled/planar cell polarity (Fz/PCP) signalling branch requires an asymmetric cortical localization of Dsh, but this process remains poorly understood. Using a genome-wide RNA interference (RNAi) screen in Drosophila melanogaster cells, we show that Dsh membrane localization is dependent on the Na(+)/H(+) exchange activity of the plasma membrane exchanger Nhe2. Manipulating Nhe2 expression levels in the eye causes PCP defects, and Nhe2 interacts genetically with Fz. Our data show that the binding and surface recruitment of Dsh by Fz is pH- and charge-dependent. We identify a polybasic stretch within the Dsh DEP domain that binds to negatively charged phospholipids and appears to be mechanistically important. Dsh recruitment by Fz can be abolished by converting these basic amino-acid residues into acidic ones, as in the mutant, DshKR/E. In vivo, the DshKR/E(2x) mutant with two substituted residues fails to associate with the membrane during active PCP signalling but rescues canonical Wnt signalling defects in a dsh-background. These results suggest that direct interaction between Fz and Dsh is stabilized by a pH and charge-dependent interaction of the DEP domain with phospholipids. This stabilization is particularly important for the PCP signalling branch and, thus, promotes specific pathway selection in Wnt signalling.

18508505
Clinical manifestations of hereditary cystic kidney disease.
Genetic mutations of discrete loci are the cause of a diverse array of polycystic kidney disease syndromes which present in distinct, as well as overlapping, phenotypic and hereditary patterns. Since molecular diagnostics are not currently a feasible clinical tool for the diagnosis of most cystic kidney diseases, physicians must rely upon their clinical acumen and knowledge base in order to identify these patients. The goal of this manuscript is to review the hereditary patterns, basic epidemiology, and phenotypic features of the most common of the cystic renal diseases so as to increase the awareness of these renal diseases among practicing physicians. Specifically, the genetic and phenotypic features of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease, nephronopthisis-medullary cystic kidney disease complex, Bardet-Biedl syndrome, and oral-facial-digital syndrome type 1 will be reviewed.

18256315
Mechanoregulation of intracellular Ca2+ in human autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease cyst-lining renal epithelial cells.
Mutations of cilia-expressed proteins are associated with an attenuated shear-induced increase in intracellular Ca(2+) concentration ([Ca(2+)](i)) in renal epithelial cell lines derived from murine models of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). We hypothesized that human ARPKD cyst-lining renal epithelial cells also exhibited dysregulated mechanosensation. To test this, conditionally immortalized cell lines derived from human fetal ARPKD cyst-lining (pool and clone 5E) cell lines with low levels of fibrocystin/polyductin expression and age-matched normal collecting tubule [human fetal collecting tubule (HFCT) pool and clone 2C] cell lines were grown in culture, loaded with a Ca(2+) indicator dye, and subjected to laminar shear. Clonal cell lines were derived from single cells present in pools of cells from cyst-lining and collecting tubules, microdissected from human kidney. Resting and peak [Ca(2+)](i) were similar between ARPKD 5E and pool, and HFCT 2C and pool; however, the flow-induced peak [Ca(2+)](i) was greater in ARPKD 5E (700 +/- 87 nM, n = 21) than in HFCT 2C (315 +/- 58 nM, n = 12; P < 0.01) cells. ARPKD 5E cells treated with Gd(3+), an inhibitor of nonselective cation channels, inhibited but did not abolish the shear-induced [Ca(2+)](i) transient. Cilia were approximately 20% shorter in ARPKD than HFCT cells, but no difference in ciliary localization or total cellular expression of polycystin-2, a mechanosenory Gd(3+)-sensitive cation channel, was detected between ARPKD and HFCT cells. The intracellular Ca(2+) stores were similar between cells. In summary, human ARPKD cells exhibit an exaggerated Gd(3+)-sensitive mechano-induced Ca(2+) response compared with controls; whether this represents dysregulated polycystin-2 activity in ARPKD cells remains to be explored.

17472845
Reporting of estimated GFR in the primary care clinic.
Because serum creatinine is an insensitive measure of kidney dysfunction, guidelines have advocated routine use of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) to identify patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD). Patients with early (stage 3) CKD remain undiagnosed in primary care clinics; therefore, we hypothesized that routine reporting of eGFR in outpatient clinics would improve the recognition and treatment of CKD. A retrospective review of primary care patients was undertaken at the Bronx Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Bronx, New York, before and after the institution of routine eGFR reporting. We evaluated the achievement of diagnostic and therapeutic treatment goals based on the Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative guidelines (documentation of CKD, urinalysis assessment, blood pressure < 130/80 mm Hg, and renin-angiotensin system blockade) for patients with stage 3 CKD during each period. Overall, patients with diabetes with early-stage CKD achieved superior treatment rates than similar patients without diabetes. Routine reporting of eGFR improved the documentation and identification of CKD by almost 50%, although absolute improvement was modest. Use of renin-angiotensin system blockers improved minimally, as did blood pressure control. Patients with documented CKD achieved treatment goals more frequently than patients without documented CKD. Routine reporting of eGFR alone modestly improved the identification of patients with CKD without a clinically significant effect on care. For Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study calculation of eGFR reporting to effect improvements in CKD care, it will be necessary to pair eGFR reporting with provider education to identify these patients and treat them effectively.

