20737796
Comparing quantification of pain severity by verbal rating and numeric rating scales.
Researchers have reported widely varying correlations among the 3 main instruments used to quantify pain severity, Visual Analog Scale (VAS), Verbal Rating Scale (VRS), and Numeric Rating Scale (NRS), both at the level of groups and at the level of individuals. To assess the comparability of reports of pain severity using a VRS and a NRS in a spinal cord injury (SCI) sample. Data were taken from a longitudinal observational study. Patients were 168 individuals with new traumatic SCI admitted for inpatient rehabilitation who completed the VRS and NRS multiple times, each time for multiple pains as appropriate. For 1114 ratings of pain, VRS and corresponding NRS ratings were correlated weakly (Spearman correlation, rho = 0.38). For 36 individuals with at least 10 completions of paired VRS and NRS, rho ranged from -0.55 to 0.76. Variation in NRS rating for each VRS adjective was reduced by about 25% when between-patient variation was eliminated. Mean NRS ratings by VRS adjective, for patients who had used each of at least 2 adjectives at least 5 times each, showed large differences in mean NRS scores between individuals using the same VRS adjective. There are considerable differences between individuals in how NRS and VRS are used; there also seem to be individuals whose understanding of the meaning of the VRS adjectives is completely different from what was assumed by the creators of this VRS. Both VRS and NRS data must be used with extreme caution by SCI clinicians and researchers.

19533517
Prevalence of chronic pain after traumatic spinal cord injury: a systematic review.
Published studies have reported widely divergent estimates of the prevalence of chronic pain among individuals with (traumatic) spinal cord injury (SCI). To develop an estimate based on a synthesis of the research, we used searches of MEDLINE, CINAHL, PsycINFO, and other bibliographic databases and an ancestor search to identify articles published since 1966 in any language that reported a pain prevalence rate for at least 30 subjects with certain or likely traumatic SCI. Data on sample makeup, study quality indicators, and pain prevalence were abstracted independently by two researchers. A total of 42 studies reported pain prevalence rates that ranged from 26% to 96%, with a fairly even spread between these extremes. The reported rate did not appear to be related to study quality. Pain prevalence in the combined samples did not appreciably differ between males and females, those with complete versus incomplete SCI, and those with paraplegia versus tetraplegia. We conclude that too much heterogeneity was present in the reports to calculate a post-SCI pain prevalence rate using meta-analytic methods. Further research is needed to determine whether rates are related to sample makeup (e.g., average subject age), research methods used (e.g., telephone interview vs self-report instruments), or even the definition of "chronic" pain.

19247552
Case-control studies false and true: mislabeled study designs in rehabilitation research, and a master class in case-control study design.


18219234
Fatigue after traumatic brain injury and its impact on participation and quality of life.
To examine the relationships between post-TBI fatigue (PTBIF) and comorbid conditions, participation in activities, quality of life, and demographic and injury variables. 223 community-dwelling individuals with mild to severe TBI and 85 noninjured controls. Global Fatigue Index (GFI), Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II), McGill Pain Questionnaire (MPQ), Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Inventory (PSQI), Participation Objective Participation Subjective (POPS), SF-36, Life-3. Data were collected through interviews and administration of self-report measures as part of a study of PTBIF. Fatigue was more severe and prevalent in individuals with TBI, and more severe among women. It was not correlated with other demographic and injury variables. Once overlap in measurement instruments' content was removed, depression, pain, and sleep problems accounted for approximately 23% of the variance in fatigue in those with TBI compared to 58% of the variance in the control group. PTBIF was correlated with health-related quality of life and overall quality of life, but was not generally related to participation in major life activities. PTBIF has significant impact on well-being and quality of life and cannot be accounted for by comorbid conditions alone, suggesting that it is related to brain injury itself. It appears to be unrelated to demographic and injury variables other than gender. PTBIF does not limit the quantity and frequency of participation. Future research should focus on the relationship between fatigue and the quality of participation.

18219233
Objective measurement of fatigue following traumatic brain injury.
To quantify posttraumatic brain injury (post-TBI) mental fatigue objectively by documenting changes in performance on neuropsychological tests as a result of sustained mental effort and to examine the relationship between objectively measured mental fatigue and self-reported situational and day-to-day fatigue. The study included 202 community-dwelling individuals with mild-severe TBI and 73 noninjured controls. Measures included Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery, Global Fatigue Index, and situational fatigue rating. Subjects were administered a 30-minute computerized neuropsychological test battery 3 times. The second and third administrations of the battery were separated by approximately 2 hours of interviews and administration of self-report measures. The neuropsychological test scores were factor analyzed, yielding 3 subscales: speed, accuracy, and executive function. Situational fatigue and day-to-day fatigue were significantly higher in individual with TBI group than in individuals without TBI and were associated with speed subscale scores. Individuals with TBI evidenced a significant decline in performance on the accuracy subscale score. These declines in performance related to sustained mental effort were not associated with subjective fatigue in the TBI group. While practice effects on the speed and accuracy scores were observed in non-brain-injured individuals, they were not evidenced in individuals with TBI. Findings were largely consistent with previous literature and indicated that while subjective fatigue is associated with poor performance in individuals with TBI, it is not associated with objective decline in performance of mental tasks.

18092558
Pain after spinal cord injury: an evidence-based review for clinical practice and research. Report of the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research Spinal Cord Injury Measures meeting.
To examine the reliability, validity, sensitivity, and practicality of various outcome measures for pain after spinal cord injury (SCI), and to provide recommendations for specific measures for use in clinical trials. Relevant articles were obtained through a search of MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, and PubMed databases from inception through 2006. The authors performed literature searches to find articles containing data relevant to the reliability and validity of each pain outcome measure in SCI and selected non-SCI populations. After reviewing the articles, an investigator extracted information utilizing a standard template. A second investigator reviewed the chosen articles and the extracted pertinent information to confirm the findings of the first investigator. Taking into consideration both the quantity and quality of the studies analyzed, judgments on reliability and validity of the measures were made by the two investigators. Based upon these judgments, recommendations were formulated for use of specific measures in future clinical trials. In addition, for a subset of measures a voting process by a larger group of SCI experts allowed formulation of recommendations including determining which measures should be incorporated into a minimal dataset of measures for clinical trials and which ones need revision and further validity and reliability testing before use. A 0-10 Point Numerical Rating Scale (NRS) is recommended as the outcome measure for pain intensity after SCI, while the 7-Point Guy/Farrar Patient Global Impression of Change (PGIC) scale is recommended as the outcome measure for global improvement in pain. The SF-36 single pain interference question and the Multidimensional Pain Inventory (MPI) or Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) pain interference items are recommended as the outcome measures for pain interference after SCI. Brush or cotton wool and at least one high-threshold von Frey filament are recommended to test mechanical allodynia/hyperalgesia while a Peltier-type thermotester is recommended to test thermal allodynia/hyperalgesia. The International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) or Bryce-Ragnarsson pain taxonomies are recommended for classification of pain after SCI, while the Neuropathic Pain Scale (NPS) is recommended for measuring change in neuropathic pain and the Leeds Assessment of Neuropathic Symptoms and Signs (LANSS) for quantitating neuropathic and nociceptive pain discrimination.

