20960546
Surgical therapy for diabesity.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus affects more than 170 million people worldwide. Because this disease is strongly linked to obesity, the term "diabesity" has been coined to describe the confluence of the 2 disease processes. Bariatric surgery has been performed for many years to achieve sustained weight loss in the morbidly obese population. As a secondary effect, a remarkable improvement in glycemic control is commonly achieved postoperatively. This has led to substantial interest in the use of bariatric procedures to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus. Surgical procedures in common use include the adjustable gastric band, the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, the biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch, and the sleeve gastrectomy. Additionally, several investigational procedures including the ileal interposition and duodenal-jejunal bypass have been proposed as primary interventions for type 2 diabetes mellitus. These operations achieve their metabolic effects through a combination of volume restriction, intestinal bypass, and hormonal changes. As more data become available on the positive effect of bariatric procedures on type 2 diabetes mellitus, the use of such operations may grow. Bariatric surgery may ultimately become a major tool in the long-term treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. This manuscript presents an extensive review of the literature supporting these concepts.

19651070
The first decade of a laparoscopic donor nephrectomy program: effect of surgeon and institution experience with 512 cases from 1996 to 2006.
Although the procedure is generally safe, significant morbidity and even mortality have occurred after laparoscopic donor nephrectomy (LDN). The learning curves for both surgeons and institutions with LDN have not been well delineated, and longterm donor data are not well reported. A retrospective study of the initial 512 patients undergoing LDN performed at Mount Sinai Medical Center between October 1996 and March 2006 was performed. Intraoperative and immediate postoperative surgical outcomes were reviewed. Univariate analysis and multivariate logistic regressions were performed to identify predictors of outcomes, including the experience level of individual surgeons and of the institution. Longitudinal followup data of donor patients between 1 month and 9 years were obtained. Mean donor age was 39.2 years, and 54.6% of patients were women. Left kidneys were procured in 84.0%. Operative time averaged 215.2 minutes, and warm ischemia time, 166.6 seconds. The conversion rate was 1.4%, and hand-assistance was used in 49.9%. The intraoperative complication rate was 5.5%, 30-day complication rate 9.4%, and 1.4% of patients required reoperation. Immediate graft survival was 97.1%, acute tubular necrosis occurred in 8.5%, and delayed graft function in 3.7%. At a mean followup of 37.2 months, delayed donor complications were infrequent, but included chronic pain, hypertension, incisional hernia, and small bowel obstruction. Although individual surgeons and our institution gained experience, operative and warm ischemia times decreased significantly, but complication rates were unchanged. Although a learning curve was discovered for operative time and warm ischemia time, excellent results can be achieved during the early experience of both surgeons and institutions with LDN, and maintained over time. Younger, female, and nonobese donors were associated with fewer complications. Longterm donor morbidity is uncommon, but mandates better followup.

19585070
Routine management of stricture after gastric bypass and predictors of subsequent weight loss.
Gastrojejunal anastomotic stricture is the most commonly occurring short-term complication after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Endoscopic balloon dilation is the first-line treatment for stricture. However, an optimal dilation protocol has not been identified. This study aimed to document routine management of stricture after laparoscopic gastric bypass and its impact on postoperative weight loss. Charts of patients who underwent gastric bypass from 2000 to 2006 were reviewed using a standardized abstraction form. Patients with stricture were matched with control subjects based on age +/-5 years, gender, and preoperative body mass index (BMI +/- 5). Patients with at least 6 months of follow-up assessment were included in the study. Of the 113 patients included in the study, 20% were male, 26% black, 19% Hispanic, and 51% white. Their mean age was 42 +/- 10 years (range, 22-66 years). The mean preoperative BMI was 47.0 +/- 5.4 kg/m(2) for the case group and 46.6 +/- 5.5 kg/m(2) for the control group (p = 0.3). After adjustment for patient characteristics, using a larger balloon was associated with reduced odds of stricture recurrence (odds ratio [OR], 0.32; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.12-0.85; p = 0.02). All the patients were without signs or symptoms of stricture at the last follow-up visit (20 +/- 17 months). Weight loss was similar between the two groups. The percentage of estimated weight loss (%EWL) at 12 months postoperatively was 66% for the study participants and 67% for the control subjects (p = 0.5). Baseline alcohol use and higher preoperative BMI were associated with a higher BMI 6 months postoperatively (p = 0.004 and p < 0.001, respectively). Initial dilation with a larger balloon is safe and may prevent stricture recurrence. Further study of modifiable risk factors for reduced weight loss after surgery, such as alcohol use, may improve patient outcomes.

19421971
Role of surgery in management of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes is one of the most common diseases in the United States, with 1.5 million new cases reported in 2005 and a projected 48.3 million diabetics in the year 2050. Despite the disease's remarkably high prevalence and the substantial efforts focused on pharmacological treatment of the disease, current dietary, behavioral, and medical therapies have achieved only limited success. For over 2 decades, bariatric surgeons have recognized that gastric bypass surgery causes a remarkable, durable improvement in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Remarkably, this normalization of glucose metabolism occurs within several weeks of surgery, long before substantial weight loss takes place. As early as in 1987, data have been available demonstrating that 83% of patients with diabetes and 99% of those with impaired glucose tolerance become euglycemic after gastric bypass surgery. Despite the availability of this effective treatment for diabetes, the primary therapy for type 2 diabetes mellitus has remained medical. In this article, we review some of the hypotheses about how bariatric operations affect glucose metabolism and diabetes as well as the research that has been done to elucidate these mechanisms. Additionally, we discuss how surgery may one day represent an important management option for type 2 diabetes mellitus.

19250877
Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass after previous Nissen fundoplication.


18435881
Postoperative pain after laparoscopic ventral hernia repair: a prospective comparison of sutures versus tacks.
Mesh fixation in laparoscopic ventral hernia repair typically involves the use of tacks, transabdominal permanent sutures, or both of these. We compared postoperative pain after repair with either of these 2 methods. Patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair at the Mount Sinai Medical Center were prospectively enrolled in the study. They were sorted into 2 groups (1) those undergoing hernia repairs consisting primarily of transabdominal suture fixation and (2) those undergoing hernia repairs consisting primarily of tack fixation. The patients were not randomized. The technique of surgical repair was based on surgeon preference. A telephone survey was used to follow-up at 1 week, 1 month, and 2 months postoperatively. From 2004 through 2005, 50 patients were enrolled in the study. Twenty-nine had hernia repair primarily with transabdominal sutures, and 21 had repair primarily with tacks. Both groups had similar average age, BMI, hernia defect size, operative time, and postoperative length of stay. Pain scores at 1 week, 1 month, and 2 months were similar. Both groups also had similar times to return to work and need for narcotic pain medication. Patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair with primarily transabdominal sutures or tacks experience similar postoperative pain. The choice of either of these fixation methods during surgery should not be based on risk of postoperative pain.

18027049
Gastric bypass pouch and stoma reduction using a transoral endoscopic anchor placement system: a feasibility study.
Weight regain after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass may be caused by pouch enlargement or dilatation of the gastrojejunostomy (stoma). In order to avoid the substantial morbidity of revisional bariatric surgery, investigators have recently demonstrated the feasibility of reducing stoma diameter using transoral endoscopic suturing techniques. Our aim was to demonstrate the feasibility of performing both pouch and stomal reduction using transoral endoscopically placed tissue anchors in an ex vivo and acute animate model. Part I: We created an ex vivo model of a dilated gastric pouch and stoma using four explanted porcine stomachs. The stomach was divided to create an upper pouch of approx. 100 ml volume, which was reconnected to the lower portion of the stomach (gastric remnant) via an anastomosis of 18 to 20 mm diameter. Endoscopically placed anchors were then used to create plications of the stoma and reduce its diameter. In two stomachs, anchor plications were also used to decrease pouch volume. Pouch volumes and stoma diameters were measured pre- and post-procedure. Part II: A similar experimental model was created in vivo using three pigs. Anchors were placed in the stoma and pouch. The animals were immediately sacrificed and similar measurements were obtained. In the ex vivo model, stoma diameter was successfully reduced in all four stomachs by a mean of 8 mm (41%). This represented a mean decrease in cross-sectional area of 65%. Pouch volume was reduced by a mean of 28 ml (30%) in two stomachs. Stomal plications were successfully placed in two of the live animals, with a mean stoma diameter reduction of 11.5 mm (53%). Feasibility of pouch reduction using plicating anchors was confirmed. This is the first study to demonstrate the feasibility of using endoscopically placed tissue anchors to reduce both stoma diameter and pouch volume. This technique may ultimately be clinically useful in treating weight regain after gastric bypass surgery.

17964919
Bariatric surgery for morbid obesity--a cure for metabolic syndrome?
At present there is no single medication that targets the metabolic syndrome directly. Bariatric surgery, a treatment option for morbidly obese individuals who fail medical therapy, has been shown to be very effective in treating multiple aspects of the metabolic syndrome. The decrease in insulin resistance is because of significant weight loss and by enhancing secretion of gut hormones such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1).

17593464
Laparoscopic retrieval of intraabdominal foreign bodies.
The use of laparoscopy has been described as the means of removing intraabdominal foreign bodies, both intraperitoneal and intraluminal, from the stomach or bowel. An early report detailed the laparoscopic removal of translocated intrauterine devices from the peritoneal cavity. Laparoscopic removal of a retained surgical sponge also has been reported. For large ingested objects that cannot be retrieved by flexible endoscopy, laparoscopic gastrotomy and foreign body removal have been described. The authors recently had three cases of laparoscopic foreign body retrieval. The first case involved a young man who had ingested latex gloves, causing gastrointestinal bleeding. Endoscopic retrieval was unsuccessful. A laparoscopic gastrotomy was performed, with the retrieval of four gloves, followed by intracorporeal, sutured closure of the gastrotomy. The second case involved the laparoscopic removal of a Penrose drain around the distal esophagus. The patient had initially undergone a laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication, vagotomy, and gastrojejunostomy for the management of reflux and a duodenal stricture. He had persistent dysphagia after surgery, prompting takedown of the fundoplication several months later. When his dysphagia did not improve, a retained Penrose drain that had been placed around the distal esophagus at the initial operation was discovered on computed tomography. This was removed laparoscopically. At this writing, 18 months after the initial operation, the patient has complete resolution of dysphagia. The third case involved a duodenojejunal fistula caused by multiple ingested magnets that had eroded through the bowel wall. The fistula was divided laparoscopically, and 16 disk-shaped magnets were removed. The duodenum and jejunum were repaired with laparoscopic suturing and stapling. All three patients did well after surgery. Laparoscopy can be an excellent method for abdominal foreign body retrieval. Electronic supplementary material: The online version of this article (doi: 10.1007/s00464-006-9011-0) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

17386400
Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy for morbid obesity: a review.


17180288
Laparoscopic donor nephrectomy: intraoperative safety, immediate morbidity, and delayed complications with 500 cases.
Several large series of laparoscopic donor nephrectomy (LDN) have been published, largely focusing on immediate results and short-term complications. The aim of this study was to examine the results of LDN and collect medium-term and long-term donor followup. We examined the results of two surgeons who performed 500 consecutive LDNs from 1996 to 2005. Prospective databases were reviewed for both donors and recipients to record demographics, medical history, intraoperative events, and complications. Patients were followed between 1 month and 9 years after surgery to assess for delayed complications, especially hypertension, renal insufficiency, incisional hernia, bowel obstruction, and chronic pain. Left kidneys were procured in 86.2% of cases. Mean operative time was 3.5 h, and warm ischemia time averaged 3.4 min. Hand-assistance was used in 13.8%, and conversion rate was 1.8%. Intraoperative complication rate was 5.8% and was predominantly bleeding (93.1%). Most (86.2%) of the operative complications occurred during the initial 150 cases of a surgeon, compared with 10.3% in the subsequent 150 cases (p = 0.003). Operative time decreased by 87 min after the initial 150 cases (p < 0.001). Immediate graft survival was 97.5%. Delayed graft function occurred in 3.0% of recipients, and acute tubular necrosis occurred in 7.0%. Thirty-day donor complication rate was 9.8%. Mean donor creatinine was 1.24 on the first postoperative day, 1.27 at 2 weeks, and 1.24 at 1 year. At a mean followup of 32.8 months, long-term donor complications consisted of 11 cases of hypertension, 9 cases of prolonged pain or paresthesia, 2 incisional hernias, 1 small bowel obstruction requiring laparoscopic lysis of adhesions, and 1 hydrocele requiring repair. LDN can be performed with acceptable immediate morbidity and excellent graft function. Operative time and complications decreased significantly after a surgeon performed 150 cases. Long-term complications were uncommon but included a likely underestimated incidence of hypertension.

18163170
A consensus document on robotic surgery.


17704879
Multimedia article. Laparoscopic repair of a perforated marginal ulcer 2 years after gastric bypass.
The authors present the case of a 43-year-old women who underwent a laparoscopic gastric bypass in 2003 for morbid obesity. They report that 2 years later, she had maintained significant weight loss, but had developed acute abdominal pain, followed by nausea and emesis. In the emergency room, she had diffuse tenderness, tachycardia, and leukocytosis. After initial resuscitation, a computed tomography was performed, which showed free air above the liver and thickened small bowel loops. She was brought emergently to the operating room for laparoscopy. At surgery, turbid fluid and inflamed small bowel loops were seen. A perforated marginal ulcer was discovered in the Roux limb, approximately 2 cm distal to the gastrojejunal anastomosis. The perforation was oversewn primarily and patched with omentum. The repair was tested by intraoperative endoscopy. A gastrostomy tube also was placed within the gastric remnant for enteral access. The patient did extremely well postoperatively, and had an uneventful postoperative course. She was discharged on postoperative day 4. The gastrostomy tube was removed at 1 month, and at this writing, she remains well since surgery. An upper endoscopy at 2 months was completely normal, and the Helicobacter pylori test results were negative. The gastric pouch had not significantly enlarged since initial surgery, as indicated by both endoscopy and barium study. Marginal ulcer is reported to be 0.6% to 16% after laparoscopic gastric bypass. Etiologies include gastrogastric fistula, excessively large gastric pouch containing antral mucosa, H. pylori infection, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory use, and smoking. Unfortunately, none of these applied to the reported patient. Because her exact etiology remains unknown, she at this writing continues to receive proton pump inhibitor therapy.

