20018674
Involvement of the Toll-like receptor 4 pathway and use of TNF-alpha antagonists for treatment of the mucopolysaccharidoses.
Enzyme replacement therapy is currently available for three of the mucopolysaccharidoses (MPSs) but has limited effects on the skeletal lesions. We investigated the involvement of the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling pathway in the pathogenesis of MPS bone and joint disease, and the use of the anti-TNF-alpha drug, Remicade (Centocor, Inc.), for treatment. TLR4 KO (TLR4(lps-/-)) mice were interbred with MPS VII mice to produce double-KO (DKO) animals. The DKO mice had longer and thinner faces and longer femora as revealed by micro-computed tomography analysis compared with MPS VII mice. Histological analyses also revealed more organized and thinner growth plates. The serum levels of TNF-alpha were normalized in the DKO animals, and the levels of phosphorylated STAT1 and STAT3 in articular chondrocytes were corrected. These findings led us to evaluate the effects of Remicade in MPS VI rats. When initiated at 1 month of age, i.v. treatment prevented the elevation of TNF-alpha, receptor activator of NF-kappaB, and other inflammatory molecules not only in the blood but in articular chondrocytes and fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs). Treatment of 6-month-old animals also reduced the levels of these molecules to normal. The number of apoptotic articular chondrocytes in MPS VI rats was similarly reduced, with less infiltration of synovial tissue into the underlying bone. These studies revealed the important role of TLR4 signaling in MPS bone and joint disease and suggest that targeting TNF-alpha may have positive therapeutic effects.

18281275
Autoproteolytic cleavage and activation of human acid ceramidase.
Herein we report the mechanism of human acid ceramidase (AC; N-acylsphingosine deacylase) cleavage and activation. A highly purified, recombinant human AC precursor underwent self-cleavage into alpha and beta subunits, similar to other members of the N-terminal nucleophile hydrolase superfamily. This reaction proceeded with first order kinetics, characteristic of self-cleavage. AC self-cleavage occurred most rapidly at acidic pH, but also at neutral pH. Site-directed mutagenesis and expression studies demonstrated that Cys-143 was an essential nucleophile that was required at the cleavage site. Other amino acids participating in AC cleavage included Arg-159 and Asp-162. Mutations at these three amino acids prevented AC cleavage and activity, the latter assessed using BODIPY-conjugated ceramide. We propose the following mechanism for AC self-cleavage and activation. Asp-162 likely forms a hydrogen bond with Cys-143, initiating a conformational change that allows Arg-159 to act as a proton acceptor. This, in turn, facilitates an intermediate thioether bond between Cys-143 and Ile-142, the site of AC cleavage. Hydrolysis of this bond is catalyzed by water. Treatment of recombinant AC with the cysteine protease inhibitor, methyl methanethiosulfonate, inhibited both cleavage and enzymatic activity, further indicating that cysteine-mediated self-cleavage is required for ceramide hydrolysis.

18079441
Mechanism of glycosaminoglycan-mediated bone and joint disease: implications for the mucopolysaccharidoses and other connective tissue diseases.
We have previously shown that glycosaminoglycan (GAG) storage in animal models of the mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) leads to inflammation and apoptosis within cartilage. We have now extended these findings to synovial tissue and further explored the mechanism underlying GAG-mediated disease. Analysis of MPS rats, cats, and/or dogs revealed that MPS synovial fibroblasts and fluid displayed elevated expression of numerous inflammatory molecules, including several proteins important for lipopolysaccharide signaling (eg, Toll-like receptor 4 and lipoprotein-binding protein). The expression of tumor necrosis factor, in particular, was elevated up to 50-fold, leading to up-regulation of the osteoclast survival factor, receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand, and the appearance of multinucleated osteoclast-like cells in the MPS bone marrow. Treatment of normal synovial fibroblasts with GAGs also led to production of the prosurvival lipid sphingosine-1-phosphate, resulting in enhanced cell proliferation, consistent with the hyperplastic synovial tissue observed in MPS patients. In contrast, GAG treatment of normal chondrocytes led to production of the proapoptotic lipid ceramide, confirming the enhanced cell death we had previously observed in MPS cartilage. These findings have important implications for the pathogenesis and treatment of MPS and have further defined the mechanism of GAG-stimulated disease.

