21147994
Feedforward compensation mediated by the central and peripheral actions of a single neuropeptide discovered using representational difference analysis.
Compensatory mechanisms are often used to achieve stability by reducing variance, which can be accomplished via negative feedback during homeostatic regulation. In principle, compensation can also be implemented through feedforward mechanisms where a regulator acts to offset the anticipated output variation; however, few such neural mechanisms have been demonstrated. We provide evidence that an Aplysia neuropeptide, identified using an enhanced representational difference analysis procedure, implements feedforward compensation within the feeding network. We named the novel peptide "allatotropin-related peptide" (ATRP) because of its similarity to insect allatotropin. Mass spectrometry confirmed the peptide's identity, and in situ hybridization and immunostaining mapped its distribution in the Aplysia CNS. ATRP is present in the higher-order cerebral-buccal interneuron (CBI) CBI-4, but not in CBI-2. Previous work showed that CBI-4-elicited motor programs have a shorter protraction duration than those elicited by CBI-2. Here we show that ATRP shortens protraction duration of CBI-2-elicited ingestive programs, suggesting a contribution of ATRP to the parametric differences between CBI-4-evoked and CBI-2-evoked programs. Importantly, because Aplysia muscle contractions are a graded function of motoneuronal activity, one consequence of the shortening of protraction is that it can weaken protraction movements. However, this potential weakening is offset by feedforward compensatory actions exerted by ATRP. Centrally, ATRP increases the activity of protraction motoneurons. Moreover, ATRP is present in peripheral varicosities of protraction motoneurons and enhances peripheral motoneuron-elicited protraction muscle contractions. Therefore, feedforward compensatory mechanisms mediated by ATRP make it possible to generate a faster movement with an amplitude that is not greatly reduced, thereby producing stability.

20592213
Repetition priming of motoneuronal activity in a small motor network: intercellular and intracellular signaling.
The characteristics of central pattern generator (CPG) outputs are subject to extensive modulation. Previous studies of neuromodulation largely focused on immediate actions of neuromodulators, i.e., actions that were exerted at the time when either neuromodulators were present or neuromodulatory inputs to the CPG were active. However, neuromodulatory actions are known to persist when neuromodulators are no longer present. In Aplysia, stimulation of cerebral-buccal interneuron-2 (CBI-2), which activates the feeding CPG, produces a repetition priming of motor programs. This priming is reflected in an increase of firing of motoneurons. As CBI-2 contains two neuromodulatory peptides, FCAP (feeding circuit-activating peptide) and CP2 (cerebral peptide 2), we hypothesized that repetition priming may involve persistent peptidergic neuromodulation. We find that these peptides produce priming-like effects, i.e., they increase the firing of radula-opening (B48) and radula-closing (B8) motoneurons during motor programs. Proekt et al. (2004, 2007) showed that repetition priming of neuron B8 is implemented by modulatory inputs that B8 receives from the CPG. In contrast, our current findings indicate that priming of B48 may be implemented by a direct peptidergic modulation of its intrinsic characteristics via a pathway that activates cAMP. We suggest that the direct versus indirect, i.e., CPG-dependent, repetition priming may be related to the type of input that individual motoneurons receive from the CPG. We suggest that in motoneurons that are driven by concurrent excitation-inhibition, repetition priming is indirect as it is preferentially implemented via modulation of the output of CPGs. In contrast, in motoneurons that are driven by alternating excitation-inhibition, direct modulation of motoneurons may be preferentially used.

20181731
Composite modulatory feedforward loop contributes to the establishment of a network state.
Feedforward loops (FFLs) are one of many network motifs identified in a variety of complex networks, but their functional role in neural networks is not well understood. We provide evidence that combinatorial actions of multiple modulators may be organized as FFLs to promote a specific network state in the Aplysia feeding motor network. The Aplysia feeding central pattern generator (CPG) receives two distinct inputs-a higher-order interneuron cerebral-buccal interneuron-2 (CBI-2) and the esophageal nerve (EN)-that promote ingestive and egestive motor programs, respectively. EN stimulation elicits a persistent egestive network state, which enables the network to temporarily express egestive programs following a switch of input from the EN to CBI-2. Previous work showed that a modulatory CPG element, B65, is specifically activated by the EN and participates in establishing the egestive state by enhancing activity of egestion-promoting B20 interneurons while suppressing activity and synaptic outputs of ingestion-promoting B40 interneurons. Here a peptidergic contribution is mediated by small cardioactive peptide (SCP). Immunostaining and mass spectrometry show that SCP is present in the EN and is released on EN stimulation. Importantly, SCP directly enhances activity and synaptic outputs of B20 and suppresses activity and synaptic outputs of B40. Moreover, SCP promotes B65 activity. Thus the direct and indirect (through B65) pathways to B20 and B40 from SCPergic neurons constitute two FFLs with one functioning to promote egestive output and the other to suppress ingestive output. This composite FFL consisting of the two combined FFLs appears to be an effective means to co-regulate activity of two competing elements that do not inhibit each other, thereby contributing to establish specific network states.

20053896
Distinct mechanisms produce functionally complementary actions of neuropeptides that are structurally related but derived from different precursors.
Many bioactive neuropeptides containing RFamide at their C terminus have been described in both invertebrates and vertebrates. To obtain insight into the functional logic of RFamide signaling, we investigate it here in the feeding system of Aplysia. We focus on the expression, localization, and actions of two families of RFamide peptides, the FRFamides and FMRFamide, in the central neuronal circuitry and the peripheral musculature that generate the feeding movements. We describe the cloning of the FRFamide precursor protein and show that the FRFamides and FMRFamide are derived from different precursors. We map the expression of the FRFamide and FMRFamide precursors in the feeding circuitry using in situ hybridization and immunostaining and confirm proteolytic processing of the FRFamide precursor by mass spectrometry. We show that the two precursors are expressed in different populations of sensory neurons in the feeding system. In a representative feeding muscle, we demonstrate the presence of both FRFamides and FMRFamide and their release, probably from the processes of the sensory neurons in the muscle. Both centrally and in the periphery, the FRFamides and FMRFamide act in distinct ways, apparently through distinct mechanisms, and nevertheless, from an overall functional perspective, their actions are complementary. Together, the FRFamides and FMRFamide convert feeding motor programs from ingestive to egestive and depress feeding muscle contractions. We conclude that these structurally related peptides, although derived from different precursors, expressed in different neurons, and acting through different mechanisms, remain related to each other in the functional roles that they play in the system.

19846618
Motor outputs in a multitasking network: relative contributions of inputs and experience-dependent network states.
Network outputs elicited by a specific stimulus may differ radically depending on the momentary network state. One class of networks states-experience-dependent states-is known to operate in numerous networks, yet the fundamental question concerning the relative role that inputs and states play in determining the network outputs remains to be investigated in a behaviorally relevant manner. Because previous work indicated that in the isolated nervous system the motor outputs of the Aplysia feeding network are affected by experience-dependent states, we sought to establish the behavioral relevance of these outputs. We analyzed the phasing of firing of radula opening motoneurons (B44 and B48) relative to other previously characterized motoneurons. We found that the overall pattern of motoneuronal firing corresponds to the phasing of movements during feeding behavior, thus indicating a behavioral relevance of network outputs. Previous studies suggested that network inputs act to trigger a response rather than to shape its characteristics, with the latter function being fulfilled by network states. We show this is an oversimplification. In a rested state, different inputs elicited distinct responses, indicating that inputs not only trigger but also shape the responses. However, depending on the combination of inputs and states, responses were either dramatically altered by the network state or were indistinguishable from those observed in the rested state. We suggest that the relative contributions of inputs and states are dynamically regulated and, rather than being fixed, depend on the specifics of states and inputs.

19776260
Distinct inhibitory neurons exert temporally specific control over activity of a motoneuron receiving concurrent excitation and inhibition.
Recent work suggests that concurrent excitation and inhibition originating in central pattern generators (CPGs) may be used to control rhythmic motoneuronal activity. The specific roles that the inhibition plays in such cases are not well understood, however, in part because of the lack of identification of presynaptic inhibitory neurons. Here we demonstrate that, in the Aplysia feeding CPG, inhibitory inputs may be critical for flexible control of the activity of motoneurons in different forms of behavior. The feeding CPG generates ingestive and egestive motor programs, differing in the high and low activity, respectively, of the motoneuron B8 during the retraction phase of the programs. We show that, during retraction, B8 receives concurrent excitation and inhibition that produces a high-conductance state. The inhibition originates in two types of CPG neurons, B4/5 and B70, that are more active in egestion than ingestion and play a role in suppressing B8 activity during egestion. In turn, the activities of both B4/5 and B70 are suppressed by the ingestion-promoting descending interneuron CBI-3 (for cerebral-buccal interneuron 3). Thus, concurrent excitation and inhibition may be an effective means of controlling motoneuronal activity in a behavior-dependent manner. More detailed analyses reveal, furthermore, that B4/5 and B70 exert complementary actions by acting preferentially in the early and late part of retraction, respectively. Thus, the use of multiple neurons to generate inhibitory inputs to motoneurons that receive concurrent excitation and inhibition brings an additional level of flexibility that allows a temporally specific control of motoneuronal activity within a single phase of motor programs.

20397622
Evolving concepts of arousal: insights from simple model systems.
Arousal states strongly influence behavioral decisions. In general, arousal promotes activity and enhances responsiveness to sensory stimuli. Earlier work has emphasized general, or nonspecific, effects of arousal on multiple classes of behaviors. However, contemporary work indicates that arousal has quite specific effects on behavior. Here we review studies of arousal-related circuitry in molluscan model systems. Neural substrates for both general and specific effects of arousal have been identified. Based on the scope of their actions, we can distinguish two major classes of arousal elements: localized versus general. Actions of localized arousal elements are often limited to one class of behavior, and may thereby mediate specific effects of arousal. In contrast, general arousal elements may influence multiple classes of behaviors, and mediate both specific and nonspecific effects of arousal. One common way in which general arousal elements influence multiple behaviors is by acting on localized arousal elements of distinct networks. Often, effects on distinct networks have different time courses that may facilitate formation of specific behavioral sequences. This review highlights prominent roles of serotonergic systems in arousal that are conserved in gastropod molluscs despite extreme diversification of body forms, diet and ecological niches. The studies also indicate that the serotonergic elements can act as either localized or general arousal elements. We discuss the implications of these findings across animals.

19020028
Neural analog of arousal: persistent conditional activation of a feeding modulator by serotonergic initiators of locomotion.
We investigated how a neural analog of a form of arousal induced by a mildly noxious stimulus can promote two antagonistic responses, locomotion and feeding. Two pairs of cerebral serotonergic interneurons in Aplysia, CC9 and CC10, were persistently activated by transient noxious stimuli. Direct stimulation of CC9-10 activated locomotor activity that outlasted the stimulation and enhanced subsequent nerve-evoked locomotor programs. Thus, CC9-10 function both as initiators and as modulators of the locomotor network. CC9-10 also interacted with the feeding circuit but in a fundamentally different manner. CC9-10 did not directly trigger feeding activity or activate feeding command or pattern generating interneurons. CC9-10 did, however, elicit slow EPSPs in serotonergic cells that modulate feeding responses, the metacerebral cells (MCCs). CC9-10 persistently enhanced MCC excitability, but did not activate the MCCs directly. Previous work has demonstrated that the MCCs are activated during food ingestion via a sensory neuron C2. Interestingly, we found that CC9-10 stimulation converted subthreshold C2 mediated excitation of the MCC into suprathreshold excitation. Transient noxious stimuli also enhanced MCC excitability, and this was largely mediated by CC9-10. To summarize, CC9-10 exert actions on the feeding network, but their functional effects appear to be conditional on the presence of food-related inputs to the MCCs. A potential advantage of this arrangement is that it may prevent conflicting responses from being directly evoked by noxious stimuli while also facilitating the ability of food-related stimuli to generate feeding responses in the aftermath of noxious stimulation.

18989362
Predicting adaptive behavior in the environment from central nervous system dynamics.
To generate adaptive behavior, the nervous system is coupled to the environment. The coupling constrains the dynamical properties that the nervous system and the environment must have relative to each other if adaptive behavior is to be produced. In previous computational studies, such constraints have been used to evolve controllers or artificial agents to perform a behavioral task in a given environment. Often, however, we already know the controller, the real nervous system, and its dynamics. Here we propose that the constraints can also be used to solve the inverse problem--to predict from the dynamics of the nervous system the environment to which they are adapted, and so reconstruct the production of the adaptive behavior by the entire coupled system. We illustrate how this can be done in the feeding system of the sea slug Aplysia. At the core of this system is a central pattern generator (CPG) that, with dynamics on both fast and slow time scales, integrates incoming sensory stimuli to produce ingestive and egestive motor programs. We run models embodying these CPG dynamics--in effect, autonomous Aplysia agents--in various feeding environments and analyze the performance of the entire system in a realistic feeding task. We find that the dynamics of the system are tuned for optimal performance in a narrow range of environments that correspond well to those that Aplysia encounter in the wild. In these environments, the slow CPG dynamics implement efficient ingestion of edible seaweed strips with minimal sensory information about them. The fast dynamics then implement a switch to a different behavioral mode in which the system ignores the sensory information completely and follows an internal "goal," emergent from the dynamics, to egest again a strip that proves to be inedible. Key predictions of this reconstruction are confirmed in real feeding animals.

18287508
An input-representing interneuron regulates spike timing and thereby phase switching in a motor network.
Despite the importance of spike-timing regulation in network functioning, little is known about this regulation at the cellular level. In the Aplysia feeding network, we show that interneuron B65 regulates the timing of the spike initiation of phase-switch neurons B64 and cerebral-buccal interneuron-5/6 (CBI-5/6), and thereby determines the identity of the neuron that acts as a protraction terminator. Previous work showed that B64 begins to fire before the end of protraction phase and terminates protraction in CBI-2-elicited ingestive, but not in CBI-2-elicited egestive programs, thus indicating that the spike timing and phase-switching function of B64 depend on the type of the central pattern generator (CPG)-elicited response rather than on the input used to activate the CPG. Here, we find that CBI-5/6 is a protraction terminator in egestive programs elicited by the esophageal nerve (EN), but not by CBI-2, thus indicating that, in contrast to B64, the spike timing and protraction-terminating function of CBI-5/6 depends on the input to the CPG rather than the response type. Interestingly, B65 activity also depends on the input in that B65 is highly active in EN-elicited programs, but not in CBI-2-elicited programs independent of whether the programs are ingestive or egestive. Notably, during EN-elicited egestive programs, hyperpolarization of B65 delays the onset of CBI-5/6 firing, whereas in CBI-2-elicited ingestive programs, B65 stimulation simultaneously advances CBI-5/6 firing and delays B64 firing, thereby substituting CBI-5/6 for B64 as the protraction terminator. Thus, we identified a neural mechanism that, in an input-dependent manner, regulates spike timing and thereby the functional role of specific neurons.

17913984
Feeding CPG in Aplysia directly controls two distinct outputs of a compartmentalized interneuron that functions as a CPG element.
In the context of motor program generation in Aplysia, we characterize several functional aspects of intraneuronal compartmentalization in an interganglionic interneuron, CBI-5/6. CBI-5/6 was shown previously to have a cerebral compartment (CC) that includes a soma that does not generate full-size action potentials and a buccal compartment (BC) that does. We find that the synaptic connections made by the BC of CBI-5/6 in the buccal ganglion counter the activity of protraction-phase neurons and reinforce the activity of retraction-phase neurons. In buccal motor programs, the BC of CBI-5/6 fires phasically, and its premature activation can phase advance protraction termination and retraction initiation. Thus the BC of CBI-5/6 can act as an element of the central pattern generator (CPG). During protraction, the CC of CBI-5/6 receives direct excitatory inputs from the CPG elements, B34 and B63, and during retraction, it receives antidromically propagating action potentials that originate in the BC of CBI-5/6. Consequently, in its CC, CBI-5/6 receives depolarizing inputs during both protraction and retraction, and these depolarizations can be transmitted via electrical coupling to other neurons. In contrast, in its BC, CBI-5/6 uses spike-dependent synaptic transmission. Thus the CPG directly and differentially controls the program phases in which the two compartments of CBI-5/6 may transmit information to its targets.

17913915
State dependence of spike timing and neuronal function in a motor pattern generating network.
When sustained firing of a neuron is similar in different types of motor programs, its role in the generation of these programs is often similar. We investigated whether this is also the case for neurons involved in phase transition. In the Aplysia feeding central pattern generator (CPG), identified interneuron B64 starts firing at the transition between the protraction and the retraction phases of all types of motor programs, and its firing is sustained during the retraction phase. It was thought that B64 functions as a protraction terminator as it provides strong inhibitory input to protraction interneurons and motoneurons. Furthermore, premature activation of B64 can lead to premature termination of the protraction phase. Indeed, as we show here, B64 can terminate the protraction phase regardless of the type of motor program. However, B64 actually only functions as a protraction terminator in ingestive-like but not in egestive-like programs. This differential role of B64 results from a differential timing of the initiation of B64 spiking in the two types of programs. In turn, this differential timing of the initiation of B64 firing is determined by the internal state of the CPG. Thus, this study indicates the importance of the timing of initiation of firing in determining the functional role of a neuron and demonstrates that this role depends on the activity-dependent state of the network.

17392465
From hunger to satiety: reconfiguration of a feeding network by Aplysia neuropeptide Y.
A shift in motivational state often produces behavioral change, but the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. In the marine mollusc, Aplysia californica, feeding-induced transition from a hunger to satiation state leads to a slowdown and an eventual termination of feeding. Because the multifunctional feeding network generates both ingestion and the competing response, egestion, it is possible that the transition from a hunger to a satiety state is associated with network reconfiguration that results in production of fewer ingestive and more egestive responses. Chronic electrophysiological recordings in free-feeding Aplysia showed that as the meal progressed, food elicited fewer ingestive responses and simultaneously increased the number of egestive responses. Injections of Aplysia neuropeptide Y (apNPY) reduced food intake and slowed down the rate of ingestion. apNPY was localized to buccal-ganglion afferents originating in the gut-innervating esophageal nerve (EN), a nerve involved both in satiation and in the generation of egestive programs. During EN stimulation, apNPY was released in the feeding circuit. Importantly, stimulation of the cerebral-buccal interneuron-2, a command-like interneuron that is activated by food and normally elicits ingestive responses, elicited egestive responses in the presence of apNPY. This was accompanied by increased activity of the egestion-promoting interneuron B20 and decreased activity in the ingestion-promoting interneuron B40. Thus, apNPYergic reconfiguration of the feeding central pattern generator plays a role in the gradual transition from hunger to satiety states. More generally, changes in the motivational states may involve not only simple network inhibition but may also require network reconfiguration.

17314236
Multiple contributions of an input-representing neuron to the dynamics of the aplysia feeding network.
In Aplysia, mutually antagonistic ingestive and egestive behaviors are produced by the same multifunctional central pattern generator (CPG) circuit. Interestingly, higher-order inputs that activate the CPG do not directly specify whether the resulting motor program is ingestive or egestive because the slow dynamics of the network intervene. One input, the commandlike cerebral-buccal interneuron 2 (CBI-2), slowly drives the motor output toward ingestion, whereas another input, the esophageal nerve (EN), drives the motor output toward egestion. When the input is switched from EN to CBI-2, the motor output does not switch immediately and remains egestive. Here, we investigated how these slow dynamics are implemented on the interneuronal level. We found that activity of two CPG interneurons, B20 and B40, tracked the motor output regardless of the input, whereas activity of another CPG interneuron, B65, tracked the input regardless of the motor output. Furthermore, we show that the slow dynamics of the network are implemented, at least in part, in the slow dynamics of the interaction between the input-representing and the output-representing neurons. We conclude that 1) a population of CPG interneurons, recruited during a particular motor program, simultaneously encodes both the input that is used to elicit the motor program and the output elicited by this input; and 2) activity of the input-representing neurons may serve to bias the future motor programs.

17202238
Activity-dependent peptidergic modulation of the plateau-generating neuron B64 in the feeding network of Aplysia.
Many behaviors display various forms of activity-dependent plasticity. An example of such plasticity is the progressive shortening of the duration of protraction phase of feeding responses of Aplysia that occurs when feeding responses are repeatedly elicited. A similar protraction-duration shortening is observed in isolated ganglia of Aplysia when feeding-like motor programs are elicited through a prolonged stimulation of the command-like neuron CBI-2. Here, we investigate a cellular mechanism that may underlie this activity-dependent shortening of protraction duration of feeding motor programs. CBI-2 contains two neuropeptides, CP2 and FCAP. Previous work showed that CP2 shortens protraction duration of CBI-2 elicited programs. We show here that the same is true for FCAP. We also show that both CP2 and FCAP modulated the biophysical properties of a plateau-generating neuron, B64, that plays an important role in terminating the protraction phase of feeding motor programs. We find that prestimulation of CBI-2, as well as superfusion of CP2 and FCAP, lowered the threshold for activation of the plateau potential in B64. The threshold-lowering actions of CBI-2 prestimulation were occluded by superfusion of FCAP and CP2. Furthermore, at elevated temperature, conditions under which peptide release is prevented in Aplysia, prestimulation of CBI-2 does not lower the plateau-potential threshold, whereas superfusion of CP2 and FCAP does. Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that peptides released from CBI-2 lower the threshold for activation of plateau potential in B64, thereby contributing to the shortening of protraction duration when CBI-2 is repeatedly activated.

19830256
Cycle-to-cycle variability as an optimal behavioral strategy.
Aplysia feeding behavior is highly variable from cycle to cycle. In some cycles, when the variability causes a mismatch between the animal's movements and the requirements of the feeding task, the variability makes the behavior unsuccessful. We propose that the behavior is variable nevertheless because the variability serves a higher-order functional purpose. When the animal is faced with a new and only imperfectly known feeding task in each cycle, the variability implements a trial-and-error search through the space of possible feeding movements. Over many cycles, this may be the animal's optimal strategy in an uncertain and changing feeding environment.

