20817531
Oocyte cohesin expression restricted to predictyate stages provides full fertility and prevents aneuploidy.
To ensure correct meiotic chromosome segregation, sister chromatid cohesion (SCC) needs to be maintained from its establishment in prophase I oocytes before birth until continuation of meiosis into metaphase II upon oocyte maturation in the adult. Aging human oocytes suffer a steep increase in chromosome missegregation and aneuploidy, which may be caused by loss of SCC through slow deterioration of cohesin [1-3]. This hypothesis assumes that cohesin expression in embryonic oocytes is sufficient to provide adequate long-term SCC. With increasing age, mouse oocytes deficient in the meiosis-specific cohesin SMC1? massively lose SCC and chiasmata [3, 4]. To test the deterioration hypothesis, we specifically and highly efficiently inactivated the mouse Smc1? gene at the primordial follicle stage shortly after birth, when oocytes had just entered meiosis I dictyate arrest. In the adult, however, irrespective of oocyte age, chiasma positions and SCC are normal. Frequency and size of litters prove full fertility even in aged females. Thus, SMC1? cohesin needs only be expressed during prophase I prior to the primordial follicle stage to ensure SCC up to advanced age of mice.

19345099
Tdrd6 is required for spermiogenesis, chromatoid body architecture, and regulation of miRNA expression.
Chromatoid bodies (CBs) are characteristic spermatid organelles, which were suggested to function in RNA storage and small RNA processing but whose functions remain largely unknown. CB components include Mili, Miwi, and Tudor domain proteins such as Tdrd6, whose contribution to CB structure and function is elusive. We determined gametogenesis stage- and male-specific expression and localization of Tdrd6, identified a C-terminally truncated form as predominant after meiosis I, and demonstrated direct physical interaction of Tdrd6 with the CB components Mili and Miwi. Development from round into elongated spermatids is abrogated in Tdrd6(-/-) mice. Their round spermatids bear "ghost" CBs, whose architecture is greatly disrupted. Mael, Miwi, and Mvh do not localize to the Tdrd6-deficient CBs, but retrotransposons are not significantly activated. However, more than 50 miRNAs are more abundant in Tdrd6(-/-) testes, as are exemplary pre- and pri-miRNAs. We conclude that Tdrd6 is essential for spermiogenesis, for CB structure, and for proper mature and precursor miRNA expression.

19303390
Regulatory T cells sequentially migrate from inflamed tissues to draining lymph nodes to suppress the alloimmune response.
To determine the site and mechanism of suppression by regulatory T (Treg) cells, we investigated their migration and function in an islet allograft model. Treg cells first migrated from blood to the inflamed allograft where they were essential for the suppression of alloimmunity. This process was dependent on the chemokine receptors CCR2, CCR4, and CCR5 and P- and E-selectin ligands. In the allograft, Treg cells were activated and subsequently migrated to the draining lymph nodes (dLNs) in a CCR2, CCR5, and CCR7 fashion; this movement was essential for optimal suppression. Treg cells inhibited dendritic cell migration in a TGF-beta and IL-10 dependent fashion and suppressed antigen-specific T effector cell migration, accumulation, and proliferation in dLNs and allografts. These results showed that sequential migration from blood to the target tissue and to dLNs is required for Treg cells to differentiate and execute fully their suppressive function.

18996922
Cornelia de Lange syndrome mutations in SMC1A or SMC3 affect binding to DNA.
Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a clinically heterogeneous developmental disorder characterized by facial dysmorphia, upper limb malformations, growth and cognitive retardation. Mutations in the sister chromatid cohesion factor genes NIPBL, SMC1A and SMC3 are present in approximately 65% of CdLS patients. In addition to their canonical roles in chromosome segregation, the cohesin proteins are involved in other biological processes such as regulation of gene expression, DNA repair and maintenance of genome stability. To gain insights into the molecular basis of CdLS, we analyzed the affinity of mutated SMC1A and SMC3 hinge domains for DNA. Mutated hinge dimers bind DNA with higher affinity than wild-type proteins. SMC1A- and SMC3-mutated CdLS cell lines display genomic instability and sensitivity to ionizing radiation and interstrand crosslinking agents. We propose that SMC1A and SMC3 CdLS mutations affect the dynamic association between SMC proteins and DNA, providing new clues to the underlying molecular cause of CdLS.

18236401
SWAP-70 regulates mast cell FcepsilonRI-mediated signaling and anaphylaxis.
Mast cells, perhaps best known by their ability to trigger allergic reactions after stimulation through the FcepsilonRI, express the unusual phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-dependent, Rac-binding protein SWAP-70. Here, we show that the IgE-mediated passive cutaneous and the systemic anaphylactic responses are strongly reduced in SWAP-70(-/-) mice. Cultured SWAP-70(-/-) immature bone marrow mast cells (BMMC) are also impaired in FcepsilonRI-mediated degranulation, which can be restored by expression of exogenous wild-type SWAP-70, but less so if a phosphatidylinositol trisphosphate (PIP(3)) binding mutant is expressed. SWAP-70 itself supports inositol-3-phosphate and PIP(3) production, the latter indicating a potential feedback from SWAP-70 towards PI3K. FcepsilonRI-stimulated transcription and release of cytokines is controlled by SWAP-70. Key FcepsilonRI signal transduction events like activation of LAT by phosphorylation, activation of Akt/PKB and of p38 MAP kinase are reduced in SWAP-70(-/-) BMMC, but ERK is strongly hyperactivated. Some requirements for SWAP-70 were apparent only under limited-strength signaling conditions. We suggest that SWAP-70 defines a new element of efficient mast cell activation upon FcepsilonRI signaling, important for the control of mast cell-dependent anaphylaxis.

18094331
SWAP-70 deficiency causes high-affinity plasma cell generation despite impaired germinal center formation.
Germinal centers (GCs) are lymphoid tissue structures central to the generation of long-lived, high-affinity, antibody-forming B cells. However, induction, maintenance, and regulation of GCs are not sufficiently understood. The F-actin-binding, Rac-interacting protein SWAP-70 is strongly expressed in activated B cells like those in B follicles. Recent work suggests that SWAP-70 is involved in B-cell activation, migration, and homing. Therefore, we investigated the role of SWAP-70 in the T-dependent immune response, in GC formation, and in differentiation into plasma and memory B cells. Compared with wt, sheep red blood cell (SRBC)-, or NP-KLH-immunized SWAP-70(-/-) mice have strongly reduced numbers of GCs and GC-specific B cells. However, SWAP-70(-/-) NP-specific B cells accumulate outside of the B follicles, and SWAP-70(-/-) mice show more plasma cells in the red pulp and in the bone marrow, and increased NP-specific Ig and antibody-forming B cells. Yet the memory response is impaired. Thus, SWAP-70 deficiency uncouples GC formation from T-dependent antibody and long-lived plasma cell production and causes extrafollicular generation of high-affinity plasma cells, but does not adequately support the memory response.

