19998324
Pharmacology and immunological actions of a herbal medicine ASHMI on allergic asthma.
Allergic asthma is a chronic and progressive inflammatory disease for which there is no satisfactory treatment. Studies reported tolerability and efficacy of an anti-asthma herbal medicine intervention (ASHMI) for asthma patients, developed from traditional Chinese medicine. To investigate the pharmacological actions of ASHMI on early- and late-phase airway responses (EAR and LAR), Ovalbumin (OVA)-sensitized mice received 6 weeks of ASHMI treatment beginning 24 h following the first intratracheal OVA challenge. EAR were determined 30 min following the fourth challenge and LAR 48 h following the last challenge. ASHMI effects on cytokine secretion, murine tracheal ring contraction and human bronchial smooth muscle cell prostaglandin (PG) production were also determined.ASHMI abolished EAR, which was associated with significantly reduced histamine, leukotriene C4, and OVA-specific IgE levels, as well as LAR, which was associated with significantly reduced bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) eosinophils, decreased airway remodeling, and lower Th2 cytokine levels in BALF and splenocyte cultures. Furthermore, ASHMI inhibited contraction of murine tracheal rings and increased production of the potent smooth muscle relaxer PGI(2). ASHMI abrogation of allergic airway responses is associated with broad effects on asthma pathological mechanisms.

19203662
Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 silences peanut-induced anaphylaxis for a prolonged posttreatment period via IFN-gamma-producing CD8+ T cells.
Food allergy is a serious and sometimes fatal condition for which there is no cure. We previously reported that Food Allergy Herbal Formula (FAHF)-2) protected peanut-allergic mice against anaphylactic reactions as long as 4 weeks posttherapy. This formula is now in clinical trials in the United States. We sought to determine whether FAHF-2-mediated protection could be extended long-term and explored the mechanisms underlying its persistent immunomodulatory effects. Peanut-allergic mice received FAHF-2 daily orally by gavage for 7 weeks, and then received 7 oral peanut challenges at intervals of 4 to 10 weeks over a period of 36 weeks. For mechanistic studies, some mice received CD4(+) or CD8(+) T-cell-depleting antibodies or IFN-gamma-neutralizing antibodies. Anaphylactic symptoms, body temperatures, and plasma histamine levels were recorded after each challenge, and peanut-specific immunoglobulin levels and cytokine profiles of splenocytes, mesenteric lymph node cells, and purified CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells were determined. Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 treatment protected mice from anaphylaxis for more than 36 weeks after discontinuing treatment. Peanut-specific IgE levels were reduced as much as 50%, whereas IgG(2a) levels were increased as much as 60%, and these effects persisted over time. T(H)2 cytokine production by CD4(+) T cells from FAHF-2-treated mice was reduced as much as 75%, whereas CD8(+) T-cell IFN-gamma production was markedly increased by as much as 85% at the final challenge. Neutralization of INF-gamma and depletion of CD8(+) T cells markedly attenuated FAHF-2 efficacy. Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 provides long-term protection from anaphylaxis by inducing a beneficial shift in allergen-specific immune responses mediated largely by elevated CD8(+) T-cell IFN-gamma production.

19132888
Licorice flavonoids inhibit eotaxin-1 secretion by human fetal lung fibroblasts in vitro.
Glycyrrhiza uralensis (Gan-Cao), commonly called "licorice", is one of the most commonly used herbs in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). In the United States, licorice products are most often consumed as flavoring and sweetening agents in food products. The licorice triterpenoid glycyrrhizin has several biological activities, including anti-inflammatory activity. Other potential anti-inflammatory constituents in G. uralensis have not been fully investigated. Airway eosinophilic inflammation is a major feature of allergic asthma. Eotaxin-1 (eotaxin) is involved in the recruitment of eosinophils to sites of antigen-induced inflammation in asthmatic airways. Because human lung fibroblasts are the major source of eotaxin, inhibition of eosinophil recruitment by suppression of fibroblast eotaxin production is a potentially valuable approach for the pharmacological intervention in asthma. A systematic bioassay-guided purification of G. uralensis yielded five flavonoids: liquiritin, liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenin, 7,4'-dihydroxyflavone, and isoononin. The structures of the compounds were established by (1)H and (13)C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) studies. The potential ability of these isolated pure compounds and glycyrrhizin to inhibit secretion of eotaxin-1 by human fetal lung fibroblasts (HFL-1) was tested. Liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenin, and 7,4'-dihydroxyflavone were more effective than liquiritin, isoononin, and glycyrrhizin in suppressing eotaxin secretion. A concentration-response study showed the IC(50) concentrations of liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenin, and 7,4'-dihydroxyflavone were 4.2, 0.92, and 0.21 microg/mL, respectively, demonstrating that Glycyrrhiza flavonoids inhibit eotaxin-1 secretion in vitro.

18389474
Pharmacological and immunological effects of individual herbs in the Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 (FAHF-2) on peanut allergy.
It was previously shown that a Chinese herbal formula, Food Allergy Herbal Formula 2 (FAHF-2) composed of nine herbs, blocked peanut-induced anaphylaxis in a murine model. The current study was designed to investigate the pharmacological actions of individual herbs comprising FAHF-2 on peanut-induced anaphylactic reactions in a murine model of peanut allergy and to determine if all nine herbs are necessary to prevent an anaphylactic reaction, or if a simplified formula containing fewer herbs would be equally effective. Some individual herbs reduced peanut-induced anaphylactic symptoms but no single herb offered full protection from anaphylactic symptoms equivalent to FAHF-2. The herbs had highly variable effects on histamine release, as well as peanut-specific serum IgE and IgG2a levels. The herbs also had variable effects on IL-4, IL-5 and IFN-gamma levels. A simplified formula comprising the most efficacious tested individual herbs showed only partial efficacy and was not able to reproduce comparably the effects of FAHF-2, suggesting that component herbs of FAHF-2 may work synergistically to produce the curative therapeutic effects produced by the whole formula, which appears to be the best option for future clinical trials.

17516560
Network analysis of FDA approved drugs and their targets.
The global relationship between drugs that are approved for therapeutic use and the human genome is not known. We employed graph-theory methods to analyze the Federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved drugs and their known molecular targets. We used the FDA Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations 26(th) Edition Electronic Orange Book (EOB) to identify all FDA approved drugs and their active ingredients. We then connected the list of active ingredients extracted from the EOB to those known human protein targets included in the DrugBank database and constructed a bipartite network. We computed network statistics and conducted Gene Ontology analysis on the drug targets and drug categories. We find that drug to drug-target relationship in the bipartite network is scale-free. Several classes of proteins in the human genome appear to be better targets for drugs since they appear to be selectively enriched as drug targets for the currently FDA approved drugs. These initial observations allow for development of an integrated research methodology to identify general principles of the drug discovery process.

21121976
Efficacy, safety and immunological actions of butanol-extracted Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 on peanut anaphylaxis.
Therapies for peanut allergy (PNA) are urgently needed. Food Allergy Herbal Formula-2 (FAHF-2) has profound therapeutic effects in a murine PNA model and is safe for food-allergic adults in clinical trials. However, the large FAHF-2 pill-load is not conducive to clinical studies in children. Thus, refining FAHF-2 to decrease pill-load is essential for the inclusion of children in clinical trials and to facilitate studying FAHF-2 as a clinically useful botanical drug. Testing long-term efficacy and safety of a butanol-purified extract of FAHF-2 (B-FAHF-2) in a murine model of PNA, and to explore its immunological mechanisms of action. FAHF-2 was purified by butanol extraction. C3H/HeJ mice with established PNA received the first course of B-FAHF-2 at 6 mg, twice daily for 7 weeks (PNA/B-FAHF-2) or water (PNA/sham) and were then challenged immediately after completing the treatment and six more times every 1-2 months post-treatment up to week 50. Mice then received a second course of B-FAHF-2 treatment at week 52 and were challenged at week 65. In vivo and in vitro immunological effects on T, B and mast cells were also determined. Butanol purification reduced the volume of the effective dose ?5-fold. All PNA/B-FAHF-2 mice were completely protected from PN anaphylaxis until the fifth challenge after the first course of treatment, as compared with PNA/sham mice. Partial protection persisted up to 50 weeks. A second treatment course restored complete protection. B-FAHF-2 significantly suppressed Th2 cytokine, IgE and histamine levels in vivo, and showed direct inhibition of Th2, IgE-producing B cells and mast cell activation in vitro. B-FAHF-2 had a high margin of safety. B-FAHF-2 produced long-lasting protection against PN anaphylaxis for approximately half of the murine life span without side-effects. B-FAHF-2 exhibited direct effects on multiple food allergy effector cells.

