21283035
Nonablative 4-MHz Dual Radiofrequency Wand Rejuvenation Treatment for Periorbital Rhytides and Midface Laxity.
: To evaluate the wrinkle-reducing effects of 4-MHz radiofrequency (RF) energy applied to human periorbital, frontal, and midface facial skin using clinical wrinkle grading, patient self-satisfaction survey, and limited histologic studies. : Thirty-two patients, ranging from 29 to 71 years of age with skin types varying from class I to class III using the Fitzpatrick Wrinkle Classification system, underwent 8 weekly treatment sessions of nonablative RF therapy on the periorbital, frontal, and midface regions and were subjected to follow up for 6 months after treatment. Pretreatment and post-treatment evaluations were compared. Two female subjects gave informed consent for RF treatment for the right upper eyelid and no treatment for left upper eyelid. Specimens from both upper eyelids then underwent histologic examination using light and transmission electron microscopy. : Pre- and post-RF treatment evaluation by 3 independent observers using the Fitzpatrick wrinkle classification system showed progressive improvements in wrinkle score at 1-, 3-, and 6-month intervals (p < 0.01). Self-evaluation of 32 patients using a 9-point rating scale after application of RF treatment also showed improving satisfaction (p < 0.01). The most commonly noted adverse reaction was transient erythema (62.5%) lasting from a few hours to a day. Transmission electron microscopy (25,000×) showed scattered diffuse changes in collagen fibril architecture with a shift from smaller-diameter collagen fibers in the untreated samples to larger-diameter fibers in the treated samples and a loss of distinct fibril borders. : Four-megahertz dual RF wand delivery rejuvenation treatment produces a reduction in periorbital and midface rhytides.

20926130
The biological properties of iron oxide core high-density lipoprotein in experimental atherosclerosis.
Lipoproteins are a family of plasma nanoparticles responsible for the transportation of lipids throughout the body. High-density lipoprotein (HDL), the smallest of the lipoprotein family, measures 7-13 nm in diameter and consists of a cholesteryl ester and triglyceride core that is covered with a monolayer of phospholipids and apolipoproteins. We have developed an iron oxide core HDL nanoparticle (FeO-HDL), which has a lipid based fluorophore incorporated in the phospholipid layer. This nanoparticle provides contrast for optical imaging, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Consequently, FeO-HDL can be visualized on the anatomical, cellular and sub-cellular level. In the current study we show that the biophysical features of FeO-HDL closely resemble those of native HDL and that FeO-HDL possess the ability to mimic HDL characteristics both in vitro as well as in vivo. We demonstrate that FeO-HDL can be applied to image HDL interactions and to investigate disease settings where HDL plays a key function. More generally, we have demonstrated a multimodal approach to study the behavior of biomaterials in vitro as well as in vivo. The approach allowed us to study nanoparticle dynamics in circulation, as well as nanoparticle targeting and uptake by tissues and cells of interest. Moreover, we were able to qualitatively assess nanoparticle excretion, critical for translating nanotechnologies to the clinic.

20668118
Atherosclerotic plaque composition: analysis with multicolor CT and targeted gold nanoparticles.
To investigate the potential of spectral computed tomography (CT) (popularly referred to as multicolor CT), used in combination with a gold high-density lipoprotein nanoparticle contrast agent (Au-HDL), for characterization of macrophage burden, calcification, and stenosis of atherosclerotic plaques. The local animal care committee approved all animal experiments. A preclinical spectral CT system in which incident x-rays are divided into six different energy bins was used for multicolor imaging. Au-HDL, an iodine-based contrast agent, and calcium phosphate were imaged in a variety of phantoms. Apolipoprotein E knockout (apo E-KO) mice were used as the model for atherosclerosis. Gold nanoparticles targeted to atherosclerosis (Au-HDL) were intravenously injected at a dose of 500 mg per kilogram of body weight. Iodine-based contrast material was injected 24 hours later, after which the mice were imaged. Wild-type mice were used as controls. Macrophage targeting by Au-HDL was further evaluated by using transmission electron microscopy and confocal microscopy of aorta sections. Multicolor CT enabled differentiation of Au-HDL, iodine-based contrast material, and calcium phosphate in the phantoms. Accumulations of Au-HDL were detected in the aortas of the apo E-KO mice, while the iodine-based contrast agent and the calcium-rich tissue could also be detected and thus facilitated visualization of the vasculature and bones (skeleton), respectively, during a single scanning examination. Microscopy revealed Au-HDL to be primarily localized in the macrophages on the aorta sections; hence, the multicolor CT images provided information about the macrophage burden. Spectral CT used with carefully chosen contrast agents may yield valuable information about atherosclerotic plaque composition.

20368128
Case report: Lung disease in World Trade Center responders exposed to dust and smoke: carbon nanotubes found in the lungs of World Trade Center patients and dust samples.
After the collapse of the World Trade Center (WTC) on 11 September 2001, a dense cloud of dust containing high levels of airborne pollutants covered Manhattan and parts of Brooklyn, New York. Between 60,000 and 70,000 responders were exposed. Many reported adverse health effects. In this report we describe clinical, pathologic, and mineralogic findings in seven previously healthy responders who were exposed to WTC dust on either 11 September or 12 September 2001, who developed severe respiratory impairment or unexplained radiologic findings and underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgical lung biopsy procedures at Mount Sinai Medical Center. WTC dust samples were also examined. We found that three of the seven responders had severe or moderate restrictive disease clinically. Histopathology showed interstitial lung disease consistent with small airways disease, bronchiolocentric parenchymal disease, and nonnecrotizing granulomatous condition. Tissue mineralogic analyses showed variable amounts of sheets of aluminum and magnesium silicates, chrysotile asbestos, calcium phosphate, and calcium sulfate. Small shards of glass containing mostly silica and magnesium were also found. Carbon nanotubes (CNT) of various sizes and lengths were noted. CNT were also identified in four of seven WTC dust samples. These findings confirm the previously reported association between WTC dust exposure and bronchiolar and interstitial lung disease. Long-term monitoring of responders will be needed to elucidate the full extent of this problem. The finding of CNT in both WTC dust and lung tissues is unexpected and requires further study.

20110314
SIX1 acts synergistically with TBX18 in mediating ureteral smooth muscle formation.
Dysfunction of the ureter often leads to urine flow impairment from the kidney to the bladder, causing dilation of the ureter and/or renal pelvis. Six1 is a crucial regulator of renal development: mutations in human SIX1 cause branchio-oto-renal (BOR) syndrome and Six1(-/-) mice exhibit renal agenesis, although the ureter is present. It remains unclear whether Six1 plays a role in regulating ureter morphogenesis. We demonstrate here that Six1 is differentially expressed during ureter morphogenesis. It was expressed in undifferentiated smooth muscle (SM) progenitors, but was downregulated in differentiating SM cells (SMCs) and had disappeared by E18.5. In Six1(-/-) mice, the ureteral mesenchymal precursors failed to condense and differentiate into normal SMCs and showed increased cell death, indicating that Six1 is required for the maintenance and normal differentiation of SM progenitors. A delay in SMC differentiation was observed in Six1(-/-) ureters. A lack of Six1 in the ureter led to hydroureter and hydronephrosis without anatomical obstruction when kidney formation was rescued in Six1(-/-) embryos by specifically expressing Six1 in the metanephric mesenchyme, but not the ureter, under control of the Eya1 promoter. We show that Six1 and Tbx18 genetically interact to synergistically regulate SMC development and ureter function and that their gene products form a complex in cultured cells and in the developing ureter. Two missense mutations in SIX1 from BOR patients reduced or abolished SIX1-TBX18 complex formation. These findings uncover an essential role for Six1 in establishing a functionally normal ureter and provide new insights into the molecular basis of urinary tract malformations in BOR patients.

19908945
Kupffer cell activation by ambient air particulate matter exposure may exacerbate non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
Owing to increased obesity, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is now the most prevalent liver disease in the United States. NAFLD is considered a component of metabolic syndrome, a cluster of disorders that also includes diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, arteriosclerosis, and hypertension. Exposure to ambient air particulate matter with aerodynamic diameters < 2.5 microm (PM(2.5)) is a risk factor for arteriosclerosis and lung disease, but its effect on NAFLD is unknown. PM(2.5) induces pulmonary dysfunction via Toll-like receptor (TLR) activation on alveolar macrophages. TLR activation of Kupffer cells, resident hepatic macrophages, and subsequent pro-inflammatory cytokine production have been shown to play a key role in NAFLD progression. We hypothesized that PM(2.5) exposure is a significant risk factor for the progression of NAFLD. Thus, following exposure of male C57BL/6 mice fed high fat chow (HFC) to concentrated air particulate matter (CAPs) or filtered air for 6 weeks, progression of NAFLD was evaluated by standardized histological assessment of hepatic inflammation and fibrosis. In mice fed HFC, the hepatic inflammatory grade (3.00 +/- 0.00 vs. 1.50 +/- 0.71, P < 0.001) and fibrosis stage (1.00 +/- 0.00 vs. 0.60 +/- 0.52, P = 0.023) were both significantly higher in mice exposed to CAPs versus filtered air, respectively. Increased numbers of Kupffer cells contained PM in CAPs-exposed mice scores of (2.00 +/- 0.94 vs. 0.20 +/- 0.42, respectively, P < 0.001). PM exposure increased IL-6 secretion up to seven-fold in a dose-dependent manner by isolated wild-type but not TLR4(-/-) Kupffer cells (P < 0.050). In conclusion, ambient PM(2.5) exposure may be a significant risk factor for NAFLD progression.

19863797
Analysis of knockout mice suggests a role for VGF in the control of fat storage and energy expenditure.
Previous studies of mixed background mice have demonstrated that targeted deletion of Vgf produces a lean, hypermetabolic mouse that is resistant to diet-, lesion-, and genetically-induced obesity. To investigate potential mechanism(s) and site(s) of action of VGF, a neuronal and endocrine secreted protein and neuropeptide precursor, we further analyzed the metabolic phenotypes of two independent VGF knockout lines on C57Bl6 backgrounds. Unlike hyperactive VGF knockout mice on a mixed C57Bl6-129/SvJ background, homozygous mutant mice on a C57Bl6 background were hypermetabolic with similar locomotor activity levels to Vgf+/Vgf+ mice, during day and night cycles, indicating that mechanism(s) other than hyperactivity were responsible for their increased energy expenditure. In Vgf-/Vgf- knockout mice, morphological analysis of brown and white adipose tissues (BAT and WAT) indicated decreased fat storage in both tissues, and decreased adipocyte perimeter and area in WAT. Changes in gene expression measured by real-time RT-PCR were consistent with increased fatty acid oxidation and uptake in BAT, and increased lipolysis, decreased lipogenesis, and brown adipocyte differentiation in WAT, suggesting that increased sympathetic nervous system activity in Vgf-/Vgf- mice may be associated with or responsible for alterations in energy expenditure and fat storage. In addition, uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) and UCP2 protein levels, mitochondrial number, and mitochondrial cristae density were upregulated in Vgf-/Vgf- BAT. Using immunohistochemical and histochemical techniques, we detected VGF in nerve fibers innervating BAT and Vgf promoter-driven reporter expression in cervical and thoracic spinal ganglia that project to and innervate the chest wall and tissues including BAT. Moreover, VGF peptide levels were quantified by radioimmunoassay in BAT, and were found to be down-regulated by a high fat diet. Lastly, despite being hypermetabolic, VGF knockout mice were cold intolerant. We propose that VGF and/or VGF-derived peptides modulate sympathetic outflow pathways to regulate fat storage and energy expenditure.

19325119
Quantitative 3D video microscopy of HIV transfer across T cell virological synapses.
The spread of HIV between immune cells is greatly enhanced by cell-cell adhesions called virological synapses, although the underlying mechanisms have been unclear. With use of an infectious, fluorescent clone of HIV, we tracked the movement of Gag in live CD4 T cells and captured the direct translocation of HIV across the virological synapse. Quantitative, high-speed three-dimensional (3D) video microscopy revealed the rapid formation of micrometer-sized "buttons" containing oligomerized viral Gag protein. Electron microscopy showed that these buttons were packed with budding viral crescents. Viral transfer events were observed to form virus-laden internal compartments within target cells. Continuous time-lapse monitoring showed preferential infection through synapses. Thus, HIV dissemination may be enhanced by virological synapse-mediated cell adhesion coupled to viral endocytosis.

18939808
Nanocrystal core high-density lipoproteins: a multimodality contrast agent platform.
High density lipoprotein (HDL) is an important natural nanoparticle that may be modified for biomedical imaging purposes. Here we developed a novel technique to create unique multimodality HDL mimicking nanoparticles by incorporation of gold, iron oxide, or quantum dot nanocrystals for computed tomography, magnetic resonance, and fluorescence imaging, respectively. By including additional labels in the corona of the particles, they were made multifunctional. The characteristics of these nanoparticles, as well as their in vitro and in vivo behavior, revealed that they closely mimic native HDL.

18072282
Colocalization of MCM8 and MCM7 with proteins involved in distinct aspects of DNA replication.
Minichromosome maintenance (MCM) proteins are essential for DNA replication in eukaryotes. A subcomplex of the MCM2-7 family members, initially characterized in yeast, is thought to serve as a eukaryotic DNA replicative helicase. MCM8 is a new family member, not present in yeast, which may function alone or with other family members in aspects of DNA metabolism, including replication initiation and elongation. Through the use of chromatin immunoprecipitation, we find that MCM8, like MCM7, colocalizes on a specific DNA segment of the c-MYC replication initiation zone (c-MYC replicator) with Cdc6, a protein potentially involved in loading MCM proteins onto DNA. The association between MCM8 and MCM7 peaks in mid G1, at the time of assembly of the prereplication complex. The association of both MCM proteins with Cdc6, however, continues even after DNA replication is complete. We also find that MCM8 colocalizes at the c-MYC replicator with chromatin-bound Cdk2. Our data indicate that any role MCM8 may play in elongation is likely to be discontinuous, in its association with DNA, from a potential role in initiation. Using immunogold electron microscopy we show that MCM8 and MCM7 differ in spatial relation to RPA70 during S phase. Our data strongly suggest that MCM8 functions with other known replication proteins in processes which accompany DNA replication, especially initiation, and which are specifically adapted to suit higher eukaryotes.

17728233
Sequence of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Gag localization and oligomerization monitored with live confocal imaging of a replication-competent, fluorescently tagged HIV-1.
The assembly of infectious human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) requires that Gag transport and oligomerization be coordinated with its association with other viral proteins, viral RNAs, and cellular membranes. We have developed a replication-competent HIV type 1 molecular clone that carries a Gag-internal or interdomain green fluorescent protein (iGFP) fusion to reveal a physiologically accurate temporal sequence of Gag localization and oligomerization during the formation of infectious HIV. This recombinant HIV is as infectious as native HIV in single-round infectivity assays, validating its use for trafficking studies. It replicates robustly in permissive MT4 cells and is infectious, yet it spreads poorly in other T-cell lines. Immunofluorescence of Gag-iGFP showed a pattern very similar to that of native Gag. However, the intense plasma membrane Gag-iGFP fluorescence contrasts markedly with its immunofluorescence at this site, indicating that many Gag epitopes can be masked by oligomerization. Consistent with this, fluorescence resonance energy transfer studies visualized intense Gag oligomerization at the plasma membrane and weaker oligomerization at cytoplasmic sites. Four-dimensional, time-lapse confocal imaging reveals a temporal progression of Gag distribution over hours in which Gag is initially diffusely localized within the cytoplasm. Plasma membrane signals then accumulate as Gag levels increase and vesicular association appears late, only after plasma membrane site signals have reached high intensity. Lastly, the cell rounds up and HIV protease activation induces diffuse fluorescence throughout the cell. These distinct phases reveal a natural progression of Gag trafficking during the viral gene expression program. HIV Gag-iGFP is a useful tool for dissecting mechanisms of viral assembly and transmission.

17525274
Sperm abnormalities in heterozygous acid sphingomyelinase knockout mice reveal a novel approach for the prevention of genetic diseases.
Acid sphingomyelinase knockout mice are a model of the inherited human disorder types A and B Niemann-Pick disease. Herein, we show that heterozygous (ASMKO(+/-)) mice have two distinct sperm populations resembling those found in normal and mutant animals, respectively, and that these two populations could be distinguished by their morphology, ability to undergo capacitation or the acrosome reaction, and/or mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP). The abnormal morphology of the mutant sperm could be normalized by demembranation with detergents or by the addition of recombinant acid sphingomyelinase to the culture media, and the corrected sperm also had an enhanced fertilization capacity. Methods were then explored to enrich for normal sperm from the mixed ASMKO(+/-) population, and flow cytometric sorting based on MMP provided the best results. In vitro fertilization was performed using ASMKO(+/-) oocytes and sperm before and after MMP sorting, and it was found that the sorted sperm produced significantly more wild-type pups than nonsorted sperm. Sperm sorting is much less invasive and more cost-effective than egg isolation, and offers several advantages over the existing assisted reproduction options for Niemann-Pick disease carrier couples. It therefore could have a major impact on the prevention of this and perhaps other genetic diseases.

