20431454
The effect of a nursing labor management partnership on nurse turnover and satisfaction.
The effects of a nursing labor management partnership (NLMP) on nurse turnover and nurse satisfaction were examined. Job satisfaction and retention are among the factors related to the nursing shortage. The NLMP was a specific intervention where nursing leaders, both nonbargaining and bargaining, worked collaboratively to improve patient care and outcomes. The study was conducted in a large, Magnet-designated urban academic medical center in the Northeastern United States. The hospital has more than 1,000 inpatient beds and more than 2,200 registered nurses, 2,107 of whom are members of a nursing union. Nurse turnover and satisfaction were studied before (2005) and after (2008) the implementation of the NLMP model. There was a significant decrease in nurse turnover and a significant increase in nurse satisfaction (from moderate to high) post-NLMP. This study establishes a basis for further nursing research on the implementation of an NLMP in union environments.

18346564
Improving substance abuse screening and intervention in a primary care clinic.
Despite recent efforts to educate primary care providers in the identification and management of patients presenting with substance abuse problems, many opportunities to identify and intervene with these patients are overlooked. This project was designed to identify factors that interfere with rates of screening and brief intervention (SBI) of substance abuse problems in a primary care clinic in a major academic medical center in New York City. Six informants representing the disciplines of medicine, nursing, and social work in the primary care clinic provided information regarding SBI. Analysis was focused on substantiation of the need for enhanced diffusion of knowledge related to screening for substance abuse problems to improve rates of SBI in primary care. Recommendations for improvement included continued promotion of SBI by influential role models and opinion leaders, improvement in primary care providers' perceptions of the perceived characteristics of SBI to improve rates of adoption, implementation of interdisciplinary educational initiatives toward the goal of improving rates of SBI in the primary care clinic, and initiation of translational research at the clinic supporting SBI in primary care.

