20392278
Genetics as a tool for the dissociation of mental operations over the course of development.
In recent years it has become possible to differentiate separable aspects of attention and to characterize the anatomical structure and dynamic states of their underlying networks. When individual differences in the structure and dynamics of these networks are used as dependent measures in associations with individual genetic variation, it becomes possible to assign cellular and molecular changes that occur over the course of normal development to specific aspects of network structure and function. In this way, a more granular understanding of the physiology of neural networks can be obtained. Here we review a translational research strategy focused on how genetic variation contributes to the normal development of attentional function. We seek to use genetic information to help construct a multinode, multinetwork model that can explain, in part, individual differences in the development of attention over the course of development.

17652463
The functional integration of the anterior cingulate cortex during conflict processing.
Although functional activation of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) related to conflict processing has been studied extensively, the functional integration of the subdivisions of the ACC and other brain regions during conditions of conflict is still unclear. In this study, participants performed a task designed to elicit conflict processing by using flanker interference on target response while they were scanned using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging. The physiological response of several brain regions in terms of an interaction between conflict processing and activity of the anterior rostral cingulate zone (RCZa) of the ACC, and the effective connectivity between this zone and other regions were examined using psychophysiological interaction analysis and dynamic causal modeling, respectively. There was significant integration of the RCZa with the caudal cingulate zone (CCZ) of the ACC and other brain regions such as the lateral prefrontal, primary, and supplementary motor areas above and beyond the main effect of conflict and baseline connectivity. The intrinsic connectivity from the RCZa to the CCZ was modulated by the context of conflict. These findings suggest that conflict processing is associated with the effective contribution of the RCZa to the neuronal activity of CCZ, as well as other cortical regions.

19344637
Assessing the molecular genetics of the development of executive attention in children: focus on genetic pathways related to the anterior cingulate cortex and dopamine.
It is well known that children show gradual and protracted improvement in an array of behaviors involved in the conscious control of thought and emotion. Non-invasive neuroimaging in developing populations has revealed many neural correlates of behavior, particularly in the developing cingulate cortex and frontostriatal circuits. These brain regions, themselves, undergo protracted molecular and cellular change in the first two decades of human development and, as such, are ideal regions of interest for cognitive- and imaging-genetic studies that seek to link processes at the biochemical and synaptic levels to brain activity and behavior. We review our research to date that employs both adult and child-friendly versions of the attention network task (ANT) in an effort to begin to describe the role of specific genes in the assembly of a functional attention system. Presently, we constrain our predictions for genetic association studies by focusing on the role of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and of dopamine in the development of executive attention.

