20014421
Current surgical management of ulcerative colitis.
Inflammatory bowel disease is divided into 2 major disease entities: Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. Ulcerative colitis is characterized by contiguous inflammation of the colorectal mucosa, always beginning in and involving the rectum and progressing for variable distances proximally within the colon. In ulcerative colitis, medical therapy, which is not curative, is directed at controlling symptoms and reducing the underlying inflammatory process. However, emergent or elective removal of the colon and rectum does cure the disease and also eliminates the possibility of developing a malignancy. Here we present the current surgical treatment of ulcerative colitis and issues in the management of ulcerative colitis. We discuss indications for surgical treatment, elective and emergent operative management, early and late complications of surgery, and functional results.

20010350
Prospective analysis of clinician accuracy in the diagnosis of benign anal pathology: comparison across specialties and years of experience.
The majority of patients referred to a colorectal surgeon with anal complaints are told they have "hemorrhoids"; however, many of these patients have other anal pathology causing their symptoms. Therefore, we prospectively evaluated the diagnostic accuracy of physicians for common anal pathology, stratified by specialty and experience. Seven common benign anal pathologic conditions were selected (prolapsed internal hemorrhoid, thrombosed external hemorrhoid, abscess, fissure, fistula, condyloma acuminata, and full-thickness rectal prolapse). Prospectively accrued subjects included attending physicians, fellows, residents, and medical students. Subjects were shown images and asked to provide a written diagnosis. We prospectively evaluated the overall diagnostic accuracy and stratified accuracy across specialties and years of clinical experience. Medical students were the control group. There were 198 physicians and 216 medical students. Overall diagnostic accuracy for physicians was 53.5% and for controls was 21.9% (P < .001). Surgeons had the highest overall accuracy at 70.4%, whereas all of the other groups had an accuracy of <50%. Physicians correctly identified condylomata and rectal prolapse most frequently and hemorrhoidal conditions least frequently. All 7 conditions were correctly identified by 4.1% of subjects and all of the conditions were incorrectly diagnosed by 20.2%. There was no correlation between years of experience and diagnostic accuracy (P = NS). Diagnostic accuracy for common benign anal pathologic conditions was suboptimal across all clinical specialties. Although many specialties had a diagnostic accuracy that was significantly better than the control group, there was no association between years of experience and accuracy. Improved programs for physician education for these common conditions should be developed.

19279411
Severity of inflammation as a predictor of colectomy in patients with chronic ulcerative colitis.
We evaluated a large cohort of patients with longstanding ulcerative colitis in a colonoscopic surveillance program to determine predictors of colectomy. We queried a retrospective database of patients who had symptoms of ulcerative colitis for seven years or more. Histologic inflammation in biopsies was graded on a validated four-point scale: absent, mild, moderate, severe. We performed a multivariate analysis of the inflammation scores and other variables to determine predictive factors for colectomy. Patients who underwent colectomy for neoplasia were censored at the time of surgery; those who did not undergo colectomy were censored at the time of last contact. A total of 561 patients were evaluated, with a median follow-up of 21.4 years since disease onset. A total of 97 patients (17.3 percent) underwent surgery; 25 (4.5 percent) for reasons other than dysplasia. These 25 constitute events for this analysis. For univariate analysis, mean inflammation (P < 0.001) and steroid use (P = 0.01) were predictors of colectomy. For multivariable proportional hazards analysis, mean inflammation (P < 0.001) and steroid use (P = 0.03) were predictors of colectomy, whereas salicylate use (P = 0.007) was protective. Higher median inflammation scores and corticosteroid use were predictors of colectomy in this patient population. The overall rate of colectomy during a long period of follow-up was low (<1 percent per year).

18330577
Cavernous, arteriovenous, and mixed hemangioma-lymphangioma of the rectosigmoid: rare causes of rectal bleeding--case series and review of the literature.
Cavernous hemangiomas of the sigmoid colon and rectum are uncommon vascular malformations usually found in young adults with a long history of episodic and painless rectal bleeding. Alternatively, they may present with massive life-threatening hemorrhage. We report three cases of hemangioma of the rectosigmoid including one case of cavernous hemangioma, one case of arteriovenous hemangioma, and one case of hemangiolymphangiomatosis with emphasis on clinical presentation, radiologic, operative, and pathologic findings. Definitive treatment consists of complete resection with a sphincter-preserving procedure or abdominoperineal resection, based on extent of disease. Therapy is typically delayed by several years in these patients due to erroneous diagnosis and failed treatment of hemorrhoids and inflammatory bowel disease. Relative to hemangiomas, lymphangiomas of the rectosigmoid are even more rare and when symptomatic, present with rectal bleeding and pelvic pain.

17160570
Acute ischemic proctitis: report of four cases.
Acute ischemic proctitis is an extremely rare clinical entity. It is mainly described in patients with significant atherosclerotic and cardiac risk factors who present with lower gastrointestinal symptoms in the setting of hemodynamic instability. Previous reports of ischemic proctitis suggest that rectal resection is not necessary in the treatment of this disease. We present four cases of acute ischemic proctitis that required complete proctectomy. All patients had large vessel atherosclerosis with rectal bleeding and sepsis as the presenting signs and symptoms. Three of four patients underwent complete proctectomy as the initial procedure. The fourth patient underwent complete proctectomy five days after the initial intervention. Two of four patients survived and were ultimately discharged from the hospital. A third patient recovered from surgery but ultimately died of respiratory complications. Only the patient who was initially treated by subtotal proctectomy died as the result of the disease. Although ischemic necrosis of the rectum is rare, complete proctectomy may be necessary to save the patient's life.

20658162
Intraluminal migration of mesh following incisional hernia repair.
Incisional hernia is the most common long term complication of colon surgery. These hernias are often repaired with synthetic mesh. Mesh migration is an infrequent occurrence. There are reports of mesh migrating into the peritoneum and into viscous organs causing a variety of symptoms including recurrent hernia, infection, and obstruction. We present the case of transmural mesh migration from the abdominal wall into the small bowel presenting as small bowel obstruction.

19593624
Reduction of an incarcerated, prolapsed ileostomy with the assistance of sugar as a desiccant.
Prolapse is a well-described complication after ileostomy or colostomy, and is typically asymptomatic and easily reduced. Acute incarceration of a prolapsed stoma is a rare event, however. A patient presented with an incarcerated, prolapsed ileostomy causing small bowel obstruction and stomal ischemia. Successful reduction was performed with the assistance of sugar as a desiccant. Incarceration of a prolapsed ileostomy is highly atypical, but can be approached in a similar manner to an incarcerated rectal prolapse. Successful reduction can prevent an emergent operation, allowing for medical optimization and elective surgical treatment if necessary.

17298629
Anorectal cancer following topical formalin application for haemorrhagic radiation proctitis.
Topical formalin has been used as an effective treatment for haemorrhagic radiation proctitis. In the course of reviewing our experience with this modality, we identified two patients who developed anorectal cancer during the follow-up period. From 2001 to 2005, 49 patients who received pelvic radiation for treatment of prostate, rectal or endometrial cancer subsequently developed haemorrhagic radiation proctitis. Four percent formalin was applied in the office setting under direct visualization with a rigid proctoscope and without sedation. Response to treatment was then reviewed. Seventy-eight per cent of patients reported a complete response to formalin application. Only 14% were refractory to formalin treatment. Two patients subsequently presented with anorectal cancer. Topical formalin application in the outpatient setting appears to be an effective first-line treatment for haemorrhagic radiation proctitis. We report the first cases of anorectal cancer which developed subsequent to formalin application. Pelvic irradiation is known to increase the risk of developing a second malignancy, therefore it is impossible to determine what, if any, role formalin application played in the development of the second malignancies.

