20816193
Identification of IgE sequential epitopes of lentil (Len c 1) by means of peptide microarray immunoassay.
Lentils are often responsible for allergic reactions to legumes in Mediterranean children. Although the primary sequence of the major allergen Len c 1 is known, the location of the IgE-binding epitopes remains undefined. We sought to identify IgE-binding epitopes of Len c 1 and relate epitope binding to clinical characteristics. One hundred thirty-five peptides corresponding to the primary sequence of Len c 1 were probed with sera from 33 patients with lentil allergy and 15 nonatopic control subjects by means of microarray immunoassay. Lentil-specific IgE levels, skin prick test responses, and clinical reactions to lentil were determined. Epitopes were defined as overlapping signal above interslide and intraslide cutoffs and confirmed by using inhibition assays with a peptide from the respective region. Hierarchic clustering of microarray data was used to correlate binding patterns with clinical findings. The patients with lentil allergy specifically recognized IgE-binding epitopes located in the C-terminal region between peptides 107 and 135. Inhibition experiments confirmed the specificity of IgE binding in this region, identifying different epitopes. Linkage of cluster results with clinical data and lentil-specific IgE levels displayed a positive correlation between lentil-specific IgE levels, epitope recognition, and respiratory symptoms. Modeling based on the 3-dimensional structure of a homologous soy vicilin suggests that the Len c 1 epitopes identified are exposed on the surface of the molecule. Several IgE-binding sequential epitopes of Len c 1 have been identified. Epitopes are located in the C-terminal region and are predicted to be exposed on the surface of the protein. Epitope diversity is positively correlated with IgE levels, pointing to a more polyclonal IgE response.

20471069
Greater epitope recognition of shrimp allergens by children than by adults suggests that shrimp sensitization decreases with age.
Shellfish allergy is a long-lasting disorder typically affecting adults. Despite its high prevalence, there is limited information about allergenic shrimp proteins and the epitopes implicated in such allergic reactions. We sought to identify the IgE-binding epitopes of the 4 shrimp allergens and to characterize epitope recognition profiles of children and adults with shrimp allergy. Fifty-three subjects, 34 children and 19 adults, were selected with immediate allergic reactions to shrimp, increased shrimp-specific serum IgE levels, and positive immunoblot binding to shrimp. Study subjects and 7 nonatopic control subjects were tested by means of peptide microarray for IgE binding with synthetic overlapping peptides spanning the sequences of Litopenaeus vannamei shrimp tropomyosin, arginine kinase (AK), myosin light chain (MLC), and sarcoplasmic calcium-binding protein (SCP). The Wilcoxon test was used to determine significant differences in z scores between patients and control subjects. The median shrimp IgE level was 4-fold higher in children than in adults (47 vs 12.5 kU(A)/L). The frequency of allergen recognition was higher in children (tropomyosin, 81% [94% for children and 61% for adults]; MLC, 57% [70% for children and 31% for adults]; AK, 51% [67% for children and 21% for adults]; and SCP, 45% [59% for children and 21% for adults]), whereas control subjects showed negligible binding. Seven IgE-binding regions were identified in tropomyosin by means of peptide microarray, confirming previously identified shrimp epitopes. In addition, 3 new epitopes were identified in tropomyosin (epitopes 1, 3, and 5b-c), 5 epitopes were identified in MLC, 3 epitopes were identified in SCP, and 7 epitopes were identified in AK. Interestingly, frequency of individual epitope recognition, as well as intensity of IgE binding, was significantly greater in children than in adults for all 4 proteins. Children with shrimp allergy have greater shrimp-specific IgE antibody levels and show more intense binding to shrimp peptides and greater epitope diversity than adults.

20226304
Correlation of IgE/IgG4 milk epitopes and affinity of milk-specific IgE antibodies with different phenotypes of clinical milk allergy.
Results from large-scale epitope mapping with a peptide microarray have been shown to correlate with clinical features of milk allergy. We sought to assess IgE and IgG4 epitope diversity and IgE affinity in different clinical phenotypes of milk allergy and identify informative epitopes that might be predictive of clinical outcomes of milk allergy. Forty-one subjects were recruited from a larger study on the effects of ingesting heat-denatured milk proteins in subjects with milk allergy. Using food challenges, subjects were characterized as being clinically reactive to all forms of milk (n = 17), being tolerant to heated milk (HM) products (n = 16), or having outgrown their milk allergy (n = 8). Eleven healthy volunteers without milk allergy served as control subjects. A peptide microarray was performed by using the previously published protocol. Subjects with milk allergy had increased epitope diversity compared with those who outgrew their allergy. HM-tolerant subjects had IgE-binding patterns similar to those who had outgrown their allergy, but IgG4-binding patterns that were more similar to those of the allergic group. Binding to higher numbers of IgE peptides was associated with more severe allergic reactions during challenge. There was no association between IgG4 peptides and clinical features of milk allergy. Using a competitive peptide microarray assay, allergic patients demonstrated a combination of high- and low-affinity IgE binding, whereas HM-tolerant subjects and those who had outgrown their milk allergy had primarily low-affinity binding. Greater IgE epitope diversity and higher affinity, as determined by using the peptide microarray, were associated with clinical phenotypes and severity of milk allergy.

19625695
Butyrate enhances the intestinal barrier by facilitating tight junction assembly via activation of AMP-activated protein kinase in Caco-2 cell monolayers.
Butyrate, one of the SCFA, promotes the development of the intestinal barrier. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the butyrate regulation of the intestinal barrier are unknown. To test the hypothesis that the effect of butyrate on the intestinal barrier is mediated by the regulation of the assembly of tight junctions involving the activation of the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), we determined the effect of butyrate on the intestinal barrier by measuring the transepithelial electrical resistance (TER) and inulin permeability in a Caco-2 cell monolayer model. We further used a calcium switch assay to study the assembly of epithelial tight junctions and determined the effect of butyrate on the assembly of epithelial tight junctions and AMPK activity. We demonstrated that the butyrate treatment increased AMPK activity and accelerated the assembly of tight junctions as shown by the reorganization of tight junction proteins, as well as the development of TER. AMPK activity was also upregulated by butyrate during calcium switch-induced tight junction assembly. Compound C, a specific AMPK inhibitor, inhibited the butyrate-induced activation of AMPK. The facilitating effect of butyrate on the increases in TER in standard culture media, as well as after calcium switch, was abolished by compound C. We conclude that butyrate enhances the intestinal barrier by regulating the assembly of tight junctions. This dynamic process is mediated by the activation of AMPK. These results suggest an intriguing link between SCFA and the intracellular energy sensor for the development of the intestinal barrier.

19577281
Development of a novel peptide microarray for large-scale epitope mapping of food allergens.
The peptide microarray is a novel assay that facilitates high-throughput screening of peptides with a small quantity of sample. We sought to use overlapping peptides of milk allergenic proteins as a model system to establish a reliable and sensitive peptide microarray-based immunoassay for large-scale epitope mapping of food allergens. A milk peptide microarray was developed by using commercially synthesized peptides (20-mers, 3 offset) covering the primary sequences of alpha(s1)-casein, alpha(s2)-casein, beta-casein, kappa-casein, and beta-lactoglobulin. Conditions for printing and immunolabeling were optimized using a serum pool of 5 patients with milk allergy. Reproducibility of the milk peptide microarray was evaluated using replicate arrays immunolabeled with the serum pool, whereas specificity and sensitivity were assessed by using serial dilution of the serum pool and a peptide inhibition assay. Our results show that epitopes identified by the peptide microarray were mostly consistent with those identified previously by SPOT membrane technology, but with specific binding to a few newly identified epitopes of milk allergens. Data from replicate arrays were reproducible (r > or = 0.92) regardless of printing lots, immunolabeling, and serum pool batches. Using the serially diluted serum pool, we confirmed that IgE antibody binding detected in the array was specific. Peptide inhibition of IgE binding to the same peptide and overlapping peptides further confirmed the specificity of the array. A reliable peptide microarray was established for large-scale IgE epitope mapping of milk allergens, and this robust technology could be applied for epitope mapping of other food allergens.

19568005
The role of immunoglobulin E-binding epitopes in the characterization of food allergy.
Allergen-specific immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies play a central role in food allergic reactions. IgE epitope mapping of food allergens may provide information regarding patient's clinical history and contribute to food allergy diagnosis/prognosis. The goal of this article is to review recent developments in the methods for IgE epitope mapping and the role of IgE-binding epitopes in the characterization of food allergy. Recent studies have suggested a potential role for sequential IgE-binding epitopes as biomarkers for characterizing various phenotypes of food allergy. Studies of allergens in milk, peanut, egg and wheat have shown a correlation between IgE sequential epitope diversity and patients' allergy severity or persistence. Several informative epitopes in milk allergens have been identified as candidate biomarkers to predict the development of tolerance to milk. However, limitations with current methods of IgE-binding epitope identification need to be addressed before they can be applied in the diagnosis/prognosis of food allergy. IgE epitope mapping has the potential to become an additional tool for the diagnosis/prognosis of food allergy and lead to a better understanding of the pathogenesis and tolerance induction of food allergy.

19377951
Microarrayed allergen molecules for diagnostics of allergy.
With the evolution of peptide synthesis techniques and microarray technology, it is now possible to map and characterize allergenic epitopes on a microarray platform. The peptide microarray-based immunoassay allows simultaneous analysis of thousands of target peptides using small volumes of diluted serum samples, and has a promising future to become a superior testing tool for aspects of food allergy diagnosis and prognosis, as well as for designing recombinant allergens for safe immunotherapy. Characterization of allergenic epitopes provides fundamental knowledge for understanding mechanisms of food allergy. This chapter describes in detail the development of a sensitive and reliable peptide microarray-based immunoassay. The information includes a comparison of different slide substrates, effect of buffers on spot morphology, performance of printing pins, immunolabeling detection systems with different levels of sensitivity, and suggested approaches to data analysis.

18979216
Trefoil factor-3 expression in human colon cancer liver metastasis.
Deaths from colorectal cancer are often due to liver metastasis. Trefoil factor-3 (TFF3) is expressed by normal intestinal epithelial cells and its expression is maintained throughout the colon adenoma-carcinoma sequence. Our previous work demonstrated a correlation between TFF3 expression and metastatic potential in an animal model of colon cancer. The aim of this study was to determine whether TFF3 is expressed in human colon cancer liver metastasis (CCLM) and whether inhibiting TFF3 expression in colon cancer cells would alter their invasive potential in vitro. Human CCLMs were analyzed at the mRNA and protein level for TFF3 expression. Two highly metastatic rat colon cancer cell lines that either natively express TFF3 (LN cells) or were transfected with TFF3 (LPCRI-2 cells), were treated with two rat TFF3 siRNA constructs (si78 and si365), and analyzed in an in vitro invasion assay. At the mRNA and protein level, TFF3 was expressed in 17/17 (100%) CCLMs and 10/11 (91%) primary colon cancers, but not in normal liver tissue. By real time PCR, TFF3 expression was markedly inhibited by both siRNA constructs in LN and LPCRI-2 cells. The si365 and si78 constructs inhibited invasion by 44% and 53%, respectively, in LN cells, and by 74% and 50%, respectively, in LPCRI-2 cells. These results provide further evidence that TFF3 contributes to the malignant behavior of colon cancer cells. These observations may have relevance for designing new diagnostic and treatment approaches to colorectal cancer.

17264459
Necrotising enterocolitis: the state of the science.
Necrotizing enterocolitis is the most common gastrointestinal emergency of the neonate, affecting 5-10% of infants, yet the pathogenesis remains unclear. Widely accepted risk factors include prematurity, enteral feeds, bacterial colonization and mucosal injury. How these or other yet identified factors come together to create the classic clinical and pathologic features is the subject of much research. The activation of the cytokine cascade, in part by bacterial ligands, appears to play a key role in mucosal injury. Two mediators that may also contribute are platelet activating factor and intestinal toll-like receptors. Short chain fatty acids, the products of bacterial fermentation of carbohydrates, have been thought to cause mucosal injury. Overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria in the face of a decreased commensal population may play a key role. A current focus of clinical research involves probiotics, enterally fed forms of commsenal bacteria. This may set the stage for a healthier intestinal ecosystem and possibly, decreased risk of NEC.

17211138
Effects of butyrate on intestinal barrier function in a Caco-2 cell monolayer model of intestinal barrier.
Production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) in the intestinal lumen may play an important role in the maintenance of the intestinal barrier. However, overproduction/accumulation of SCFA in the bowel may be toxic to the intestinal mucosa and has been hypothesized to play a role in the pathogenesis of neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). By using a Caco-2 cell monolayer model of intestinal barrier, we report here that the effect of butyrate on the intestinal barrier is paradoxical. Butyrate at a low concentration (2 mM) promotes intestinal barrier function as measured by a significant increase in transepithelial electrical resistance (TER) and a significant decrease in inulin permeability. Butyrate at a high concentration (8 mM) reduces TER and increases inulin permeability significantly. Butyrate induces apoptosis and reduces the number of viable Caco-2 cells in a dose-dependent manner. Intestinal barrier function impairment induced by high concentrations of butyrate is most likely related to butyrate-induced cytotoxicity due to apoptosis. We conclude that the effect of butyrate on the intestinal barrier is paradoxical; i.e. whereas low concentrations of butyrate may be beneficial in promoting intestinal barrier function, excessive butyrate may induce severe intestinal epithelial cell apoptosis and disrupt intestinal barrier.

