19771594
Neuromuscular diseases associated with HIV-1 infection.
Neuromuscular disorders are common in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV); they occur at all stages of disease and affect all parts of the peripheral nervous system. These disorders have diverse etiologies including HIV itself, immune suppression and dysregulation, comorbid illnesses and infections, and side effects of medications. In this article, we review the following HIV-associated conditions: distal symmetric polyneuropathy; inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy; mononeuropathy; mononeuropathy multiplex; autonomic neuropathy; progressive polyradiculopathy due to cytomegalovirus; herpes zoster; myopathy; and other, rarer disorders.

19589300
HIV-related neurocognitive impairment in the HAART era.
Neurocognitive impairment is common in people living with HIV and AIDS. Prior to highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), cognitive impairment primarily affected patients with advanced disease, and was a more rapidly progressive illness. With the use of HAART, cognitive impairment improved, along with the overall health of HIV-positive patients. However, it is still a prevalent problem, even in patients with desirable CD4+ count and undetectable plasma viral load. In this review, we address the nature of HIV-related neurocognitive impairment in the HAART era, including its etiology, pathology, appropriate diagnostic tools for clinical practice and research, and rational treatment approaches.

19521250
The roles of ethnicity and antiretrovirals in HIV-associated polyneuropathy: a pilot study.
In the pre-highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) era, distal sensory polyneuropathy (DSP) was associated with markers of advanced HIV infection and the use of neurotoxic antiretrovirals (ARVs). As HAART became widespread, and the AIDS epidemic shifted into minority populations, the risk factors for DSP became less clear. We explore the roles of ethnicity and ARV in the development of DSP in an HAART era cohort. Data from 336 HIV-positive adults were obtained from the Manhattan HIV Brain Bank. One hundred four participants had no DSP at entry visit; at least 1 follow-up visit; and a self-identified ethnicity of non-Hispanic white, Hispanic, or African American. Fifty percent of participants developed DSP; of those, 67% were symptomatic. Participants who developed DSP were older (P = 0.02) and had higher CD4 counts (P = 0.001). ARV-DSP was more common in Hispanics (P = 0.02) and intravenous drug users (P = 0.02). There was a trend for higher pain scores in Hispanics with symptomatic DSP (P = 0.08). This study suggests that there are ethnic disparities in the clinical manifestations of HIV-related neuropathies including pain and the susceptibility to ARV-DSP. Further studies of larger cohorts are indicated to explore the etiology of these differences.

18695060
Motor function and human immunodeficiency virus-associated cognitive impairment in a highly active antiretroviral therapy-era cohort.
Cognitive impairment has long been recognized as a manifestation of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. However, highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has altered the neurologic manifestations of HIV. To develop a measure to quantify the motor abnormalities included in the original descriptions of HIV-associated dementia (HAD); to determine whether motor, affective, and behavioral dysfunction predict cognitive impairment; and to determine whether quantitative motor testing is a helpful adjunct in the diagnosis of HAD in a complex population from the HAART era. Neurologic and neuropsychological data were collected from the Manhattan HIV Brain Bank, a longitudinal cohort study of patients with advanced HIV. The HIV-Dementia Motor Scale (HDMS) was developed and validated and cognitive and affective or behavioral function was quantified using global neuropsychological T scores, the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), and an independent assessment of apathy. Relationships among cognitive, motor, affective, and behavioral performance were examined using correlation, linear regression, and analyses of variance. An urban AIDS research center. A total of 260 HIV-positive, predominantly minority patients. The HDMS scores and global neuropsychological T scores. The HDMS and BDI scores were independent predictors of cognitive impairment. Significant cognitive impairment was found in patients with motor dysfunction. Patients diagnosed as having HAD had a greater degree of motor impairment than those with other neurocognitive diagnoses. Motor, affective, and behavioral abnormalities predict cognitive impairment in HIV-positive patients in this HAART-era cohort. The HDMS may be useful in the assignment of HIV-associated neurocognitive impairment in HIV populations in which normative data or neuropsychological test design is not optimal.

18657728
Diagnosis and management of HIV-associated neuropathy.
Distal sensory polyneuropathy (DSP) is the most common neurologic complication of HIV infection and a major cause of morbidity in HIV-infected patients. DSP may occur secondary to HIV (HIV-DSP) or be due to antiretroviral drug toxicity. Timely detection of the symptoms and signs of DSP in patients who have HIV may allow for the reversal of the toxic effects of antiretrovirals and for the initiation of symptomatic treatment. The pathogenic mechanism of HIV-DSP is likely multifactorial. Restorative therapies for DSP are not currently available but recent advances have led to novel symptomatic therapies. This article highlights the risk factors, pathogenesis, pathology, clinical features, diagnostic studies, differential diagnosis, and treatment of HIV-associated neuropathy.

18194751
Neuromuscular complications of human immunodeficiency virus infection.
Neurologic complications of HIV infection are common, and are a significant source of morbidity. The chronic nature of HIV today, the complexity of highly active antiretroviral therapy regimens, and the multiple and diffuse effects of HIV on the nervous system present an exciting diagnostic challenge, in which a systematic, comprehensive approach to diagnosis and treatment is necessary.

17714115
Safety profile of treatment in diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain.
New treatment options for diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain (DPNP) have recently been developed, including two Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved agents, duloxetine and pregabalin. As clinicians face a broader spectrum of efficacious treatments, side-effect profiles play an increasingly important role in the development of a pain management regimen. In this article we review the safety profile of agents commonly used in the treatment of DPNP.

