21508333
c-Src inactivation reduces renal epithelial cell-matrix adhesion, proliferation and cyst formation.
c-Src is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase whose activity is induced by phosphorylation at Y418 and translocation from the cytoplasm to the cell membrane. Increased activity of c-Src has been associated with cell proliferation, matrix adhesion, motility and apoptosis in tumors. Immunohistochemistry suggested that activated (pY418)-Src activity is increased in cyst-lining ADPKD epithelial cells in human and mouse autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD). Western blot analysis showed that SKI-606 (Wyeth) is a specific inhibitor of pY(418)-src without demonstrable effects on EGFR or ErbB2 activity in renal epithelia. In vitro studies on mouse collecting duct (mIMCD) cells and human ADPKD cyst-lining epithelial cells showed that SKI-606 inhibited epithelial cell proliferation over a 24-hour time-frame. In addition, SKI-606 treatment caused a striking statistically significant decrease in adhesion of mIMCD and human ADPKD to extracellular collagen matrix. Retained viability of unattached cells was consistent with a primary effect on epithelial cell anchorage dependence mediated by, the loss of extracellular matrix (ECM)-attachment due to ?2?1-integrin function. SKI-606-mediated attenuation of the human ADPKD hyper-proliferative and hyper-ECM-adhesive epithelial cell phenotype in vitro was paralleled by retardation of the renal cystic phenotype of Pkd1 orthologous ADPKD heterozygous mice in vivo. This suggests that SKI-606 has dual effects on cystic epithelial cell proliferation and ECM-adhesion and may have therapeutic potential for ADPKD patients.

19923420
Abnormalities in focal adhesion complex formation, regulation, and function in human autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease epithelial cells.
Integrin-associated focal adhesion complex formation and turnover plays an essential role in directing interactions between epithelial cells and the extracellular matrix during organogenesis, leading to appropriate cell spreading, cell-matrix adhesion, and migration. Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is associated with loss of function of PKHD1-encoded protein fibrocystin-1 and is characterized by cystic dilation of renal collecting tubules (CT) in utero and loss of renal function in patients if they survive the perinatal period. Normal polycystin-1 (PC-1)/focal adhesion complex function is required for control of CT diameter during renal development, and abnormalities in these complexes have been demonstrated in human PC-1 mutant cystic cells. To determine whether loss of fibrocystin-1 was associated with focal adhesion abnormalities, ARPKD cells or normal age-matched human fetal (HF)CT cells in which fibrocystin-1 had been decreased by 85% by small interfering RNA inhibition were compared with normal HFCT. Accelerated attachment and spreading on collagen matrix and decreased motility of fibrocystin-1-deficient cells were associated with longer paxillin-containing focal adhesions, more complex actin-cytoskeletal rearrangements, and increased levels of total beta(1)-integrin, c-Src, and paxillin. Immunoblot analysis of adhesive cells using site-specific phospho-antibodies demonstrated ARPKD-associated loss of activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) by phosphorylation at its autophosphorylation site (Y397); accelerated FAK inhibition by phosphorylation at Y407, S843, and S910; as well as increased activation of c-Src at pY418. Paxillin coimmunoprecipitation analyses suggested that fibrocystin-1 was a component of the normal focal adhesion complex and that actin and fibrocystin-1 were lost from ARPKD complexes.

19367327
Protein kinase-X interacts with Pin-1 and Polycystin-1 during mouse kidney development.
The regulation of epithelial branching morphogenesis by bone morphogenetic protein-7 depends, in part, on functionally defined cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent protein kinases. We previously identified protein kinase-X (PRKX), a cAMP-dependent kinase, as a regulator of epithelial morphogenesis during kidney development and found that it binds to and phosphorylates Polycystin-1. Overexpression of PRKX stimulates renal epithelial cell migration, tubulogenesis, ureteric bud branching, and glomerular induction in embryonic mouse kidney explants in organ cultures. Here we determined the physiological functions of endogenous PRKX. Knockdown by siRNA of PRKX gene expression in a human fetal collecting tubule (HFCT) cell line exceeded 70% and resulted in decreased cell migration and increased adhesion of the cells to a collagen I matrix. In embryonic mouse kidney explants, the same degree of knockdown decreased ureteric bud branching and glomerular induction. Because PRKX BAG-3 PIN-1 and MAGI-1 are all expressed in ureteric bud derivatives, we tested for interactions among them and found that PRKX binds to all three proteins through its WW domain as determined by TransSignal domain arrays, and it coimmunoprecipitated with Pin-1 in HFCT cell lysates. These studies suggest that Polycystin-1 and Pin-1 may mediate the function of PRKX in kidney development.

19186247
Mouse models of polycystic kidney disease.
Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is a diverse group of human monogenic lethal conditions inherited as autosomal dominant (AD) or recessive (AR) traits. Recent development of genetically engineered mouse models of ADPKD, ARPKD, and nephronophthisis/medullary cystic disease (NPHP) are providing additional insights into the molecular mechanisms governing of these disease processes as well as the developmental differentiation of the normal kidney. Genotypic and phenotypic mouse models are discussed and provide evidence for the fundamental involvement of cell-matrix, cell-cell, and primary cilia-lumen interactions, as well as epithelial proliferation, apoptosis, and polarization. Structure/function relationships between the PKD1, PKD2, PKHD1, and NPHP genes and proteins support the notion of a regulatory multiprotein cystic complex with a mechanosensory function that integrates signals from the extracellular environment. The plethora of intracellular signaling cascades that can impact renal cystic development suggest an exquisitely sensitive requirement for integrated downstream transduction and provide potential targets for therapeutic intervention. Appropriate genocopy models that faithfully recapitulate the phenotypic characteristics of the disease will be invaluable tools to analyze the effects of modifier genes and small molecule inhibitor therapies.

18516626
Pathways of apoptosis in human autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant polycystic kidney diseases.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a major cause of end-stage renal disease in adults. Autosomal recessive (AR) PKD affects approximately 1:20,000 live-born children with high perinatal mortality. Both diseases have abnormalities in epithelial proliferation, secretion, and cell-matrix interactions, leading to progressive cystic expansion and associated interstitial fibrosis. Cell number in a kidney reflects the balance between proliferation and apoptosis. Apoptosis results from extrinsic (ligand-induced, expression of caspase-8) and intrinsic (mitochondrial damage, expression of caspase-9) triggers. Previous studies have suggested a role for apoptosis in PKD cyst formation and parenchymal destruction. Mechanisms underlying apoptosis in human ADPKD and ARPKD were examined by quantitative immunohistochemistry and Western immunoblot analyses of age-matched normal and PKD tissues. Caspase-8 expression was significantly greater in small cysts and normal-appearing tubules than in larger cysts in ADPKD kidneys. Caspase-8 also appeared early in the disease process of ADPKD. In ARPKD, expression of caspase-8 was most pronounced in later stages of the disease and was not confined to a specific cyst size. In conclusion, apoptosis in human ADPKD is an early event, occurring predominantly in normal-appearing tubules and small cysts, and is triggered by an extrinsic factor, but it occurs later in ARPKD.

18256315
Mechanoregulation of intracellular Ca2+ in human autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease cyst-lining renal epithelial cells.
Mutations of cilia-expressed proteins are associated with an attenuated shear-induced increase in intracellular Ca(2+) concentration ([Ca(2+)](i)) in renal epithelial cell lines derived from murine models of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). We hypothesized that human ARPKD cyst-lining renal epithelial cells also exhibited dysregulated mechanosensation. To test this, conditionally immortalized cell lines derived from human fetal ARPKD cyst-lining (pool and clone 5E) cell lines with low levels of fibrocystin/polyductin expression and age-matched normal collecting tubule [human fetal collecting tubule (HFCT) pool and clone 2C] cell lines were grown in culture, loaded with a Ca(2+) indicator dye, and subjected to laminar shear. Clonal cell lines were derived from single cells present in pools of cells from cyst-lining and collecting tubules, microdissected from human kidney. Resting and peak [Ca(2+)](i) were similar between ARPKD 5E and pool, and HFCT 2C and pool; however, the flow-induced peak [Ca(2+)](i) was greater in ARPKD 5E (700 +/- 87 nM, n = 21) than in HFCT 2C (315 +/- 58 nM, n = 12; P < 0.01) cells. ARPKD 5E cells treated with Gd(3+), an inhibitor of nonselective cation channels, inhibited but did not abolish the shear-induced [Ca(2+)](i) transient. Cilia were approximately 20% shorter in ARPKD than HFCT cells, but no difference in ciliary localization or total cellular expression of polycystin-2, a mechanosenory Gd(3+)-sensitive cation channel, was detected between ARPKD and HFCT cells. The intracellular Ca(2+) stores were similar between cells. In summary, human ARPKD cells exhibit an exaggerated Gd(3+)-sensitive mechano-induced Ca(2+) response compared with controls; whether this represents dysregulated polycystin-2 activity in ARPKD cells remains to be explored.

18039103
Cystic disease of the kidney.
This review focuses on the mechanisms that underlie the development of human renal cystic diseases. A pathological, clinical, and pathophysiological overview is given. Initial analysis of the cell biology of inappropriate hyperproliferation accompanied by fluid secretion of cyst-lining epithelia has been followed by the elucidation of fundamental defects in epithelial polarity, cell-matrix and cell-cell interactions, and apoptosis, all of which are discussed. Identification of the genes and proteins responsible for several renal cystic diseases has led to a more complete understanding of defects in renal developmental programming, differentiation, and morphogenesis, all of which underlie cystic diseases of the kidney.

17980165
Protein kinase X (PRKX) can rescue the effects of polycystic kidney disease-1 gene (PKD1) deficiency.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a common, genetically determined developmental disorder of the kidney that is characterized by cystic expansion of renal tubules and is caused by truncating mutations and haplo-insufficiency of the PKD1 gene. Several defects in cAMP-mediated proliferation and ion secretion have been detected in ADPKD cyst-lining epithelia. Unlike the ubiquitous PKA, the cAMP-dependent CREB-kinase, Protein Kinase X (PRKX) is developmentally regulated, tissue restricted and induces renal epithelial cell migration, and tubulogenesis in vitro as well as branching morphogenesis of ureteric bud in developing kidneys. The possibility of functional interactions between PKD1-encoded polycystin-1 and PRKX was suggested by the renal co-distribution of PRKX and polycystin-1 and the binding and phosphorylation of the C-terminal of polycystin-1 by PRKX at S4166 in vitro. Early consequences of PKD1 mutation include increased tubule epithelial cell-matrix adhesion, decreased migration, reduced ureteric bud branching and aberrant renal tubule dilation. To determine whether PRKX might counteract the adverse effects of PKD1 mutation, human ADPKD epithelial cell lines were transfected with constitutively active PRKX and shown to rescue characteristic adhesion and migration defects. In addition, the co-injection of constitutively active PRKX with inhibitory pMyr-EGFP-PKD1 into the ureteric buds of mouse embryonic kidneys in organ culture resulted in restoration of normal branching morphogenesis without cystic tubular dilations. These results suggest that PRKX can restore normal function to PKD1-deficient kidneys and have implications for the development of preventative therapy for ADPKD.

