21533885
Seasonal Influenza Vaccination among Homebound Elderly Receiving Home-Based Primary Care in New York City.
Seasonal influenza vaccination is recommended for all persons aged ?50 years to reduce influenza related morbidity and mortality, but vaccination coverage among community-dwelling elderly remains low. Homebound elderly receiving home-based primary care (HBPC) have fewer barriers to vaccination than other community-dwelling elderly. The Mount Sinai Visiting Doctors (MSVD) program provides HBPC to homebound elderly in New York City. This study assessed seasonal influenza vaccination coverage within an urban HBPC program and identified factors associated with vaccine refusal. A cross-sectional analysis of data from the 2008-2009 influenza season was completed and influenza vaccination coverage was assessed. The association between social, demographic and health-related characteristics and vaccine refusal was evaluated using bivariate analysis and multivariable logistic regression. Of 689 people aged >65 eligible for influenza vaccination, 578 (84%) accepted and 111 (16%) refused vaccination. In multivariable analysis, vaccine refusal was positively associated with female gender (adjusted odds ratio [AOR] = 1.85, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.02, 3.35), black race (AOR = 2.04, 95% CI 1.28, 3.25), and living alone (AOR = 1.71, 95% CI 1.10, 2.67), and negatively associated with dementia (AOR = 0.59, 95% CI 0.37, 0.91). Seasonal influenza vaccine coverage in the MSVD program was high compared to nursing home and community-dwelling elderly. Offering patients vaccination at home without additional expense will likely improve vaccine coverage among urban homebound elderly. Understanding why vaccine refusal rates are higher among females, black patients, and those living alone should guide interventions to increase vaccine acceptance among this population.

18225454
Falls in the community-dwelling older adult: a review for primary-care providers.
Falls in the elderly are an important independent marker of frailty. Up to half of elderly people over 65 experience a fall every year. They are associated with high morbidity and mortality and are responsible for greater than 20 billion dollars a year in healthcare costs in the United States. This article presents a review and guide for the primary care provider of the predisposing and situational risk factors for falls; comprehensive assessment for screening and tailored intervention; and discussion of single and multicomponent measures for fall prevention and management in the older person living in the community. Interventions for the cognitively impaired and demented elderly will also be addressed.

17283350
Brief communication: National quality-of-care standards in home-based primary care.
Home-based primary care for homebound seniors is complex, and practice constraints are unique. No quality-of-care standards exist. To identify process quality indicators that are essential to high-quality, home-based primary care. An expert development panel reviewed established and new quality indicators for applicability to home-based primary care. A separate national evaluation panel used a modified Delphi process to rate the validity and importance of the potential quality indicators. Two national panels whose members varied in practice type, location, and setting. The panels considered 260 quality indicators and endorsed 200 quality indicators that cover 23 geriatric conditions. Twenty-one (10.5%) quality indicators were newly created, 52 (26%) were modified, and 127 (63.5%) were unchanged. The quality indicators have decreased emphasis on interventions and have placed greater emphasis on quality of life. The quality indicator set may not apply to all homebound seniors and might be difficult to implement for a typical home-based primary care program. The quality indicator set provides a comprehensive home-based primary care quality framework and will allow for future comparative research. Provision of these evidence-based measures could improve patient quality of life and longevity.

