21271695
Rational design of cyclic peptide modulators of the transcriptional coactivator CBP: a new class of p53 inhibitors.
The CREB binding protein (CBP) is a human transcriptional coactivator consisting of several conserved functional modules, which interacts with distinct transcription factors including nuclear receptors, CREB, and STAT proteins. Despite the importance of CBP in transcriptional regulation, many questions regarding the role of its particular domains in CBP functions remain unanswered. Therefore, developing small molecules capable of selectively modulating a single domain of CBP is of invaluable aid at unraveling its prominent activities. Here we report the design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of conformationally restricted peptides as novel modulators for the acetyl-lysine binding bromodomain (BRD) of CBP. Utilizing a target structure-guided and computer-aided rational design approach, we developed a series of cyclic peptides with affinity for CBP BRD significantly greater than those of its biological ligands, including lysine-acetylated histones and tumor suppressor p53. The best cyclopeptide of the series exhibited a K(d) of 8.0 ?M, representing a 24-fold improvement in affinity over that of the linear lysine 382-acetylated p53 peptide. This lead peptide is highly selective for CBP BRD over BRDs from other transcriptional proteins. Cell-based functional assays carried out in colorectal carcinoma HCT116 cells further demonstrated the efficacy of this compound to modulate p53 stability and function in response to DNA damage. Our results strongly argue that these CBP modulators can effectively inhibit p53 transcriptional activity by blocking p53K382ac binding to CBP BRD and promoting p53 instability by changes of its post-translational modification states, a different mechanism than that of the p53 inhibitors reported to date.

20837527
Shared molecular amino acid signature in the HLA-DR peptide binding pocket predisposes to both autoimmune diabetes and thyroiditis.
There is strong genetic association between type 1A diabetes (T1D) and autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD). T1D and AITD frequently occur together in the same individual, a condition classified as a variant of the autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 3 (APS3). Because T1D and AITD are individually strongly associated with different HLA class II sequences, we asked which HLA class II pocket sequence and structure confer joint susceptibility to both T1D and AITD in the same individual (APS3v). We sequenced the HLA-DR gene in 105 APS3v patients and 153 controls, and identified a pocket amino acid signature, DR?-Tyr-26, DR?-Leu-67, DR?-Lys-71, and DR?-Arg-74, that was strongly associated with APS3v (P = 5.4 × 10(-14), odds ratio = 8.38). Logistic regression analysis demonstrated that DR?-Leu-67 (P = 9.4 × 10(-13)) and DR?-Arg-74 (P = 1.21 × 10(-13)) gave strong independent effects on disease susceptibility. Structural modeling studies demonstrated that pocket 4 was critical for the development of T1D+AITD; all disease-associated amino acids were linked to areas of the pocket that interact directly with the peptide and, therefore, influence peptide binding. The disease-susceptible HLA-DR pocket was more positively charged (Lys-71, Arg-74) compared with the protective pocket (Ala-71, Gln-74). We conclude that a specific pocket amino acid signature confers joint susceptibility to T1D+AITD in the same individual by causing significant structural changes in the MHC II peptide binding pocket and influencing peptide binding and presentation. Moreover, Arg-74 is a major amino acid position for the development of several autoimmune diseases. These findings suggest that blocking the critical Arg-74 pocket might offer a method for treating certain autoimmune conditions.

20338845
A molecular dynamics investigation of lipid bilayer perturbation by PIP2.
Phosphoinositides like phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP(2)) are negatively charged lipids that play a pivotal role in membrane trafficking, signal transduction, and protein anchoring. We have designed a force field for the PIP(2) headgroup using quantum mechanical methods and characterized its properties inside a lipid bilayer using molecular dynamics simulations. Macroscopic properties such as area/headgroup, density profiles, and lipid order parameters calculated from these simulations agree well with the experimental values. However, microscopically, the PIP(2) introduces a local perturbation of the lipid bilayer. The average PIP(2) headgroup orientation of 45 degrees relative to the bilayer normal induces a unique, distance-dependent organization of the lipids that surround PIP(2). The headgroups of these lipids preferentially orient closer to the bilayer normal. This perturbation creates a PIP(2) lipid microdomain with the neighboring lipids. We propose that the PIP(2) lipid microdomain enables the PIP(2) to function as a membrane-bound anchoring molecule.

20303712
Tg.2098 is a major human thyroglobulin T-cell epitope.
An HLA-DR variant containing Arginine at position 74 of the DRbeta1 chain confers a strong genetic susceptibility to autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD), Graves' disease (GD) and Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT), while Glutamine at position DRbeta1-74 is protective. We hypothesized that the DRbeta1-Arg74 variant is able to present pathogenic thyroglobulin (Tg) peptides to T-cells more efficiently, thereby triggering thyroid autoimmunity. Indeed, we have previously identified 4 human Tg (hTg) peptides that bind specifically to DRbeta1-Arg74 with much weaker binding to the protective variant DRbeta1-Gln74. The aim of our study was to examine in vivo whether an hTg peptide that binds strongly and specifically to DRbeta1-Arg74 is capable of stimulating T-cells during the induction of thyroiditis in a "humanized" mouse expressing human DR3, and in patients positive for Tg antibodies. Sequencing of exon 2 of the DR transgene in the DR3 mice, null for endogenous MHC II molecules, confirmed that they expressed the disease-associated DRbeta1-Arg74 variant, thus making them an ideal in vivo model to test the presentation of hTg peptides by DRbeta1-Arg74 HLA-DR. Induction of EAT in the DR3 mice lead to T-cell stimulation and proliferation to Tg.2098, a strong and specific DRbeta1-Arg74 binder, while a non-binding control peptide, Tg.2766 did not induce this response. Moreover, Tg.2098 stimulated T-cells from 4 individuals who were positive for thyroglobulin antibodies, demonstrating that Tg.2098 is an immunogenic peptide capable of being presented in vivo and activating T-cells in EAT and AITD. Energetic analysis of the complex formed by Tg.2098 and DRbeta-Arg74 has shown that the origin of the affinity was determined by residues 1, 7 and 9 in the peptide, while the selectivity of the peptide for the MHC was determined by the Asp in position 4. The disease-protective substitution R74Q, leads to reduction in affinity due to changes in local interaction with D4 as well as non-local interaction with other residues. The electrostatic potential on the surface of the DRbeta-Arg74-Tg.2098 complex has a unique signature which may be recognized by T-cell receptors leading to autoimmune thyroiditis. Taken together these findings suggest that Tg.2098, a strong and specific binder to the disease-associated HLA-DRbeta-Arg74, is a major human T-cell epitope and participant in the pathoetiology of AITD.

19731376
The energetics of the acetylation switch in p53-mediated transcriptional activation.
Targeted therapeutic intervention in receptor-ligand interactions of p53-mediated tumor suppression can impact progression of disease, aging, and variation in genetic expression. Here, we conducted a number of molecular simulations, based on structures of p53 in complex with its transcriptional coactivating CBP bromodomain, determined by NMR spectroscopy, to investigate the energetics of the binding complex. Building on the observation that acetylation of K382 in p53 serves as the essential triggering switch for a specific interaction with CBP, we assessed the differential effect of acetylation on binding from simulations of an octapeptide derived from p53 with acetylated and nonacetylated K382 (residues 379-386). Cluster analysis of the simulations shows that acetylation of the free peptide does not significantly change the population of the preferred conformation of the peptide in solution for binding to CBP. Conversion of the acetylated K382 to nonacetylated form with free energy perturbation (FEP) simulations of the p53 CBP complex and the free peptide showed that the relative contribution of the acetyl group to binding is 4.8 kcal/mol. An analysis of residue contributions to the binding energy using an MM-GBSA approach agrees with the FEP results and sheds additional light on the origin of selectivity in p53 binding to the CBP bromodomain.

19086158
The PT1-Ca2+ Gla domain binds to a membrane through two dipalmitoylphosphatidylserines. A computational study.
Binding of vitamin K-dependent proteins to cell membranes containing phosphatidylserine (PS) via gamma-carboxyglutamic acid (Gla) domains is one of the essential steps in the blood coagulation pathway. During activation of the coagulation cascade, prothrombin is converted to thrombin by prothrombinase, a complex consisting of serine protease FXa and cofactor FVa, anchored to anionic phospholipids on the surface of activated platelets in the presence of calcium ions. To investigate the binding of the Gla domain of prothrombin fragment 1 (PT1) to anionic lipids in the presence of Ca2+, we have conducted MD simulations of the protein with one and two dipalmitoylphosphatidylserines (DPPS) in a dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) bilayer membrane. The results show a well-defined phosphatidylserine binding site, which agrees generally with crystallographic studies [Huang, M., et al. (2003) Nat. Struct. Biol. 10, 751-756]. However, in the presence of the lipid membrane, some of the interactions observed in the crystal structure adjust during the simulations possibly because in our system the PT1-Ca2+ complex is embedded in a DPPC lipid membrane. Our simulations confirm the existence of a second phospholipid headgroup binding site on the opposite face of the PT1-Ca2+ complex as suggested by MacDonald et al. [(1997) Biochemistry 36, 5120-5127]. The serine headgroup in the second site binds through a Gla domain-bound calcium ion Ca1, Gla30, and Lys11. On the basis of free energy simulations, we estimate the energy of binding of the PT1-Ca2+ complex to a single DPPS to be around -11.5 kcal/mol. The estimated free energy of binding of a DPPS lipid to the second binding site is around -8.8 kcal/mol and is in part caused by the nature of the second site and in part by entropic effects.

19053280
The PT1-Ca(2+) Gla Domain Binds to a Membrane through Two Dipalmitoylphosphatidylserines. A Computational Study (dagger).
Binding of vitamin K-dependent proteins to cell membranes containing phosphatidylserine (PS) via gamma-carboxyglutamic acid (Gla) domains is one of the essential steps in the blood coagulation pathway. During activation of the coagulation cascade, prothrombin is converted to thrombin by prothrombinase, a complex consisting of serine protease FXa and cofactor FVa, anchored to anionic phospholipids on the surface of activated platelets in the presence of calcium ions. To investigate the binding of the Gla domain of prothrombin fragment 1 (PT1) to anionic lipids in the presence of Ca(2+), we have conducted MD simulations of the protein with one and two dipalmitoylphosphatidylserines (DPPS) in a dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) bilayer membrane. The results show a well-defined phosphatidylserine binding site, which agrees generally with crystallographic studies [Huang, M., et al. (2003) Nat. Struct. Biol. 10, 751-756]. However, in the presence of the lipid membrane, some of the interactions observed in the crystal structure adjust during the simulations possibly because in our system the PT1-Ca(2+) complex is embedded in a DPPC lipid membrane. Our simulations confirm the existence of a second phospholipid headgroup binding site on the opposite face of the PT1-Ca(2+) complex as suggested by MacDonald et al. [(1997) Biochemistry 36, 5120-5127]. The serine headgroup in the second site binds through a Gla domain-bound calcium ion Ca1, Gla30, and Lys11. On the basis of free energy simulations, we estimate the energy of binding of the PT1-Ca(2+) complex to a single DPPS to be around -11.5 kcal/mol. The estimated free energy of binding of a DPPS lipid to the second binding site is around -8.8 kcal/mol and is in part caused by the nature of the second site and in part by entropic effects.

18957407
Prediction of protein loop structures using a local move Monte Carlo approach and a grid-based force field.
We have developed an improved local move Monte Carlo (LMMC) loop sampling approach for loop predictions. The method generates loop conformations based on simple moves of the torsion angles of side chains and local moves of backbone of loops. To reduce the computational costs for energy evaluations, we developed a grid-based force field to represent the protein environment and solvation effect. Simulated annealing has been used to enhance the efficiency of the LMMC loop sampling and identify low-energy loop conformations. The prediction quality is evaluated on a set of protein loops with known crystal structure that has been previously used by others to test different loop prediction methods. The results show that this approach can reproduce the experimental results with the root mean square deviation within 1.8 A for all the test cases. The LMMC loop prediction approach developed here could be useful for improvement in the quality the loop regions in homology models, flexible protein-ligand and protein-protein docking studies.

18723677
Autoinhibitory regulation of SCF-mediated ubiquitination by human cullin 1's C-terminal tail.
SCF (Skp1 x CUL1 x F-box protein x ROC1) E3 ubiquitin ligase and Cdc34 E2-conjugating enzyme catalyze polyubiquitination in a precisely regulated fashion. Here, we describe biochemical evidence suggesting an autoinhibitory role played by the human CUL1 ECTD (extreme C-terminal domain; spanning the C-terminal 50 amino acids), a region that is predicted to contact the ROC1 RING finger protein by structural studies. We showed that ECTD did not contribute to CUL1's stable association with ROC1. Remarkably, deletion of ECTD, or missense mutations designed to disrupt the predicted ECTD x ROC1 interaction, markedly increased the ability of SCF(betaTrCP2) to promote IkappaB alpha polyubiquitination and polyubiquitin chain assembly by Cdc34 in vitro. Thus, disruption of ECTD yields in vitro effects that parallel SCF activation by Nedd8 conjugation to CUL1. We propose that SCF may be subject to autoinhibitory regulation, in which Nedd8 conjugation acts as a molecular switch to drive the E3 into an active state by diminishing the inhibitory ECTD x ROC1 interaction.

18338226
Modeling dimerizations of transmembrane proteins using Brownian dynamics simulations.
The dimerizations of membrane proteins, Outer Membrane Phospholipase A (OMPLA) and glycophorin A (GPA), have been simulated by an adapted Brownian Dynamics program. To mimic the membrane protein environment, we introduced a hybrid electrostatic potential map of membrane and water for electrostatic interaction calculations. We added a van der Waals potential term to the force field of the current version of the BD program to simulate the short-range interactions of the two monomers. We reduced the BD sampling space from three dimensions to two dimensions to improve the efficiency of BD simulations for membrane proteins. The OMPLA and GPA dimers predicted by our 2D-BD simulation and structural refinement is in good agreement with the experimental structures. The adapted 2D-BD method could be used for prediction of dimerization of other membrane proteins, such as G protein-coupled receptors, to help better understanding of the structures and functions of membrane proteins.

17505540
Calculation of the free energy and cooperativity of protein folding.
Calculation of the free energy of protein folding and delineation of its pre-organization are of foremost importance for understanding, predicting and designing biological macromolecules. Here, we introduce an energy smoothing variant of parallel tempering replica exchange Monte Carlo (REMS) that allows for efficient configurational sampling of flexible solutes under the conditions of molecular hydration. Its usage to calculate the thermal stability of a model globular protein, Trp cage TC5b, achieves excellent agreement with experimental measurements. We find that the stability of TC5b is attained through the coupled formation of local and non-local interactions. Remarkably, many of these structures persist at high temperature, concomitant with the origin of native-like configurations and mesostates in an otherwise macroscopically disordered unfolded state. Graph manifold learning reveals that the conversion of these mesostates to the native state is structurally heterogeneous, and that the cooperativity of their formation is encoded largely by the unfolded state ensemble. In all, these studies establish the extent of thermodynamic and structural pre-organization of folding of this model globular protein, and achieve the calculation of macromolecular stability ab initio, as required for ab initio structure prediction, genome annotation, and drug design.

17277191
Association free energy of dipalmitoylphosphatidylserines in a mixed dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine membrane.
Blood coagulation is strongly dependent on the binding of vitamin K-dependent proteins to cell membranes containing phosphatidylserine (PS) via gamma-carboxyglutamic acid (Gla) domains. The process depends on calcium, which can induce nonideal behavior in membranes through domain formation. Such domain separation mediated by Ca(2+) ions or proteins can have an important contribution to the thermodynamics of the interaction between charged peripheral proteins and oppositely charged membranes. To characterize the properties of lipid-lipid interactions, molecular dynamics, and free energy simulations in a mixed bilayer membrane containing dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine and dipalmitoylphosphatidylserine were carried out. The free energy of association between dipalmitoylphosphatidylserines in the environment of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholines has been calculated by using a novel approach to the dual topology technique of the PS-PC hybrid. Two different methods, free energy perturbation and thermodynamic integration, were used to calculate the free energy difference. In thermodynamic integration runs three schemes were applied to evaluate the integral at the limits of lambda --> 0 or lambda --> 1. Our studies show that the association of two PSs in the environment of PCs is repulsive in the absence of Ca(2+) and becomes favorable in their presence. We also show that the mixed component membrane should exhibit nonideal behavior that will lead to PS clustering.

