21374078
Sinusoidal galvanic vestibular stimulation (sGVS) induces a vasovagal response in the rat.
Blood pressure (BP) and heart rate (HR) were studied in isoflurane-anesthetized Long-Evans rats during sinusoidal galvanic vestibular stimulation (sGVS) and sinusoidal oscillation in pitch to characterize vestibular influences on autonomic control of BP and HR. sGVS was delivered binaurally via Ag/AgCl needle electrodes inserted over the mastoids at stimulus frequencies 0.008-0.4 Hz. Two processes affecting BP and HR were induced by sGVS: 1) a transient drop in BP (?15-20 mmHg) and HR (?3 beat*s(-1)), followed by a slow recovery over 1-6 min; and 2) inhibitory modulations in BP (?4.5 mmHg/g) and HR (?0.15 beats*s(-1)/g) twice in each stimulus cycle. The BP and HR modulations were approximately in-phase with each other and were best evoked by low stimulus frequencies. A wavelet analysis indicated significant energies in BP and HR at scales related to twice and four times the stimulus frequency bands. BP and HR were also modulated by oscillation in pitch at frequencies 0.025-0.5 Hz. Sensitivities at 0.025 Hz were ?4.5 mmHg/g (BP) and ?0.17 beat*s(-1)/g (HR) for pitches of 20-90°. The tilt-induced BP and HR modulations were out-of-phase, but the frequencies at which responses were elicited by tilt and sGVS were the same. The results show that the sGVS-induced responses, which likely originate in the otolith organs, can exert a powerful inhibitory effect on both BP and HR at low frequencies. These responses have a striking resemblance to human vasovagal responses. Thus, sGVS-activated rats can potentially serve as a useful experimental model of the vasovagal response in humans.

19692515
Dependence of the roll angular vestibuloocular reflex (aVOR) on gravity.
Little is known about the dependence of the roll angular vestibuloocular reflex (aVOR) on gravity or its gravity-dependent adaptive properties. To study gravity-dependent characteristics of the roll aVOR, monkeys were oscillated about a naso-occipital axis in darkness while upright or tilted. Roll aVOR gains were largest in the upright position and decreased by 7-15% as animals were tilted from the upright. Thus the unadapted roll aVOR gain has substantial gravitational dependence. Roll gains were also decreased or increased by 0.25 Hz, in- or out-of-phase rotation of the head and the visual surround while animals were prone, supine, upright, or in side-down positions. Gain changes, determined as a function of head tilt, were fit with a sinusoid; the amplitudes represented the amount of the gravity-dependent gain change, and the bias, the gravity-independent gain change. Gravity-dependent gain changes were absent or substantially smaller in roll (approximately 5%) than in yaw (25%) or pitch (17%), whereas gravity-independent gain changes were similar for roll, pitch, and yaw (approximately 20%). Thus the high-frequency roll aVOR gain has an inherent dependence on head orientation re gravity in the unadapted state, which is different from the yaw/pitch aVORs. This inherent gravitational dependence may explain why the adaptive circuits are not active when the head is tilted re gravity during roll aVOR adaptation. These behavioral differences support the idea that there is a fundamental difference in the central organization of canal-otolith convergence of the roll and yaw/pitch aVORs.

19645885
Effect of canal plugging on quadrupedal locomotion in monkey.
The vestibular system plays an important role in controling gait, but where in the labyrinths relevant activity arises is largely unknown. After the semicircular canals are plugged, low frequency (0.01-2 Hz) components of the angular vestibulo-ocular reflex (aVOR) and angular vestibulo-collic reflex (aVCR) are lost, but high frequency (3-20 Hz) components remain. We determined how loss of low frequency canal afference affects limb and head movements during quadrupedal locomotion. Head, body, and limb movements were recorded in three dimensions (3-D) in a cynomolgus monkey with a motion detection system, while the animal walked on a treadmill. All six canals were plugged, reducing the canal time constants from approximately 4.0 sec to approximately 0.07 sec. Major changes in the control of the limbs occurred after surgery. Fore and hind limbs were held farther from the body, producing a broad-based gait. Swing-phase trajectories were inaccurate, and control of medial-lateral limb movement was erratic. These changes in gait were present immediately after surgery, as well as 15 months later, when the animal had essentially recovered. Thus, control of the limbs in the horizontal plane was defective after loss of the low-frequency semicircular canal input and never recovered. Cycle-averaged pitch and roll head rotations, and 3-D head translations were also significantly larger and more erratic after than before surgery. Head rotations in yaw could not be quantified due to intrusion of voluntary head turns. These findings indicate that the semicircular canals provide critical low frequency information to maximize the accuracy of stepping and stabilize the head during normal quadrupedal locomotion.

