20952252
Adjuvant therapy with methylene blue in the treatment of right ventricular failure after pulmonary embolectomy.
Severe pulmonary embolism often leads to right ventricular failure after surgical embolectomy secondary to ischaemia reperfusion injury and acute lung injury (ALI). Acute right ventricular dysfunction is traditionally treated with inotropes and vasopressors to maintain cardiac output and coronary perfusion as well as selective pulmonary vasodilators to provide right ventricular afterload reduction. We report the first case of utilisation of methylene (MB) in a patient with acute right ventricular failure and vasoplegic shock after surgical pulmonary embolectomy.

20841364
The efficacy of post-cardiopulmonary bypass dosing of vancomycin in cardiac surgery.
Objective. Vancomycin is administered widely to patients undergoing cardiac surgery as prophylaxis against resistant Gram-positive sternal wound and venous donor site infections. The purpose of this study was to determine the efficacy of a standardized prebypass and postbypass dosing regimen of vancomycin by assessing plasma concentrations in the immediate postoperative period and postoperative surgical site infections (SSIs). Design. Retrospective cohort study. Setting . Cardiothoracic surgical intensive care unit in a tertiary care academic medical center. Methods. A total of 34 consecutive adult patients who had undergone cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) were analyzed retrospectively. Each patient received 1000 mg of vancomycin administered over 1 hour around the time of induction of anesthesia and 500 mg after discontinuation of CPB. Trough vancomycin levels were sampled in the intensive care unit 12 hours after the last dose given in the operating room. Along with patient characteristics, postoperative readmission rates and SSIs were recorded for 1 year after surgery. Results. The nadir serum vancomycin level before the next dose was 9.3 ± 4.5 µg/mL (mean ± standard deviation). One superficial SSI was noted. Readmission rate for SSIs was 2.94%. Conclusion . Vancomycin concentrations in the serum were greater than the minimum inhibitory concentration for most staphylococci ranging from 4 to 19.3 µg/mL producing acceptable therapeutic serum concentrations and low rate of infectious complications. Thus postbypass dosing is acceptable in vancomycin cardiac surgical prophylaxis.

17368172
Mechanical ventilation for cardiac support.
Postoperative lung injury is a common, although decreasing, complication of cardiac surgery. This article discusses various means to prevent and minimize postoperative lung injury. These include lung-protective strategies, pharmacologic strategies, and mechanical ventilation.

