21565664
Foreword endocrine hypertension.


21540285
Minireview: IGF, Insulin, and Cancer.
In recent years, the influence of the IGF system and insulin on cancer growth has been widely studied. Observational human studies have reported increased cancer mortality in those with obesity and type 2 diabetes, which may be attributable to hyperinsulinemia, elevated IGF-I, or potentially both factors. Conversely, those with low insulin, IGF-I and IGF-II levels appear to be relatively protected from cancer development. Initial attention focused on the role of IGF-I in tumor development. The results of these investigations allowed for the development of therapies targeting the IGF-I receptor signaling pathway. However, after in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrating that insulin may also play a significant and independent role in tumorigenesis, insulin is now receiving more attention in this regard. Some studies suggest that targeting insulin receptor signaling may be an important alternative or adjunct to targeting IGF-I receptor signaling. In this minireview, we discuss some of the recent in vitro, animal, and clinical studies that have elaborated our understanding of the influence of IGF and insulin on tumorigenesis. These studies have shed more light on the interaction between insulin and IGF signaling in cancer cells. They have made possible the development of novel targeted therapies and highlighted some of the potential future directions for research and therapeutics.

21459318
Is growth hormone resistance/IGF-1 reduction good for you?
GH, IGF-1, and insulin are emerging as important and independent mediators of tumor development and aging. Two recent studies report that humans with GH-receptor deficiency are protected from developing cancer through alterations in GH, IGF-1, and insulin signaling, decreasing the susceptibility of cells to DNA damage and abnormal proliferation.

21349407
Foreword: Gastroenteropancreatic system and its tumors: Part 2.


21095537
Foreword: Gastroenteropancreatic system and its tumors: Part 1.


21056746
The GH/IGF-1 axis in growth and development: new insights derived from animal models.


20960553
Insulin resistance in obesity as the underlying cause for the metabolic syndrome.
The metabolic syndrome affects more than a third of the US population, predisposing to the development of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The 2009 consensus statement from the International Diabetes Federation, American Heart Association, World Heart Federation, International Atherosclerosis Society, International Association for the Study of Obesity, and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute defines the metabolic syndrome as 3 of the following elements: abdominal obesity, elevated blood pressure, elevated triglycerides, low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and hyperglycemia. Many factors contribute to this syndrome, including decreased physical activity, genetic predisposition, chronic inflammation, free fatty acids, and mitochondrial dysfunction. Insulin resistance appears to be the common link between these elements, obesity and the metabolic syndrome. In normal circumstances, insulin stimulates glucose uptake into skeletal muscle, inhibits hepatic gluconeogenesis, and decreases adipose-tissue lipolysis and hepatic production of very-low-density lipoproteins. Insulin signaling in the brain decreases appetite and prevents glucose production by the liver through neuronal signals from the hypothalamus. Insulin resistance, in contrast, leads to the release of free fatty acids from adipose tissue, increased hepatic production of very-low-density lipoproteins and decreased high-density lipoproteins. Increased production of free fatty acids, inflammatory cytokines, and adipokines and mitochondrial dysfunction contribute to impaired insulin signaling, decreased skeletal muscle glucose uptake, increased hepatic gluconeogenesis, and ? cell dysfunction, leading to hyperglycemia. In addition, insulin resistance leads to the development of hypertension by impairing vasodilation induced by nitric oxide. In this review, we discuss normal insulin signaling and the mechanisms by which insulin resistance contributes to the development of the metabolic syndrome.

20960544
The obesity pandemic: meeting the clinical challenges.


20926579
Elevated circulating IGF-I promotes mammary gland development and proliferation.
Animal studies have shown that IGF-I is essential for mammary gland development. Previous studies have suggested that local IGF-I rather than circulating IGF-I is the major mediator of mammary gland development. In the present study we used the hepatic IGF-I transgenic (HIT) and IGF-I knockout/HIT (KO-HIT) mouse models to examine the effects of enhanced circulating IGF-I on mammary development in the presence and absence of local IGF-I. HIT mice express the rat IGF-I transgene under the transthyretin promoter in the liver and have elevated circulating IGF-I and normal tissue IGF-I levels. The KO-HIT mice have no tissue IGF-I and increased circulating IGF-I. Analysis of mammary gland development reveals a greater degree of complexity in HIT mice as compared to control and KO-HIT mice, which demonstrate similar degrees of mammary gland complexity. Immunohistochemical evaluation of glands of HIT mice also suggests an enhanced degree of proliferation of the mammary gland, whereas KO-HIT mice exhibit mammary gland proliferation similar to control mice. In addition, HIT mice have a higher percentage of proliferating myoepithelial and luminal cells than control mice, whereas KO-HIT mice have an equivalent percentage of proliferating myoepithelial and luminal cells as control mice. Thus, our findings show that elevated circulating IGF-I levels are sufficient to promote normal pubertal mammary epithelial development. However, HIT mice demonstrate more pronounced mammary gland development when compared to control and KO-HIT mice. This suggests that both local and endocrine IGF-I play roles in mammary gland development and that elevated circulating IGF-I accelerates mammary epithelial proliferation.

20841312
The pathway from diabetes and obesity to cancer, on the route to targeted therapy.
To review the epidemiologic studies that describe the relationships among diabetes, obesity, and cancer; animal studies that have helped to decipher the mechanisms of cancer development; and some of the therapeutic targets undergoing investigation. An electronic search was performed of Medline, Scopus, Google Scholar, and ClinicalTrials.gov to identify English-language articles and studies published from 1995 through 2010 relating to obesity, insulin, insulinlike growth factors, diabetes mellitus, and cancer. Epidemiologic studies have reported that diabetes and obesity are linked to an increased risk of certain cancers in association with higher levels of insulin, C-peptide, and insulinlike growth factor 1. Animal models have demonstrated that increased insulin, insulinlike growth factor 1, and insulinlike growth factor 2 signaling can enhance tumor growth, while inhibiting this signaling can reduce tumorigenesis. Therapies that target insulin and insulinlike growth factor 1 signaling pathways have been developed and are currently in clinical trials to treat cancer. Insulin, insulinlike growth factor 1, and insulinlike growth factor 2 signaling through the insulin receptor and the insulinlike growth factor 1 receptor can induce tumorigenesis, accounting to some extent for the link between diabetes, obesity, and cancer. Knowledge of these pathways has enhanced our understanding of tumor development and allowed for the discovery of novel cancer treatments.

20801951
Mammalian target of rapamycin inhibition abrogates insulin-mediated mammary tumor progression in type 2 diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes increases breast cancer risk and mortality, and hyperinsulinemia is a major mediator of this effect. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is activated by insulin and is a key regulator of mammary tumor progression. Pharmacological mTOR inhibition suppresses tumor growth in numerous mammary tumor models in the non-diabetic setting. However, the role of the mTOR pathway in type 2 diabetes-induced tumor growth remains elusive. Herein, we investigated whether the mTOR pathway is implicated in insulin-induced mammary tumor progression in a transgenic mouse model of type 2 diabetes (MKR mice) and evaluated the impact of mTOR inhibition on the diabetic state. Mammary tumor progression was studied in the double transgenic MMTV-Polyoma Virus middle T antigen (PyVmT)/MKR mice and by orthotopic inoculation of PyVmT- and Neu/ErbB2-driven mammary tumor cells (Met-1 and MCNeuA cells respectively). mTOR inhibition by rapamycin markedly suppressed tumor growth in both wild-type and MKR mice. In diabetic animals, however, the promoting action of insulin on tumor growth was completely blunted by rapamycin, despite a worsening of the carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. Taken together, pharmacological mTOR blockade is sufficient to abrogate mammary tumor progression in the setting of hyperinsulinemia, and thus mTOR inhibitors may be an attractive therapeutic modality for breast cancer patients with type 2 diabetes. Careful monitoring of the metabolic state, however, is important as dose adaptations of glucose- and/or lipid-lowering therapy might be necessary.

20723813
Type I diabetes. Foreword.


20663687
The proliferating role of insulin and insulin-like growth factors in cancer.
Epidemiological studies have reported an increased risk of cancer in people with type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and obesity, related in part to hyperinsulinemia, secondary to insulin resistance. Hyperinsulinemia leads to increased expression of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I expression. In fact, increased insulin, IGF-I and IGF-II levels are associated with tumor growth in vitro, in animal models, and in epidemiological studies in humans. In this paper, we discuss the roles of insulin, IGF-I and IGF-II, their interaction with the insulin receptor (IR) and IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR), and their signaling pathways and regulation as these pertain to tumor growth. We explain how these pathways have been deciphered by in vitro and in vivo studies, and how they are being exploited in the development of targeted cancer therapies.

20425567
Insulin, insulin resistance, obesity, and cancer.
Epidemiologic studies have proposed a link between obesity, type 2 diabetes, and cancer. The pathophysiologic mechanisms involved in the development of type 2 diabetes, namely hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance, have also been implicated in cancer development. Patients with type 2 diabetes are reported to have a worse response to cancer chemotherapy, have more complications, and have a poorer prognosis than patients with cancer without diabetes. Studies also have reported that insulin, insulin secretagogues, and metformin may have effects on tumor growth. Given the escalating worldwide prevalence of obesity and type 2 diabetes, their relationship to cancer has generated great interest and research across many fields of medicine.

20372078
Hyperinsulinemia and type 2 diabetes: Impact on cancer.
Comment on: Novosyadlyy R, et al. Cancer Res 2010; 70:741-51.

20309918
Type 2 diabetes and cancer: what is the connection?
Epidemiological studies have demonstrated an association between type 2 diabetes and cancer. Type 2 diabetes is characterized by insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia. Hyperinsulinemia may lead to cancer through insulin's effect on its cognate receptor and the insulin-like growth factor system. The effects of insulin and insulin-like growth factor I on cancer development and progression have been demonstrated in animal and human studies. Type 2 diabetes has been positively associated with cancers of the breast, colon, and pancreas. An inverse relationship has been observed between type 2 diabetes and prostate cancer, and this may be due to lower testosterone levels in men with type 2 diabetes. Medications used to treat type 2 diabetes may affect cancer cells directly or indirectly by affecting serum insulin levels. Hyperinsulinemia may be an important risk factor for cancer as well as a target for cancer therapy.

20122443
Hormones and the science of athletic performance. Foreword.


20068149
Insulin-mediated acceleration of breast cancer development and progression in a nonobese model of type 2 diabetes.
Epidemiologic studies suggest that type 2 diabetes (T2D) increases breast cancer risk and mortality, but there is limited experimental evidence supporting this association. Moreover, there has not been any definition of a pathophysiological pathway that diabetes may use to promote tumorigenesis. In the present study, we used the MKR mouse model of T2D to investigate molecular mechanisms that link T2D to breast cancer development and progression. MKR mice harbor a transgene encoding a dominant-negative, kinase-dead human insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) that is expressed exclusively in skeletal muscle, where it acts to inactivate endogenous insulin receptor (IR) and IGF-IR. Although lean female MKR mice are insulin resistant and glucose intolerant, displaying accelerated mammary gland development and enhanced phosphorylation of IR/IGF-IR and Akt in mammary tissue, in the context of three different mouse models of breast cancer, these metabolic abnormalities were found to accelerate the development of hyperplastic precancerous lesions. Normal or malignant mammary tissue isolated from these mice exhibited increased phosphorylation of IR/IGF-IR and Akt, whereas extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 phosphorylation was largely unaffected. Tumor-promoting effects of T2D in the models were reversed by pharmacological blockade of IR/IGF-IR signaling by the small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor BMS-536924. Our findings offer compelling experimental evidence that T2D accelerates mammary gland development and carcinogenesis,and that the IR and/or the IGF-IR are major mediators of these effects.

19959755
Insulin-sensitizing therapy attenuates type 2 diabetes-mediated mammary tumor progression.
Type 2 diabetes increases breast cancer risk and mortality, and hyperinsulinemia has been identified as a major factor linking these two diseases. Thus, we hypothesized that pharmacological reduction of elevated insulin levels would attenuate type 2 diabetes-mediated mammary tumor progression. We studied mammary tumor development in MKR(+/+) mice, a nonobese, hyperinsulinemic mouse model of type 2 diabetes. MKR(+/+) mice were either crossed with mice expressing the polyoma virus middle T oncogene specifically in the mammary gland or inoculated orthotopically with the mouse mammary tumor cell lines Met-1 and MCNeuA. MKR(+/+) or control mice harboring tumors were treated with CL-316243, a specific beta3-adrenergic receptor agonist, which sensitizes insulin action but has no direct effect on the mouse mammary epithelium or Met-1 and MCNeuA cells. CL-316243 treatment significantly reduced the elevated insulin levels in MKR(+/+) mice and, as a consequence, attenuated mammary tumor progression in the three tumor models tested. This effect was accompanied by reductions in phosphorylation of insulin and IGF-I receptors in transformed mammary tissue. Insulin-sensitizing treatment is sufficient to abrogate type 2 diabetes-mediated mammary tumor progression. Therefore, early administration of insulin-sensitizing therapy may reduce breast cancer risk and mortality in patients with type 2 diabetes.

19956655
High-efficient FLPo deleter mice in C57BL/6J background.
Conditional gene manipulation in mice becomes a routine for genetic studies of mammalian gene functions. Additional site-specific recombinases such as FLP or phi31 provide one more level of gene manipulation flexibility. The recombination activity of the currently available FLP deleter mice remains low. We generated a new FLP deleter mouse line with the mouse codon-optimized FLPo gene in C57BJ/6 background, which showed superior recombination efficacy in comparison to FLPe deleter mice. 100% complete removal of FRT-flanked Neo cassette was observed in all F1 progeny mice carrying both FLPo and Neo cassette, which can be transmitted to F2 generation independent of FLPo activity. Our new FLPo transgenic mice (on pure C57BJ/6 background) will largely facilitate the gene targeting process and is valuable for conditional gene manipulation.

19944284
Pediatric endocrinology: Part II. Foreword.


19800274
Biological effects of growth hormone on carbohydrate and lipid metabolism.
This review will summarize the metabolic effects of growth hormone (GH) on the adipose tissue, liver, and skeletal muscle with focus on lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. The metabolic effects of GH predominantly involve the stimulation of lipolysis in the adipose tissue resulting in an increased flux of free fatty acids (FFAs) into the circulation. In the muscle and liver, GH stimulates triglyceride (TG) uptake, by enhancing lipoprotein lipase (LPL) expression, and its subsequent storage. The effects of GH on carbohydrate metabolism are more complicated and may be mediated indirectly via the antagonism of insulin action. Furthermore, GH has a net anabolic effect on protein metabolism although the molecular mechanisms of its actions are not completely understood. The major questions that still remain to be answered are (i) What are the molecular mechanisms by which GH regulates substrate metabolism? (ii) Does GH affect substrate metabolism directly or indirectly via IGF-1 or antagonism of insulin action?

19497975
Elevated levels of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I in serum rescue the severe growth retardation of IGF-I null mice.
IGF-I plays a vital role in growth and development and acts in an endocrine and an autocrine/paracrine fashion. The purpose of the current study was to clarify whether elevated levels of IGF-I in serum can rescue the severe growth retardation and organ development and function of igf-I null mice. To address that, we overexpressed a rat igf-I transgene specifically in the liver of igf-I null mice. We found that in the total absence of tissue IGF-I, elevated levels of IGF-I in serum can support normal body size at puberty and after puberty but are insufficient to fully support the female reproductive system (evident by irregular estrous cycle, impaired development of ovarian corpus luteum, reduced number of uterine glands and endometrial hypoplasia, all leading to decreased number of pregnancies and litter size). We conclude that most autocrine/paracrine actions of IGF-I that determine organ growth and function can be compensated by elevated levels of endocrine IGF-I. However, in mice, full compensatory responses are evident later in development, suggesting that autocrine/paracrine IGF-I is critical for neonatal development. Furthermore, we show that tissue IGF-I is necessary for the development of the female reproductive system and cannot be compensated by elevated levels of serum IGF-I.

19328408
This issue of Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics focuses on clinical and molecular advances in autoimmune endocrine conditions. Foreword.


19217508
Basic aspects and clinical applicability in the field of lipidology. Foreword.


19150422
Type 2 diabetic mice demonstrate slender long bones with increased fragility secondary to increased osteoclastogenesis.
Type 2 diabetics often demonstrate normal or increased bone mineral density, yet are at increased risk for bone fracture. Furthermore, the anti-diabetic oral thiazolidinediones (PPARgamma agonists) have recently been shown to increase bone fractures. To investigate the etiology of possible structural and/or material quality defects, we have utilized a well-described mouse model of Type 2 diabetes (MKR). MKR mice exhibit muscle hypoplasia from birth with reduced mass by the pre-diabetic age of 3 weeks. A compensatory hyperplasia ensues during early (5 weeks) development; by 6-8 weeks muscle is normal in structure and function. Adult whole-bone mechanical properties were determined by 4-point bending to test susceptibility to fracture. Micro-computed tomography and cortical bone histomorphometry were utilized to assess static and dynamic indices of structure, bone formation and resorption. Osteoclastogenesis assays were performed from bone marrow-derived non-adherent cells. The 8-week and 16-week, but not 3-week, male MKR had slender (i.e., narrow relative to length) femurs that were 20% weaker (p<0.05) relative to WT control femurs. Tissue-level mineral density was not affected. Impaired periosteal expansion during early diabetes resulted from 250% more, and 40% less of the cortical bone surface undergoing resorption and formation, respectively (p<0.05). Greater resorption persisted in adult MKR on both periosteal and endosteal surfaces. Differences were not limited to cortical bone as the distal femur metaphysis of 16 week MKR contained less trabecular bone and trabecular separation was greater than in WT by 60% (p<0.05). At all ages, MKR marrow-derived cultures demonstrated the ability for enhanced osteoclast differentiation in response to M-CSF and RANK-L. Taken together, the MKR mouse model suggests that skeletal fragility in Type 2 diabetes may arise from reduced transverse bone accrual and increased osteoclastogenesis during growth that is accelerated by the diabetic/hyperinsulinemic milieu. Further, these results emphasize the importance of evaluating diabetic bone based on morphology in addition to bone mass.

19046557
Rationale and strategies for early detection and management of diabetic kidney disease.
Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) occurs in 20% to 40% of patients with diabetes mellitus and is the leading cause of chronic kidney disease and end-stage renal disease in the United States. Despite the American Diabetes Association and the National Kidney Foundation advocating annual screening of diabetic patients, DKD remains underdiagnosed in the diabetic population. Early recognition of diabetic nephropathy by health care professionals is vital for proper management. The presence of microalbuminuria is particularly important as even low levels of dipstick-negative albuminuria indicate early disease long before a diminished glomerular filtration rate and are associated with an elevated cardiovascular disease risk. Like all forms of chronic kidney disease, DKD causes a progressive decline in renal function that, despite current treatment strategies, is largely irreversible. Many patients with DKD might be expected to develop end-stage renal disease, but many more patients will likely die of a cardiovascular event before renal replacement therapy is needed. Therefore, a renewed focus on cardiovascular risk factor reduction and a timely nephrology consultation with an emphasis on patient education is essential to proper DKD management.

19030972
The role of endocrine insulin-like growth factor-I and insulin in breast cancer.
Epidemiologic studies demonstrate that breast cancer is the most common type of cancer diagnosed in women and is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality. While there are many risk factors known to be associated with increased breast cancer risk, this review will focus specifically on circulating IGF-I, hyperinsulinemia, and type 2 diabetes. Their effects on promoting breast cancer development, progression, and adverse outcomes have been demonstrated in both animal and human studies, suggesting that the IGF system is a potential target for breast cancer therapy. In addition, in the clinical setting, emphasizing metabolic risk modifications to patients including weight loss, dietary changes, and diabetes control may also play an important role in breast cancer risk reduction.

19022901
Insulin-like growth factors and the brain.


18775352
The metabolic syndrome--from insulin resistance to obesity and diabetes.
In today's society with the escalating levels of obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease, the metabolic syndrome is receiving considerable attention and is the subject of much controversy. Greater insight into the mechanism(s) behind the syndrome may improve our understanding of how to prevent and best manage this complex condition.

18775350
Endocrinology and metabolism clinics of North America. Foreword.


18687786
The role of insulin receptor signaling in zebrafish embryogenesis.
Insulin receptor (IR) signaling is considered to be important in growth and development in addition to its major role in metabolic homeostasis. The metabolic role of insulin in carbohydrate and lipid metabolism is extensively studied. In contrast, the role of IR activation during embryogenesis is less understood. To address this, we examined the function of the IR during zebrafish development. Zebrafish express two isoforms of IR (insra and insrb). Both isoforms were cloned and show high homology to the human insulin receptor and can functionally substitute for the human IR in fibroblasts derived from insr gene-deleted mice. Gene expression studies reveal that these receptors are expressed at moderate levels in the central nervous system during development. Morpholino-mediated selective knockdown of each of the IR isoforms causes growth retardation and profound morphogenetic defects in the brain and eye. These results clearly demonstrate that IR signaling plays essential roles in vertebrate embryogenesis and growth.

18317445
Clinical relevance of systemic and local IGF-I: lessons from animal models.
Since the original somatomedin hypothesis was first put forward, several major revisions have been made. These include the identification of the insulin-like growth factors (IGF-I and IGF-II) and, importantly, the finding that these substances have local (autocrine/paracrine) as well as endocrine effects. Differentiating the roles of IGF-I at these different levels has been an ongoing challenge. However, knowledge in this area has been advanced by studies of knockout mice with specific gene deletions of liver IGF-I as well as IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs). Targeting IGFBP and the acid-labile subunit, in gene deletion studies, has made it possible to almost completely eliminate circulating IGF-I. Finally, animal models looking at IGFBPs have begun to provide insights into the numerous and often surprising effects these proteins themselves have. Despite the advances in knowledge made through these animal models, our understanding of the IGF-I system is still incomplete.

18502326
The articles cover all of the aspects from a basic and practical point of view. Foreword.


18407030
Our evolving understanding of getting to goal using insulin in type 2 diabetes.


18357953
Treatment of diabetes: a clinical update on insulin trials.
The prevalence of diabetes, along with its accompanying long-term microvascular and macrovascular complications, continues to increase. Landmark studies of both type 1 and type 2 diabetes have provided the foundations on which to investigate improved treatment strategies for type 2 diabetes. Recent evidence suggests a new paradigm for treating type 2 diabetes that adds insulin earlier in the treatment process to maintain tight glycemic control. The newer insulin analogues in combination with oral antidiabetic agents provide a viable option for improving glycemic control and preventing or delaying the occurrence of complications.

18212763
Mechanisms of disease: using genetically altered mice to study concepts of type 2 diabetes.
A wide range of genetically engineered murine models of type 2 diabetes have been created to try to understand the site of the primary defect in insulin action, and the relationship between insulin resistance and impaired beta-cell function in diabetes. Genetic disruption of various aspects known to be important in diabetes has examined specific facets, including glucose sensing, transcription factors for the insulin gene, the insulin gene itself, insulin and insulin-like growth factor receptors, downstream signaling components and some mutations that increase insulin sensitivity. This article focuses on models that have given insight into insulin resistance and impaired insulin production, especially models that examine molecules involved in the signaling pathway downstream of insulin binding its receptor. These models recapitulate many features of human type 2 diabetes and, although they have emphasized the complexity of this disease, they offer numerous opportunities to characterize particular aspects and eventually fit them together to help delineate the human disease.

18159646
The benefits of tight glycemic control in type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) is associated with significantly increased risk of microvascular and macrovascular disease. Although most studies have focused on the microvascular complications of diabetes (eg, nephropathy, neuropathy, retinopathy), most patients with type 2 DM die from causes that are related to macrovascular disease (eg, myocardial infarction). Poor glycemic control increases the risk of future cardiovascular events, and prospective studies of patients with type 1 and type 2 DM have demonstrated that the incidence of vascular complications is reduced by lifestyle modifications or medications that reduce blood glucose concentrations.

17964909
Insulin resistance as the underlying cause for the metabolic syndrome.
Classically, the metabolic syndrome is characterized as group of pathologies including visceral obesity, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and impaired glucose tolerance. It is now realized that insulin resistance plays a principal role in initiating and perpetuating the pathologic manifestations of the metabolic syndrome. A more in-depth understanding of the basic pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying insulin resistance may aid clinicians in treating and possibly delaying or even preventing the onset of the metabolic syndrome and its complications. This article outlines how abnormal insulin signaling and secretion, impaired glucose disposal, lipotoxicity, and proinflammatory cytokines exacerbate insulin resistance and result in the perturbations of the metabolic syndrome.

17315038
Mechanisms of disease: metabolic effects of growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor 1.
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) 1 is a member of a family that is involved in growth, development, cell differentiation, and metabolism. IGF1, IGF2 and insulin act primarily through tyrosine-kinase-linked receptors--the IGF1 receptor (IGF1R) and insulin receptor (IR). The IGF1R binds IGF1 and IGF2 with high affinity and the IR binds insulin with high affinity; however, since both receptors share a high degree of structural and functional homology, the IGF1R can bind insulin and the IR can bind the IGFs with reduced affinity. These two receptors can, moreover, form heterodimers, which bind both ligands. Upon binding to the receptors, cascades of tyrosine and serine kinases are stimulated to facilitate growth or metabolism. The IGF2 receptor is a scavenger receptor, and is, therefore, not involved in mediation of growth or metabolic effects of the IGF family and will not be discussed in the current article. IGF1 is a major gene target of growth hormone and its product mediates many of the actions of growth hormone on growth and development; however, IGF1 has actions distinct from those of growth hormone in carbohydrate, lipid, and protein metabolism. For example, excess growth hormone causes insulin resistance and hyperglycemia, whereas IGF1 has insulin-like effects that reduce blood glucose levels and has been used experimentally to treat both type 1 and type 2 diabetes.

17264177
A familial insulin-like growth factor-I receptor mutant leads to short stature: clinical and biochemical characterization.
IGF-I/IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) signaling pathways play important roles in longitudinal growth. A novel Arg481Glu (R481Q) mutation in IGF-IR was detected in a family with intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation. The objective of the study was to explore the mechanism whereby the R481Q mutation may be causative in growth retardation. A 13-yr-old girl with short stature was studied for functional analysis of the R481Q mutation in the IGF-IR. Two members of a family who showed intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, with increased serum IGF-I levels, demonstrated a substitution of arginine for glutamine at 481 (R481Q) in the IGF-IR. This mutation results in the formation of an altered fibronectin type III domain within the alpha-subunit. NIH-3T3 fibroblasts that overexpress the human wild-type or R481Q mutant IGF-IR demonstrated normal cell surface ligand binding by 125I-IGF-I binding assay. However, the fold increase of IGF-I stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of the IGF-IR beta-subunit as well as downstream activation of ERK1/2 and Akt was reduced in cells overexpressing the mutant receptor. Additionally, basal and IGF-I-stimulated levels of cell proliferation were also reduced in cells overexpressing the mutant receptor. Our results demonstrate that NIH-3T3 cells overexpressing a mutant form of the Igf1r gene, in which arginine at 481 is substituted by glutamine, lead to reduced levels of the fold increase of IGF-IR beta-subunit phosphorylation as well as ERK1/2 and Akt phosphorylation and was accompanied by decreased cell proliferation. These results are postulated to be the cause of intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation in the described patients.

19617901
Physical and functional interaction between polyoma virus middle T antigen and insulin and IGF-I receptors is required for oncogene activation and tumour initiation.
Polyoma virus middle T antigen (PyVmT) is a powerful viral oncogene; however, the mechanisms of PyVmT activation are poorly understood. The insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) and the insulin receptor (IR) are known to be implicated in the development of many cancers. Furthermore, PyVmT-overexpressing mouse mammary carcinoma Met-1 cells are highly responsive to IGF-I and insulin. Herein, we demonstrate that PyVmT physically interacts with IGF-IR and IR in Met-1 cells. Insulin and IGF-I increase association of the IR and IGF-IR with PyVmT, enhance tyrosine phosphorylation of PyVmT and augment the recruitment of Src and PLCgamma(1) to PyVmT. This is accompanied by robust and sustained phosphorylation of Akt and ERK1/2, which are implicated in both PyVmT and IGF-IR/IR signalling. Both ligands significantly increase proliferation, survival, migration and invasion of Met-1 cells. Furthermore, orthotopic inoculation of Met-1 cells with shRNAmir-mediated knockdown of IR or IGF-IR fails to initiate tumour growth in recipient mice. In conclusion, our data indicate that the physical and functional interaction between PyVmT and cellular receptor tyrosine kinases, including IR and IGF-IR, is critical for PyVmT activation and tumour initiation. These results also provide a novel mechanism for oncogene activation in the host cell.

19436992
Apolipoprotein E deficiency abrogates insulin resistance in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Although it is known that lipid metabolism plays a role in insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes and in obesity, the mechanism is still largely unknown. Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) regulates plasma lipid levels and also plays a role in the uptake of lipids into various tissues. To investigate whether the suppression of whole-particle lipoprotein uptake into tissues affects insulin responsiveness and the diabetic condition, we examined the effect of an ApoE (also known as Apoe) gene deletion in MKR mice, a mouse model of type 2 diabetes. ApoE ( -/- ), MKR, ApoE ( -/- )/MKR and control mice were placed on a high-fat, high-cholesterol diet for 16 weeks. Glucose tolerance, serum insulin, blood glucose, insulin tolerance, tissue triacylglycerol content and atherosclerotic lesions were assessed. ApoE ( -/- )/MKR and ApoE ( -/- ) mice showed significantly improved blood glucose, glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. Reduced triacylglycerol content in liver and reduced fat accumulation in liver and adipose tissue were found in ApoE ( -/- )/MKR and ApoE ( -/- ) mice compared with control and MKR mice. ApoE ( -/- ) and ApoE ( -/- )/MKR mice demonstrated similarly large atherosclerotic lesions, whereas MKR and control mice had small atherosclerotic lesions. We demonstrated that ApoE deficiency abrogates insulin resistance in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes, suggesting that lipid accumulation in tissue is a major cause of insulin resistance in this mouse model.

18777452
Obesity and type 2 diabetes are associated with an increased risk of developing cancer and a worse prognosis; epidemiological and mechanistic evidence.
Both obesity and Type 2 diabetes are independently associated with an increased risk of developing cancer and an increased mortality. The etiology is yet to be determined but insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia maybe important factors. Hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia and inflammatory cytokines in addition to the insulin-like growth factors are also possible factors involved in the process.

18497723
Insulin resistance and the metabolic syndrome.
The metabolic syndrome is a constellation of risk factors including glucose dysregulation, central obesity, dyslipidemia, and hypertension. There are multiple definitions that have been described by various health organizations. However, we do know that insulin resistance plays a major role as the underlying cause for the development and potentiation of the metabolic syndrome. At present, it is unclear if the diagnosis of metabolic syndrome is greater than the sum of its parts. However, the presence of more than one of the associated risk factors should indicate that a patient is at increased risk for developing diabetes, cardiovascular disease and death. Thus, the primary care physician should aggressively treat the metabolic risk factors in their patients to prevent the onset and progression to more severe disease.

18437163
Insulin-like growth factor-I protects cells from ER stress-induced apoptosis via enhancement of the adaptive capacity of endoplasmic reticulum.
Disruption of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis causes accumulation of unfolded and misfolded proteins in the ER, triggering the ER stress response, which can eventually lead to apoptosis when ER dysfunction is severe or prolonged. Here we demonstrate that human MCF-7 breast cancer cells, as well as murine NIH/3T3 fibroblasts, are rescued from ER stress-initiated apoptosis by insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I). IGF-I significantly augments the adaptive capacity of the ER by enhancing compensatory mechanisms such as the IRE1 alpha-, PERK- and ATF6-mediated arms of ER stress signalling. During ER stress, IGF-I stimulates translational recovery and induces expression of the key molecular chaperone protein Grp78/BiP, thereby enhancing the folding capacity of the ER and promoting recovery from ER stress. We also demonstrate that the antiapoptotic activity of IGF-I during ER stress may be mediated by a novel, as yet unidentified, signalling pathway(s). Application of signal transduction inhibitors of MEK (U1026), PI3K (LY294002 and wortmannin), JNK (SP600125), p38 (SB203580), protein kinases A and C (H-89 and staurosporine) and STAT3 (Stattic) does not prevent IGF-I-mediated protection from ER stress-induced apoptosis. Taken together, these data demonstrate that IGF-I protects against ER stress-induced apoptosis by increasing adaptive mechanisms through enhancement of ER stress-signalling pathways, thereby restoring ER homeostasis and preventing apoptosis.

18302671
Update on diabetes mellitus: prevention, treatment, and association with oral diseases.
Diabetes mellitus is a prevalent disease that affects millions of people worldwide and has paralleled the growing population of overweight and obese individuals. Early detection of prediabetes and diabetes, as well as lifestyle interventions including diet and exercise, are the overarching objectives in preventing and managing diabetes. For individuals who do not achieve glycemic control with lifestyle modification, there are newer medication classes that assist with weight loss, more physiologic insulins with convenient delivery systems, and old standbys like metformin and thiazolidinediones. Glycemic control along with blood pressure and cholesterol management reduce microvascular and macrovascular disease including cardiovascular events. Mounting evidence demonstrates that diabetes is a risk factor for periodontitis and possibly oral premalignancies and oral cancer. The systemic inflammatory response generated by inflamed periodontal tissue may in turn exacerbate diabetes, worsen cardiovascular outcomes, and increase mortality. Thus, oral medical and surgical physicians are vital in treating oral pathology, recognizing new cases of diabetes, and counseling people with diabetes to promote oral health. This article presents updates in the diagnosis, risk factors, prevention, management, and peri-oral complications of diabetes to assist oral health professionals in providing optimal care to patients with diabetes.

