20174621
The virion host shut-off (vhs) protein blocks a TLR-independent pathway of herpes simplex virus type 1 recognition in human and mouse dendritic cells.
Molecular pathways underlying the activation of dendritic cells (DCs) in response to Herpes Simplex Virus type 1 (HSV-1) are poorly understood. Removal of the HSV virion host shut-off (vhs) protein relieves a block to DC activation observed during wild-type infection. In this study, we utilized a potent DC stimulatory HSV-1 recombinant virus lacking vhs as a tool to investigate the mechanisms involved in the activation of DCs by HSV-1. We report that the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines by conventional DC (cDC) during HSV-1 infection is triggered by both virus replication-dependent and replication-independent pathways. Interestingly, while vhs is capable of inhibiting the release of cytokines during infection of human and mouse cDCs, the secretion of cytokines by plasmacytoid DC (pDC) is not affected by vhs. These data prompted us to postulate that infection of cDCs by HSV triggers a TLR independent pathway for cDC activation that is susceptible to blockage by the vhs protein. Using cDCs isolated from mice deficient in both the TLR adaptor protein MyD88 and TLR3, we show that HSV-1 and the vhs-deleted virus can activate cDCs independently of TLR signaling. In addition, virion-associated vhs fails to block cDC activation in response to treatment with TLR agonists, but it efficiently blocked cDC activation triggered by the paramyxoviruses Sendai Virus (SeV) and Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV). This block to SeV- and NDV-induced activation of cDC resulted in elevated SeV and NDV viral gene expression indicating that infection with HSV-1 enhances the cell's susceptibility to other pathogens through the action of vhs. Our results demonstrate for the first time that a viral protein contained in the tegument of HSV-1 can block the induction of DC activation by TLR-independent pathways of viral recognition.

19937971
Oncoapoptosis: a novel molecular therapeutic for cancer treatment.
Many cancer cells refractory to radiation treatment and chemotherapy proliferate due to loss of intrinsic programmed cell death (apoptosis) regulation. Consequently, the resolution of these cancers are many times outside the management capabilities of conventional therapeutics. We have developed a replication defective herpes simplex virus system which triggers apoptosis specifically in transformed human cells, termed oncoapoptosis. Susceptibility to virus induced cell death is dependent on the p53 protein status in the tumor cells, indicating specific targeting of the treatment. Primary cells which produce functional p53 are resistant to oncoapoptotic killing but not to apoptosis induced by nonviral environmental factors. Thus, induction of apoptosis by nonreplicating virus is a feasible molecular therapeutic approach for killing human cancer cells. Our findings have important implications in designing novel virus-based anticancer strategies.

19609770
Detection of herpes simplex virus dependent apoptosis.
Subversion of the host response to virus infection is a universal theme of virology and viral immunology. Multiple mechanisms are in place to limit virus spread on behalf of the host, yet through evolution, viruses have adapted to either weaken or eliminate the effects of these host factors. Cell death or apoptosis is one such example of a host response to viral infection. As such, experimental techniques that enable analysis of viruses (and viral genes) involved in triggering, blocking, or perhaps augmenting this process represent important tools for virologists, immunologists, and cell biologists. Presented here are a series of techniques developed in our lab for the analysis of apoptosis that occurs as a consequence of herpes simplex virus type 1 infection.

19307008
A conserved carboxy-terminal domain in the major tegument structural protein VP22 facilitates virion packaging of a chimeric protein during productive herpes simplex virus 1 infection.
Recombinant virus HSV-1(RF177) was previously generated to examine tegument protein VP22 function by inserting the GFP gene into the gene encoding VP22. During a detailed analysis of this virus, we discovered that RF177 produces a novel fusion protein between the last 15 amino acids of VP22 and GFP, termed GCT-VP22. Thus, the VP22 carboxy-terminal specific antibody 22-3 and two anti-GFP antibodies reacted with an approximately 28 kDa protein from RF177-infected Vero cells. GCT-VP22 was detected at 1 and 3 hpi. Examination of purified virions indicated that GCT-VP22 was incorporated into RF177 virus particles. These observations imply that at least a portion of the information required for virion targeting is located in this domain of VP22. Indirect immunofluorescence analyses showed that GCT-VP22 also localized to areas of marginalized chromatin during RF177 infection. These results indicate that the last fifteen amino acids of VP22 participate in virion targeting during HSV-1 infection.

18770556
Herpes simplex virus: propagation, quantification, and storage.
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) is the prototype of a family of large, enveloped, double-stranded DNA viruses, the Herpesviridae, which cause significant morbidity and mortality in humans. Productive replication of HSV in cells in culture results in definitive changes in cellular physiology and metabolism, ultimately leading to lysis. These definitive aspects of viral-host interactions enable diagnosis of HSV infections. In this unit, a series of methods are described for the propagation, quantification, and storage of HSV. Infectious center assays are used to measure the titers of HSV stocks. In addition, immunological methods are described for documenting the accumulation of viral polypeptides in infected whole cell extracts, as well as in situ using indirect immunofluorescence. These techniques should be beneficial to basic research virologists utilizing standard laboratory HSV strains, as well as clinical microbiologists interested in characterizing HSV isolated from patients.

18639407
Reconsideration of viral protein immunoblotting for differentiation of human herpes simplex viruses.
Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) and type 2 (HSV-2) are ubiquitous human pathogens that infect their hosts for life and reactivate to cause disease at or near the initial site of infection. As the incidence of genital HSV-1 infections increase, there is an increased demand for valid viral typing diagnostics. In this report, we reconsidered and developed a triple-phase immune-typing procedure that compares differences in electrophoretic mobilities of viral ICP4, ICP27, and VP22 proteins between HSV-1 and HSV-2 strains. We isolated and immunotyped 5 primary HSV-1 strains derived from orofacial, ocular, and genital areas along with 2 primary HSV-2 strains from the genital area. Advantages of this methodology include its general technical simplicity, sensitivity, and ability to definitively type HSV. It is anticipated that this methodology will be useful in distinguishing viruses obtained in clinical cultures.

18584907
The major tegument structural protein VP22 targets areas of dispersed nucleolin and marginalized chromatin during productive herpes simplex virus 1 infection.
The herpes simplex virus (HSV) major tegument structural protein VP22 resides in multiple subcellular regions during productive infection. During an analysis of the molecular determinants of these localizations, we observed that a transfected fusion of the C-terminal portion of VP22, containing its pat4 nuclear localization signal, with GFP lacked nucleolar sparing compared to GFP alone. Thus, the initial goal was to determine whether VP22 associates with nucleoli. Using an optimized indirect immunofluorescence system to visualize nucleolin and viral proteins, we observed that VP22 present in VP22-expressing Vero (V49) cells "surrounded" nucleolin. These two initial findings implied that VP22 might associate directly with nucleoli. We next analyzed HSV-infected cells and observed that at late times, anti-nucleolin immune reactivity was dispersed throughout the nuclei while it retained uniform, circular staining in mock-infected cells. Time course infection experiments indicated that nucleolin initiated its transition from uniform to dispersed structures between 2 and 4 hpi. Comparison of Hoechst stained nuclei showed bright anti-nucleolin staining localized to regions of marginalized chromatin. These effects required de novo infected cell protein synthesis. A portion of VP22 detected in nuclei at 4 and 6 hpi localized to these areas of altered nucleolin and marginalized chromatin. VP22 was excluded from viral replication compartments containing the viral regulatory protein ICP22. Finally, altered nucleolin and marginalized chromatin were detected with a VP22-null virus, indicating that VP22 was not responsible for these nuclear architecture alterations. Thus, we conclude that nuclear VP22 targets unique subnuclear structures early (<6hpi) during herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) infection.

17962448
Nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB precedes apoptotic poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage during productive HSV-1 replication in corneal epithelial cells.
Herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 infections of the human cornea range in severity from uncomplicated episodes that readily resolve to severe, recurring disease that invades the stroma, having a devastating permanent effect on vision. Recent published data implicate an apoptotic component to stromal HSV-1 infection. In a prior study, it was found that wild type (wt) HSV-1 infection induces, then blocks, apoptosis in epithelial cells derived from skin and that this block requires infected cell proteins (ICPs) synthesized between 3 and 6 hours post infection (hpi). This inhibition of apoptosis is in part dependent on the activation of inducible nuclear transcription factor kappaB (NF-kappaB). HSV-1-dependent apoptosis in rabbit corneal epithelial (SIRC) cells was compared with that in infected human epithelial (HEp-2) cells. SIRC cells were sensitive to apoptotic cell death induced by environmental treatment with tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha plus cycloheximide (CHX). HSV-1 stimulated the degradation of regulatory IkappaBalpha protein, resulting in nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB. This phenomenon was dependent on ICP synthesis. Neither wt nor apoptotic HSV-1 infection resulted in apoptosis in these cells. However, wt HSV-1-infected cells produced detectable levels of cleaved poly(ADP-ribose) (PARP). Inhibition of SIRC cell protein synthesis with CHX during wt HSV-1 infection led to a reduction in the amount of PARP cleavage. Whereas PARP cleavage defined cell death in most other cell types, its processing in SIRC cells was a reproducible characteristic of wt HSV-1 infection. This is the first report of such an effect, and it suggests that in corneal epithelial cells, activation of apoptotic pathways may be necessary for productive viral replication. Thus, efficient replication of HSV-1 in the corneal milieu proceeds via a different mechanism than it does in skin. However, it appears that NF-kappaB participates in inhibiting apoptosis during HSV-1 infection in both systems.

17855516
p53 and hTERT determine sensitivity to viral apoptosis.
Apoptosis is a potent host defense against microbes. Most viruses have adapted strategies to counteract this response. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) produces a balance between pro- and antiapoptotic processes during infection. When antiapoptotic signals become limiting, infected cells die through HSV-dependent apoptosis (HDAP). Oncogenic pathways were previously implicated in HDAP susceptibility. Here, we exploited our ability to selectively express all, one, or no oncogenes in the well-defined HeLa cell system to dissect the requirements for HDAP. Human papillomavirus E6 and E7 oncogene expression was inhibited by the E2 viral repressor. Sole expression of E6 mediated HDAP sensitization. Next, two known cellular targets of E6 were independently modulated. This demonstrated that E6 sensitizes HeLa cells to HDAP through hTERT and p53. Given the universality of the apoptotic antiviral response, p53 and telomerase regulation will likely be important for counteracting host defenses in many other viral infections.

17554017
Susceptibility of cancer cells to herpes simplex virus-dependent apoptosis.
Apoptosis has recently been associated with herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) latency and disease severity. There is an intricate balance between pro- and anti-apoptotic processes during HSV-1 infection. When anti-apoptotic pathways are suppressed, this balance is upset and the cells die by apoptosis, referred to here as HSV-1-dependent apoptosis (HDAP). It has been observed previously that HeLa cancer cells exhibit an enhanced sensitivity to HDAP. Here, a series of specific patient-derived cancer cells was utilized to investigate the cell-type specificity of HDAP. The results showed that a human mammary tumour cell line was sensitive to HDAP, whilst syngeneic normal cells were resistant. Furthermore, low-passage-number primary human mammary epithelial cells were resistant to HDAP. When the susceptibility of human colon, brain, breast and cervical cancer cells was assessed, the only cells insensitive to HDAP were those resistant to all environmental stimuli tested. This implies that the HDAP resistance was probably due to mutations in the cellular apoptotic machinery. Thus, the susceptibility of cancer cells to HDAP requires that they possess a functional ability to undergo programmed cell death.

17523868
Herpes simplex virus blocks Fas-mediated apoptosis independent of viral activation of NF-kappaB in human epithelial HEp-2 cells.
The goal of our study was to characterize the apoptotic response of herpes simplex virus (HSV)-infected, human epithelial HEp-2 cells to extrinsic treatments through the Fas receptor. Initially, we defined the Fas response of these cells. We found the following: (1) Treatment of HEp-2 cells with anti-Fas antibody or Fas ligand (FasL) alone did not induce apoptosis. (2) In addition, these inducers did not activate NF-kappaB in these cells. (3) The addition of cycloheximide (CHX) during these treatments caused a dramatic increase in programmed cell death. (4) HEp-2 cells infected with HSV for 6 h prior to anti-Fas plus CHX treatment were nonapoptotic, and (5) these cells possessed nuclear NFkappaB. (6) HSV blocked anti-Fas or FasL plus CHX-induced apoptosis in HEp-2 cells that stably expressed a dominant-negative form of IkappaBalpha. These results indicate that HSV infection can block the process of Fas-mediated apoptosis through a mechanism that is independent of viral activation of NFkappaB. Our findings help define the molecular mechanisms involved in HSV evasion of the cytokine-driven, innate immune response in human epithelial cells.

17222692
Apoptosis during herpes simplex virus infection.
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection triggers apoptosis in infected cells. However, proteins synthesized later in infected cells prevent apoptotic cell death from ensuing. In vivo data showing that apoptosis accompanies herpes stromal keratitis and encephalitis suggest that apoptotic modulation plays a role in the development of herpetic disease. Tremendous progress has been made toward identifying the viral factors that are responsible for inducing and inhibiting apoptosis during infection. However, the mechanisms whereby they act are still largely unknown. Recent studies have illustrated a wide diversity in the cellular response to HSV-triggered apoptosis, emphasizing the importance of host factors in this process. Together, these findings indicate that apoptosis during HSV infection represents an important virus-host interaction process, which likely influences viral pathogenesis.

21374234
Analyses of HSV Proteins for Posttranslational Modifications and Enzyme Functions.
In order to identify the nature of posttranslational modifications and enzyme functions of herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 (HSV-1 and HSV-2) proteins, it is necessary to apply both biochemical and genetic analyses. The experimental methods described in this chapter have been applied to cells cultured in vitro and infected with HSV-1 or to isolated nuclei of infected cells, to nuclear or cytoplasmic fractions, and, in some instances, to purified extracts of infected eukaryotic cells or of prokaryotic cells expressing a viral gene.

