21172569
Traumatic brain injury and its neurobehavioral sequelae.
The neurobehavioral sequelae of TBI consist of a spectrum of somatic, neurologic, and psychiatric symptoms. The challenge for clinicians lies in understanding the interface of the various symptoms and how they interrelate with other entities. Specifically, the challenge is differentiating post-TBI-related symptoms from preexisting or de novo psychiatric, neurologic, and/or systemic disorders. A comprehensive evaluation and a multidisciplinary approach to evaluating patients are essential to be able to develop the differential diagnosis needed to design a management plan that maximizes recovery.

21172566
Psychiatry for the neurologist. Preface.


21093680
Traumatic brain injury and its neurobehavioral sequelae.
The neurobehavioral sequelae (NBS) of traumatic brain injury (TBI) consist of a spectrum of somatic, neurological, and psychiatric symptoms. The challenge for clinicians lies in understanding the interface of the various symptoms and how they interrelate with other entities. Specifically, the challenge is differentiating post-TBI-related symptoms from pre-existing or de novo psychiatric, neurological, and/or systemic disorders. A comprehensive evaluation and a multidisciplinary approach to evaluating patients are essential to be able to develop the differential diagnosis needed to design a management plan that maximizes recovery.

21093675
Preface: Traumatic brain injury: defining best practice.


19306386
Neurobehavioral sequelae of traumatic brain injury.
The neurobehavioral sequelae of traumatic brain injury consist of a spectrum of somatic and neuropsychiatric symptoms. The neuropsychiatric symptoms are divided into cognitive and behavioral presentations. In the literature, these neurobehavioral sequelae have been called postconcussive symptoms, postconcussive syndrome, and postconcussive disorder; however, the authors of this review do not use this terminology because the symptoms are not restricted to patients with concussion but instead can be found in all traumatic brain injury patients of all injury severities. The development of neurobehavioral sequelae after traumatic brain injury is a multifactorial process. The patient evaluation requires a multidisciplinary approach in order to delineate physiologic dysfunction and place deficits in the context of the patient's preinjury and postinjury psychiatric status. Consequently, the evaluation of the posttraumatic brain injury patient with neurobehavioral sequelae requires a carefully structured history and physical examination with an emphasis on neurological and psychiatric function. Adjunctive evaluations must be tailored to the patient with neuroimaging, neurophysiological, and neuropsychiatric testing. Maximized outcomes may be achieved by the performance of a careful and detailed assessment that places complaints within the context of the individual.

19306370
Traumatic brain injury: from bench to bedside to home.


19238120
Behavioral manifestations of frontal lobe seizures.


