21621135
Hypermentalization in adolescents with borderline personality traits: extending the conceptual framework to younger ages.


21498463
Analysis of 94 Candidate Genes and 12 Endophenotypes for Schizophrenia From the Consortium on the Genetics of Schizophrenia.
Objective: The authors used a custom array of 1,536 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to interrogate 94 functionally relevant candidate genes for schizophrenia and identify associations with 12 heritable neurophysiological and neurocognitive endophenotypes in data collected by the Consortium on the Genetics of Schizophrenia. Method: Variance-component association analyses of 534 genotyped subjects from 130 families were conducted by using Merlin software. A novel bootstrap total significance test was also developed to overcome the limitations of existing genomic multiple testing methods and robustly demonstrate significant associations in the context of complex family data and possible population stratification effects. Results: Associations with endophenotypes were observed for 46 genes of potential functional significance, with three SNPs at p<10(-4), 27 SNPs at p<10(-3), and 147 SNPs at p<0.01. The bootstrap analyses confirmed that the 47 SNP-endophenotype combinations with the strongest evidence of association significantly exceeded that expected by chance alone, with 93% of these findings expected to be true. Many of the genes interact on a molecular level, and eight genes (e.g., NRG1 and ERBB4) displayed evidence for pleiotropy, revealing associations with four or more endophenotypes. The results collectively support a strong role for genes related to glutamate signaling in mediating schizophrenia susceptibility. Conclusions: This study supports use of relevant endophenotypes and the bootstrap total significance test for identifying genetic variation underlying the etiology of schizophrenia. In addition, the observation of extensive pleiotropy for some genes and singular associations for others suggests alternative, independent pathways mediating pathogenesis in the "group of schizophrenias."

21115066
Dorso- and ventro-lateral prefrontal volume and spatial working memory in schizotypal personality disorder.
Schizotypal personality disorder (SPD) individuals and borderline personality disorder (BPD) individuals have been reported to show neuropsychological impairments and abnormalities in brain structure. However, relationships between neuropsychological function and brain structure in these groups are not well understood. This study compared visual-spatial working memory (SWM) and its associations with dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) gray matter volume in 18 unmedicated SPD patients with no BPD traits, 18 unmedicated BPD patients with no SPD traits, and 16 healthy controls (HC). Results showed impaired SWM in SPD but not BPD, compared with HC. Moreover, among the HC group, but not SPD patients, better SWM performance was associated with larger VLPFC (BA44/45) gray matter volume (Fisher's Z p-values <0.05). Findings suggest spatial working memory impairments may be a core neuropsychological deficit specific to SPD patients and highlight the role of VLPFC subcomponents in normal and dysfunctional memory performance.

20826004
Eye tracking performance and the boundaries of the schizophrenia spectrum.
In order to investigate the nature of the eye tracking impairment in schizophrenia spectrum we measured pursuit gain with a constant velocity target using a quantitative (RMS error in pursuit gain) and, on an exploratory basis, a qualitative (quality of tracking) measure. We utilized a sample consisting of three clinically characterized groups: patients with schizophrenia (SZ), their first degree non-psychotic relatives, subjects with schizotypal personality disorder (SPD), and healthy volunteers (HV). Thirty three SZ patients, 19 SPD subjects, 66 non-psychotic relatives (all clinically assessed for schizophrenia spectrum psychopathology--DSM-IIIR) and 18 HV were evaluated using an infrared eye tracking system. Targets were constant velocity trapezoids at 5°/s (slow) and 16°/s (fast). The quality of the eye tracking was independently evaluated by at least two raters (ICC: 0.92). The RMS measures at the two velocities (quantitative measure) and the quality of the tracking obtained for each velocity were entered separately into a two factor repeated measures ANOVA, with velocity and diagnosis as the independent measures. For the quantitative ratings (RMS error), a significant effect for velocity was found, with all subjects performing worse at the higher velocity, but there was no significant velocity by diagnosis interaction. In addition, an overall significant effect for diagnosis was found in the four-group ANOVA. In post hoc multiple comparison tests, SZ subjects performed significantly worse from the HV and the relatives. SPD subjects were not different from patients with schizophrenia (or from any group--and their performance was intermediate between the HV and the SZ). Relatives of the patients with schizophrenia were different from SZ subjects, but not different from SPD or HV subjects. Similar results were obtained in the exploratory qualitative ratings. Clinical symptoms did not correlate significantly with quantitative or qualitative performance in any group. We have found that the performance of SPD subjects is intermediate between that of patients with schizophrenia and the healthy volunteers in both qualitative and quantitative (exploratory) measures. Indeed, SPD subjects comprise the only group not statistically different from schizophrenic patients in quantitative or qualitative ratings.

20541911
Deficient visual sensitivity in schizotypal personality disorder.
Schizotypal personality disorder is a personality disorder in the schizophrenia spectrum, sharing genetic and neurobiologic characteristics with schizophrenia. Visual contrast detection, found to be abnormal in chronic schizophrenia, was investigated in schizotypal personality disorder (SPD). Since dopamine in the retina enhances visual contrast detection and SPD patients have relatively reduced dopaminergic activity in the brain compared to schizophrenia patients, it was hypothesized that SPD patients would have decreased to normal contrast sensitivity. Twenty-one subjects with DSM-IV diagnosed SPD, 18 healthy controls, and 12 subjects with a personality disorder unrelated to schizophrenia (OPD) were evaluated for contrast detection using a sinusoidal grating presented at varying temporal frequencies. Subjects also were evaluated neuropsychologically using several standardized neurocognitive tests. A significant effect of subject group was found on the contrast detection threshold (p<0.01) with a significant difference between the SPD group and the healthy control group but not between the OPD group and the healthy control group. The SPD group had higher contrast detection thresholds at all temporal frequencies tested. Correlations were found between contrast detection and performance on the Trail-Making, N-Back, and CPT tasks in SPD patients. These results, based upon a paradigm reflecting dopamine activity in the early visual system, highlight the differences as well as similarities between SPD and schizophrenia with regard to the dopamine system in schizophrenia spectrum (Siever and Davis, 2004).

20451217
Tryptophan-hydroxylase 2 haplotype association with borderline personality disorder and aggression in a sample of patients with personality disorders and healthy controls.
There is a decreased serotonergic function in impulsive aggression and borderline personality disorder (BPD), and genetic association studies suggest a role of serotonergic genes in impulsive aggression and BPD. Only one study has analyzed the association between the tryptophan-hydroxylase 2 (TPH2) gene and BPD. A TPH2 "risk" haplotype has been described that is associated with anxiety, depression and suicidal behavior. We assessed the relationship between the previously identified "risk" haplotype at the TPH2 locus and BPD diagnosis, impulsive aggression, affective lability, and suicidal/parasuicidal behaviors, in a well-characterized clinical sample of 103 healthy controls (HCs) and 251 patients with personality disorders (109 with BPD). A logistic regression including measures of depression, affective lability and aggression scores in predicting "risk" haplotype was conducted. The prevalence of the "risk" haplotype was significantly higher in patients with BPD compared to HCs. Those with the "risk" haplotype have higher aggression and affect lability scores and more suicidal/parasuicidal behaviors than those without it. In the logistic regression model, affect lability was the only significant predictor and it correctly classified 83.1% of the subjects as "risk" or "non-risk" haplotype carriers. We found an association between the previously described TPH2 "risk" haplotype and BPD diagnosis, affective lability, suicidal/parasuicidal behavior, and aggression scores.

19651401
Neural correlates of the use of psychological distancing to regulate responses to negative social cues: a study of patients with borderline personality disorder.
Emotional instability is a defining feature of borderline personality disorder (BPD); yet, little is understood about its underlying neural correlates. One possible contributing factor to emotional instability is a failure to adequately employ adaptive cognitive regulatory strategies such as psychological distancing. To determine whether there are differences in neural dynamics underlying this control strategy between BPD patients and healthy control (HC) subjects, blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging signals were acquired as 18 BPD and 16 HC subjects distanced from or simply looked at pictures depicting social interactions. Contrasts in signal between distance and look conditions were compared between groups. Borderline personality disorder patients showed a different pattern of activation compared with HC subjects when looking at negative versus neutral pictures. When distancing versus looking at negative pictures, both groups showed decreased negative affect ratings and increased activation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, areas near/along the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, and posterior cingulate/precuneus regions. However, the BPD group showed less BOLD signal change in dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and IPS, less deactivation in the amygdala, and greater activation in the superior temporal sulcus and superior frontal gyrus. Borderline personality disorder and HC subjects display different neural dynamics while passively viewing social emotional stimuli. In addition, BPD patients do not engage the cognitive control regions to the extent that HCs do when employing a distancing strategy to regulate emotional reactions, which may be a factor contributing to the affective instability of BPD.

19516057
The neurobiology of personality disorders: implications for psychoanalysis.
As advances in neuroscience have furthered our understanding of the role of brain circuitry, genetics, stress, and neuromodulators in the regulation of normal behavior and in the pathogenesis of psychopathology, an increasing appreciation of the role of neurobiology in individual differences in personality and their pathology in personality disorders has emerged. Individual differences in the regulation and organization of cognitive processes, affective reactivity, impulse/action patterns, and anxiety may in the extreme provide susceptibilities to personality disorders such as borderline and schizotypal personality disorder. A low threshold for impulsive aggression, as observed in borderline and antisocial personality disorders, may be related to excessive amygdala reactivity, reduced prefrontal inhibition, and diminished serotonergic facilitation of prefrontal controls. Affective instability may be mediated by excessive limbic reactivity in gabaminergic/glutamatergic/cholinergic circuits, resulting in an increased sensitivity or reactivity to environmental emotional stimuli as in borderline personality disorder and other cluster B personality disorders. Disturbances in cognitive organization and information processing may contribute to the detachment, desynchrony with the environment, and cognitive/perceptional distortions of cluster A or schizophrenia spectrum personality disorders. A low threshold for anxiety may contribute to the avoidant, dependent, and compulsive behaviors observed in cluster C personality disorders. These alterations in critical regulatory domains will influence how representations of self and others are internalized. Aspects of neurobiological functioning themselves become cognized through the medium of figurative language into an ongoing narrative of the self, one that can be transformed through the analytic process, allowing for the modulation of genetic/biological thresholds.

19473820
Smaller superior temporal gyrus volume specificity in schizotypal personality disorder.
Superior temporal gyrus (STG/BA22) volume is reduced in schizophrenia and to a milder degree in schizotypal personality disorder (SPD), representing a less severe disorder in the schizophrenia spectrum. SPD and Borderline personality disorder (BPD) are severe personality disorders characterized by social and cognitive dysfunction. However, while SPD is characterized by social withdrawal/anhedonia, BPD is marked by hyper-reactivity to interpersonal stimuli and hyper-emotionality. This is the first morphometric study to directly compare SPD and BPD patients in temporal lobe volume. We compared three age-, sex-, and education-matched groups: 27 unmedicated SPD individuals with no BPD traits, 52 unmedicated BPD individuals with no SPD traits, and 45 healthy controls. We examined gray matter volume of frontal and temporal lobe Brodmann areas (BAs), and dorsal/ventral amygdala from 3-T magnetic resonance imaging. In the STG, an auditory association area reported to be dysfunctional in SPD and BPD, the SPD patients had significantly smaller volume than healthy controls and BPD patients. No group differences were found between BPD patients and controls. Smaller BA22 volume was associated with greater symptom severity in SPD patients. Reduced STG volume may be an important endophenotype for schizophrenia-spectrum disorders. SPD is distinct from BPD in terms of STG volume abnormalities which may reflect different underlying pathophysiological mechanisms and could help discriminate between them.

19394205
Neural correlates of emotion processing in borderline personality disorder.
Emotional instability is a hallmark feature of borderline personality disorder (BPD), yet its biological underpinnings are poorly understood. We employed functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to compare patterns of regional brain activation in BPD patients and healthy volunteers as they process positive and negative social emotional stimuli. fMRI images were acquired while 19 BPD patients and 17 healthy controls (HC) viewed emotion-inducing pictures from the International Affective Pictures System set. Activation data were analyzed with SPM5 ANCOVA models to derive the effects of diagnosis and stimulus type. BPD patients demonstrated greater differences in activation than controls, when viewing negative pictures compared with rest, in the amygdala, fusiform gyrus, primary visual areas, superior temporal gyrus (STG), and premotor areas, while healthy controls showed greater differences than BPD patients in the insula, middle temporal gyrus and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA46). When viewing positive pictures compared with rest, BPD patients showed greater differences in the STG, premotor cortex, and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. These findings suggest that BPD patients show greater amygdala activity and heightened activity of visual processing regions relative to findings for HC subjects in the processing of negative social emotional pictures compared with rest. The patients activate neural networks in emotion processing that are phylogeneticall older and more reflexive than those activated by HC subjects.

18638645
Recent advances in the biological study of personality disorders.
While it is premature to provide a simple model for the vulnerability to the development of either borderline (BPD) or schizotypal (SPD) personality disorder, it is clear that these heritable disorders lend themselves to fruitful neurobiological exploration. The most promising findings in BPD suggest that a diminished top-down control of affective responses, which is likely to relate to deceased responsiveness of specific midline regions of prefrontal cortex, may underlie the affective hyperresponsiveness in this disorder. In addition, genetic and neuroendocrine and molecular neuroimaging findings point to a role for serotonin in this affective disinhibition. Clearly SPD falls within the schizophrenia spectrum, but precisely the nature of what predicts full-blown schizophrenia as opposed to the milder symptoms of SPD is not yet clear.

18588988
Frontal-striatal-thalamic mediodorsal nucleus dysfunction in schizophrenia-spectrum patients during sensorimotor gating.
Prepulse inhibition (PPI) refers to a reduction in the amplitude of the startle eyeblink reflex to a strong sensory stimulus, the pulse, when it is preceded shortly by a weak stimulus, the prepulse. PPI is a measure of sensorimotor gating which serves to prevent the interruption of early attentional processing and it is impaired in schizophrenia-spectrum patients. In healthy individuals, PPI is more robust when attending to than ignoring a prepulse. Animal and human work demonstrates that frontal-striatal-thalamic (FST) circuitry modulates PPI. This study used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate FST circuitry during an attention-to-prepulse paradigm in 26 unmedicated schizophrenia-spectrum patients (13 schizotypal personality disorder (SPD), 13 schizophrenia) and 13 healthy controls. During 3T-fMRI acquisition and separately measured psychophysiological assessment of PPI, participants heard an intermixed series of high- and low-pitched tones serving as prepulses to an acoustic-startle stimulus. Event-related BOLD response amplitude curves in FST regions traced on co-registered anatomical MRI were examined. Controls showed greater activation during attended than ignored PPI conditions in all FST regions-dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Brodmann areas 46, 9), striatum (caudate, putamen), and the thalamic mediodorsal nucleus. In contrast, schizophrenia patients failed to show differential BOLD responses in FST circuitry during attended and ignored prepulses, whereas SPD patients showed greater-than-normal activation during ignored prepulses. Among the three diagnostic groups, lower left caudate BOLD activation during the attended PPI condition was associated with more deficient sensorimotor gating as measured by PPI. Schizophrenia-spectrum patients exhibit inefficient utilization of FST circuitry during attentional modulation of PPI. Schizophrenia patients have reduced recruitment of FST circuitry during task-relevant stimuli, whereas SPD patients allocate excessive resources during task-irrelevant stimuli. Dysfunctional FST activation, particularly in the caudate may underlie PPI abnormalities in schizophrenia-spectrum patients.

18346997
Neurobiology of aggression and violence.
Acts of violence account for an estimated 1.43 million deaths worldwide annually. While violence can occur in many contexts, individual acts of aggression account for the majority of instances. In some individuals, repetitive acts of aggression are grounded in an underlying neurobiological susceptibility that is just beginning to be understood. The failure of "top-down" control systems in the prefrontal cortex to modulate aggressive acts that are triggered by anger provoking stimuli appears to play an important role. An imbalance between prefrontal regulatory influences and hyper-responsivity of the amygdala and other limbic regions involved in affective evaluation are implicated. Insufficient serotonergic facilitation of "top-down" control, excessive catecholaminergic stimulation, and subcortical imbalances of glutamatergic/gabaminergic systems as well as pathology in neuropeptide systems involved in the regulation of affiliative behavior may contribute to abnormalities in this circuitry. Thus, pharmacological interventions such as mood stabilizers, which dampen limbic irritability, or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which may enhance "top-down" control, as well as psychosocial interventions to develop alternative coping skills and reinforce reflective delays may be therapeutic.

18272348
Cortical gray and white matter volume in unmedicated schizotypal and schizophrenia patients.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies have revealed fronto-temporal cortical gray matter volume reductions in schizophrenia. However, to date studies have not examined whether age- and sex-matched unmedicated schizotypal personality disorder (SPD) patients share some or all of the structural brain-imaging characteristics of schizophrenia patients. We examined cortical gray/white matter volumes in a large sample of unmedicated schizophrenia-spectrum patients (n=79 SPD, n=57 schizophrenia) and 148 healthy controls. MRI images were reoriented to standard position parallel to the anterior-posterior commissure line, segmented into gray and white matter tissue types, and assigned to Brodmann areas (BAs) using a postmortem-histological atlas. Group differences in regional volume of gray and white matter in the BAs were examined with MANOVA. Schizophrenia patients had significantly reduced gray matter volume widely across the cortex but more marked in frontal and temporal lobes. SPD patients had reductions in the same regions but only about half that observed in schizophrenia and sparing in key regions including BA10. In schizophrenia, greater fronto-temporal volume loss was associated with greater negative symptom severity and in SPD, greater interpersonal and cognitive impairment. Overall, our findings suggest that increased prefrontal volume in BA10 and sparing of volume loss in temporal cortex (BAs 22 and 20) may be a protective factor in SPD which reduces vulnerability to psychosis.

18075475
Irritable assault and variation in the COMT gene.
Aggression is associated with the 'low' activity allele (Met) of the functional Val158Met polymorphism among people with schizophrenia spectrum disorders relative to the 'high' activity (Val) allele. We examined this polymorphism in a sample of 112 people with axis II personality disorders. Participants completed the Buss Durkee Hostility Inventory. Two single nucleotide polymorphisms in the COMT gene were genotyped in these participants classified as 'white' according to US Census Bureau definitions. We failed to observe an association between the Val158Met allele and aggression but observed an association between self-reported aggression and the G allele of a biallelic polymorphism located in the 3'' UTR (rs16559). This allele is less prevalent among schizophrenics and is associated with lower COMT expression in the brain. These findings provide limited support for a role of COMT in modulating aggressive behavior, and are extended to people with personality disorders.

17825840
Frontolimbic structural changes in borderline personality disorder.
Frontolimbic dysfunction is observed in borderline personality disorder (BPD), with responses to emotional stimuli that are exaggerated in the amygdala and impaired in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). This pattern of altered function is consistent with animal models of stress responses and depression, where hypertrophic changes in the amygdala and atrophic changes in the ACC are observed. We tested the hypothesis that BPD patients exhibit gross structural changes that parallel the respective increases in amygdala activation and impairment of rostral/subgenual ACC activation. Twelve unmedicated outpatients with BPD by DSM-IV and 12 normal control (NC) subjects underwent a high-resolution T1-weighted structural MRI scan. Relative gray matter concentration (GMC) in spatially-normalized images was evaluated by standard voxel-based morphometry, with voxel-wise subject group comparisons by t test constrained to amygdala and rostral/subgenual ACC. The BPD group was significantly higher than NC in GMC in the amygdala. In contrast, the BPD group showed significantly lower GMC than the NC group in left rostral/subgenual ACC. This sample of BPD patients exhibits gross structural changes in gray matter in cortical and subcortical limbic regions that parallel the regional distribution of altered functional activation to emotional stimuli among these same subjects. While the histological basis for GMC changes in adult clinical populations is poorly-known at present, the observed pattern is consistent with the direction of change, in animal models of anxiety and depression, of neuronal number and/or morphological complexity in both the amygdala (where it is increased) and ACC (where it is decreased).

17601709
Fronto-limbic dysfunction in response to facial emotion in borderline personality disorder: an event-related fMRI study.
Clinical hallmarks of borderline personality disorder (BPD) include social and emotional dysregulation. We tested a model of fronto-limbic dysfunction in facial emotion processing in BPD. Groups of 12 unmedicated adults with BPD by DSM-IV and 12 demographically-matched healthy controls (HC) viewed facial expressions (Conditions) of neutral emotion, fear and anger, and made gender discriminations during rapid event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Analysis of variance of Region of Interest signal change revealed a statistically significant effect of the Group-by-Region-by-Condition interaction. This was due to the BPD group exhibiting a significantly larger magnitude of deactivation (relative to HC) in the bilateral rostral/subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) to fear and in the left ACC to fear minus neutral; and significantly greater activation in the right amygdala to fear minus neutral. There were no significant between-group differences in ROI signal change in response to anger. In voxel-wise analyses constrained within these ROIs, the BPD group exhibited significant changes in the fear minus neutral contrast, with relatively less activation in the bilateral rostral/subgenual ACC, and greater activation in the right amygdala. In the anger minus neutral contrast this pattern was reversed, with the BPD group showing greater activation in the bilateral rostral/subgenual ACC and less activation in the bilateral amygdala. We conclude that adults with BPD exhibit changes in fronto-limbic activity in the processing of fear stimuli, with exaggerated amygdala response and impaired emotion-modulation of ACC activity. The neural substrates underlying processing of anger may also be altered. These changes may represent an expression of the volumetric and serotonergic deficits observed in these brain areas in BPD.

17478083
Deficient attentional modulation of startle eyeblink is associated with symptom severity in the schizophrenia spectrum.
Patients with schizophrenia-spectrum disorders show deficient prepulse inhibition (PPI) of the startle eyeblink reflex which is thought to reflect an early stage of information processing called automatic sensorimotor gating. They also exhibit deficient attentional modulation of PPI and prepulse facilitation (PPF) of startle which is thought to reflect deficient early and later controlled attentional processing. This is the first study to assess attentional modulation of PPI and PPF in a 3-group schizophrenia-spectrum sample of age- and sex-matched unmedicated schizotypal personality disorder (SPD) and schizophrenia patients, and healthy controls. Participants performed a tone-length judgment task involving attended, ignored, and novel tone prepulses while the acoustic startle eyeblink reflex was measured. Healthy controls showed greater PPI and PPF during the attended prepulses compared with the ignored prepulses. In contrast, both the SPD and schizophrenia patient groups failed to show this pattern, indicating deficient early and later controlled attentional processing. These findings suggest abnormal attentional modulation of PPI and PPF may be a trait-like feature found in patients with schizophrenia-spectrum disorders. Among the schizophrenia-spectrum sample, more deficient PPI during the attended prepulses was associated with greater symptom severity as measured by the total 18-item Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale score.

17258691
Exaggerated affect-modulated startle during unpleasant stimuli in borderline personality disorder.
Excessive emotional responding is considered to be a hallmark of borderline personality disorder (BPD). The affect-modulated startle response is a reliable indicator of emotional processing of stimuli. The aim of this study was to examine emotional processing in BPD patients (n = 27) and healthy control subjects (n = 21). Participants viewed an intermixed series of unpleasant, borderline-salient (e.g., "hate"), and neutral (e.g., "view") words and were instructed to think about the meaning of the word for them personally while eyeblink responses were assessed. The BPD patients exhibited larger startle eyeblink during unpleasant but not neutral words, indicating exaggerated physiological affect. This finding remained significant when we controlled for comorbid diagnoses, including generalized anxiety disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder. Greater symptom severity was associated with greater affective-startle difference scores (unpleasant-neutral). Consistent with the symptom of affective dysregulation, these results suggest an abnormality in the processing of unpleasant emotional stimuli by BPD patients.

17203018
Amygdala-prefrontal disconnection in borderline personality disorder.
Abnormal fronto-amygdala circuitry has been implicated in impulsive aggression, a core symptom of borderline personality disorder (BPD). We examined relative glucose metabolic rate (rGMR) at rest and after m-CPP (meta-chloropiperazine) with (18)fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) with positron emission tomography (PET) in 26 impulsive aggressive (IED)-BPD patients and 24 controls. Brain edges/amygdala were visually traced on MRI scans co-registered to PET scans; rGMR was obtained for ventral and dorsal regions of the amygdala and Brodmann areas within the prefrontal cortex (PFC). Correlation coefficients were calculated between rGMR for dorsal/ventral amygdala regions and PFC. Additionally, amygdala volumes and rGMR were examined in BPD and controls. Correlations PFC/amygdala Placebo: Controls showed significant positive correlations between right orbitofrontal (OFC) and ventral, but not dorsal, amygdala. Patients showed only weak correlations between amygdala and the anterior PFC, with no distinction between dorsal and ventral amygdala. Correlations PFC/amygdala: m-CPP response: Controls showed positive correlations between OFC and amygdala regions, whereas patients showed positive correlations between dorsolateral PFC and amygdala. Group differences between interregional correlational matrices were highly significant. Amygdala volume/metabolism: No group differences were found for amygdala volume, or metabolism in the placebo condition or in response to meta-chloropiperazine (m-CPP). We demonstrated a tight coupling of metabolic activity between right OFC and ventral amygdala in healthy subjects with dorsoventral differences in amygdala circuitry, not present in IED-BPD. We demonstrated no significant differences in amygdala volumes or metabolism between BPD patients and controls.

17848916
Increased serotonin 2C receptor mRNA editing: a possible risk factor for suicide.
Suicide is a major public health problem with approximately 1 million victims each year worldwide. Up to 90% of adults who commit suicide have at least one psychiatric diagnosis such as major depression, bipolar disorder (BPD), schizophrenia (SZ), substance abuse or dependence. A question that has remained unanswered is whether the biological substrates of suicide are distinct from those of the psychiatric disorders in which it occurs. The serotonin 2C receptor (5-HT 2C R) has been implicated in depression and suicide. We, therefore, compared the frequencies of its mRNA editing variants in postmortem prefrontal cortical specimens from subjects who committed suicide or who died from other causes. All suicides occurred in the context of either SZ or BPD. The non-suicide cases included subjects with either SZ or BPD as well as subjects with no psychiatric diagnosis. We identified 5-HT 2CR mRNA editing variations that were associated with suicide but not with the comorbid psychiatric diagnoses, and were not influenced by demographic characteristics (age and sex) and alcohol or drug use. These variations consisted of a significant increase in the pool of mRNA variants (ACD and ABCD) that encode one of the most prevalent and highly edited isoforms of 5-HT 2C R, that is, VSV (Val156-Ser158-Val160). Because the VSV isoform of 5-HT 2C R exhibits low functional activity, an increase in its expression frequency may significantly influence the serotonergic regulation of the brain. Thus, at least in patients with SZ or BPD, overexpression of the VSV isoform in the prefrontal cortex may represent an additional risk factor for suicidal behavior.

