21225816
Traumatic wound breakdown following baha™ implant.
To highlight the importance of recognizing and managing severe peri-operative and post-operative soft tissue complications of baha™ osseointegrated implants. To discuss a patient with severe post-traumatic peri-operative and post-operative scalp complications following baha™ surgery, including management options. STUDY DEsign: Case report and literature review of post-operative soft tissue complications of baha™ osseointegrated implants. METHODS (CASE SUMMARY): A patient presented with a severe right sided mixed hearing loss and was treated with a baha™ osseointegrated implant. Post-operatively, the patient suffered trauma to the site and developed a severe traumatic wound infection, with complete dehiscence of the split thickness skin graft. The patient was treated with oral antibiotics and meticulous, aggressive local wound care. Operative management was considered but not implemented. Full healing with ability to use the device successfully was achieved. The patient healed completely and did not require revision surgery. He now has serviceable hearing after benefiting from the baha™ implant. Although post-operative complications following baha™ surgery are infrequent and commonly mild, the surgeon will rarely be encountered by a severe soft tissue complication as described. Aggressive local wound care included culture-guided antibiotic therapy is indicated prior to performing revision surgery.

20599089
The prevention and management of complications in ethmoid sinus surgery.
Prevention of complications during ethmoid sinus surgery begins with sound knowledge of the relevant anatomy, preoperative planning with use of radiologic imaging, and careful, thoughtful dissection intraoperatively. Despite these measures, however, complications may occur. This article highlights potential complications and treatment techniques to salvage good outcomes following endoscopic ethmoidectomy.

19930748
Endoscopic sinus surgery: evolution and technical innovations.
Prior to the introduction of functional endoscopic sinus surgery, several surgeons had begun to use telescopes to perform surgical procedures in the nose and sinuses. However, the central concepts of functional endoscopic sinus surgery evolved primarily from Messerklinger's endoscopic study of mucociliary clearance and endoscopic detailing of intranasal pathology. The popularity of a combination of endoscopic ethmoidectomy plus opening of secondarily involved sinuses grew rapidly during the latter part of the twentieth century, and endoscopic intranasal techniques began to expand to deal with pathology other than inflammation. We present a review of the evolution of knowledge regarding the pathogenesis of inflammatory sinus disease since that point in time, and of the impact that this has had on the management of inflammatory sinus disease. We also detail the technological advances that have allowed endoscopic intranasal techniques to expand and successfully treat other pathology, including skull base and orbital disease. In addition, we describe evolving technologies which may further influence development within this field.

