21605958
Expression of mutant human DISC1 in mice supports abnormalities in differentiation of oligodendrocytes.
Abnormalities in oligodendrocyte (OLG) differentiation and OLG gene expression deficit have been described in schizophrenia (SZ). Recent studies revealed a critical requirement for Disrupted-in-Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) in neural development. Transgenic mice with forebrain restricted expression of mutant human DISC1 (?hDISC1) are characterized by neuroanatomical and behavioral abnormalities reminiscent of some features of SZ. We sought to determine whether the expression of ?hDISC1 may influence the development of OLGs in this mouse model. OLG- and cell cycle-associated gene and protein expression were characterized in the forebrain of ?hDISC1 mice during different stages of neurodevelopment (E15 and P1 days) and in adulthood. The results suggest that the expression of ?hDISC1 exerts a significant influence on oligodendrocyte differentiation and function, evidenced by premature OLG differentiation and increased proliferation of their progenitors. Additional findings showed that neuregulin 1 and its receptors may be contributing factors to the observed upregulation of OLG genes. Thus, OLG function may be perturbed by mutant hDISC1 in a model system that provides new avenues for studying aspects of the pathogenesis of SZ.

21431547
Microarray database mining and cell differentiation defects in schizophrenia.
The causes of schizophrenia remain unknown, but a key role of oligodendrocytes and of the myelination process carried out by them has gained increasing support. The adult human brain parenchyma contains a relatively large population of progenitor cells that can generate oligodendrocytes. Defects in these adult oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) or in their proliferation/differentiation have received little attention as potential causes of schizophrenia yet. We compared the set of genes whose expression is modified in schizophrenia, as revealed by our microarray studies, with genes specifically expressed in stem cells, as revealed by studies on human embryonic stem cells. We also evaluated the genes that are upregulated when stem cells engage in differentiation programs. These genes can be viewed as fingerprints or signatures for differentiation processes. The comparisons revealed that a substantial fraction of the genes downregulated in the brains of persons with schizophrenia belong to the differentiation signature. A plausible interpretation of our observations is that a cell differentiation process, possibly of adult OPCs to oligodendrocytes, is perturbed in schizophrenia. These observations constitute an incentive for a new direction of study, aimed at investigating the potential role of OPCs in schizophrenia.

21346734
Pimozide augmentation of clozapine inpatients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder unresponsive to clozapine monotherapy.
Despite its superior efficacy, clozapine is helpful in only a subset of patients with schizophrenia unresponsive to other antipsychotics. This lack of complete success has prompted the frequent use of various clozapine combination strategies despite a paucity of evidence from randomized controlled trials supporting their efficacy. Pimozide, a diphenylbutylpiperidine, possesses pharmacological and clinical properties distinct from other typical antipsychotics. An open-label trial of pimozide adjunctive treatment to clozapine provided promising pilot data in support of a larger controlled trial. Therefore, we conducted a double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-designed 12-week trial of pimozide adjunctive treatment added to ongoing optimal clozapine treatment in 53 patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder partially or completely unresponsive to clozapine monotherapy. An average dose of 6.48?mg/day of pimozide was found to be no better than placebo in combination with clozapine at reducing Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale total, positive, negative, and general psychopathology scores. There is no suggestion from this rigorously conducted trial to suggest that pimozide is an effective augmenting agent if an optimal clozapine trial is ineffective. However, given the lack of evidence to guide clinicians and patients when clozapine does not work well, more controlled trials of innovative strategies are warranted.

20950668
Linking oligodendrocyte and myelin dysfunction to neurocircuitry abnormalities in schizophrenia.
Multiple lines of evidence in schizophrenia, from brain imaging, studies in postmortem brains, and genetic association studies, have implicated oligodendrocyte and myelin dysfunction in this disease. Recent studies suggest that oligodendrocyte and myelin dysfunction leads to changes in synaptic formation and function, which could lead to cognitive dysfunction, a core symptom of schizophrenia. Furthermore, there is accumulating data linking oligodendrocyte and myelin dysfunction with dopamine and glutamate abnormalities, both of which are found in schizophrenia. These findings implicate oligodendrocyte and myelin dysfunction as a primary change in schizophrenia, not only as secondary consequences of the illness or treatment. Strategies targeting oligodendrocyte and myelin abnormalities could therefore provide therapeutic opportunities for patients suffering from schizophrenia.

20634363
The effects of hypertension and body mass index on cognition in schizophrenia.
In recent years there has been a greater appreciation of the elevated prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors in the schizophrenia population and the liability some treatments have for their development. These vascular risk factors are in turn important risk factors in the development of dementia and more subtle cognitive impairments. However, their impact on the cognitive functions of patients with schizophrenia remains underexplored. The authors investigated whether vascular risk factors influence the cognitive impairments of schizophrenia and whether their effects on cognition in schizophrenia are different from those observed in nonpsychiatric comparison subjects. The authors compared 100 patients with schizophrenia and 53 comparison subjects on cognitive test performance in 2×2 matrices composed of individual vascular risk factors and group (schizophrenia patients and comparison subjects). Hypertension exerted a significant negative effect on immediate delayed and recognition memory in both groups. Patients with schizophrenia and hypertension were adversely affected in recognition memory, whereas comparison subjects were not. A body mass index above 25 was associated with negative effects on delayed memory in both groups, although the association fell short of statistical significance. Given that patients with schizophrenia have a higher prevalence of vascular risk factors than the general population and are undertreated for them, treatment of these risk factors may significantly improve cognitive outcome in schizophrenia.

18766013
Temporal characteristics of tract-specific anisotropy abnormalities in schizophrenia.
White matter abnormalities have been detected using diffusion tensor imaging in a variety of locations in the brains of patients with schizophrenia. Studies that included first-episode patients report less severe or no abnormalities but more pronounced deficits in chronic patients. Here, we investigated these abnormalities in a very large group of patients with schizophrenia who had both large ranges in age and in duration of illness. A highly reproducible diffusion tensor imaging tractography technique was used to quantify the fractional anisotropy of the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum as well as the bilateral pyramidal tracts. We found a decline in fractional anisotropy that correlated with the duration of illness in the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum but not in the pyramidal tracts. The findings suggest that there are white matter tract-specific degenerative mechanisms that may be present at the point of illness onset and may progress throughout the illness.

18558643
Diffusion tensor imaging findings in first-episode and chronic schizophrenia patients.
Comparisons of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) data between first-episode and chronic schizophrenia patients assessed in different studies have led to the suggestion that the decreased fractional anisotropy observed in chronic schizophrenia patients is less pronounced in first-episode patients. However, such comparisons of imaging data generated across studies are susceptible to numerous confounders, which may limit the interpretation of any differences. In order to address these issues and determine whether the DTI abnormalities of chronic schizophrenia are present at illness onset, the authors conducted a DTI investigation of the largest cohort of first-episode schizophrenia patients yet reported in conjunction with a group of chronic schizophrenia patients and healthy subjects for comparison. Fractional anisotropy data generated by diffusion tensor imaging with a 3-T Siemens Allegra head-dedicated MRI system were compared between 40 first-episode schizophrenia patients and 39 age- and gender-matched healthy comparison subjects and between 40 chronic schizophrenia patients and 40 age- and gender-matched healthy comparison subjects. The following regions of interest were assessed: forceps minor (bilaterally), forceps major (bilaterally), inferior longitudinal fasciculus (bilaterally), and the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum. In most regions, chronic schizophrenia patients showed significant or trend-level lower fractional anisotropy than healthy comparison subjects, whereas the first-episode schizophrenia patients showed only trend-level lower fractional anisotropy in the inferior longitudinal fasciculus. The cross-sectional data reported here suggest less widespread changes in white matter at illness onset in schizophrenia which progress in more chronic states. More definitive conclusions will require follow-up imaging of first-episode schizophrenia patients.

18381916
The lobotomist.


18322470
Abnormal indices of cell cycle activity in schizophrenia and their potential association with oligodendrocytes.
The goal of this study was to determine what signaling pathways may elicit myelin-specific gene expression deficits in schizophrenia (SZ). Microarray analyses indicated that genes associated with canonical cell cycle pathways were significantly affected in the anterior cingulate gyrus (ACG), the region exhibiting the most profound myelin-specific gene expression changes, in persons with SZ (N=16) as compared with controls (N=19). Detected gene expression changes of key regulators of G1/S phase transition and genes central to oligodendrocyte differentiation were validated using qPCR in the ACG in an independent cohort (Ns=45/34). The relative abundance of phosphorylated retinoblastoma protein (pRb) was increased in the white matter underlying the ACG in SZ subjects (Ns=12). The upregulation of cyclin D1 gene expression and the downregulation of p57(Kip2), accompanied by increased cyclin D/CDK4-dependent phosphorylation of pRb, acting as a checkpoint for G1/S phase transition, suggest abnormal cell cycle re-entry in postmitotic oligodendrocytes in SZ. Furthermore, gene expression profiling of brain samples from myelin mutant animal models, quaking and myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) null mice, showed that cell cycle gene expression changes were not a necessary consequence of the reduced gene expression of structural myelin proteins, such as MAG. While, quaking, a known modulator of cell cycle activity during oligodendrocyte differentiation impairs the expression of multiple myelin genes, including those that are affected in SZ. These data suggest that the normal patterns of cell cycle gene and protein expression are disrupted in SZ and that this disruption may contribute to the oligodendroglial deficits observed in SZ.

18029146
Schizophrenia and sex associated differences in the expression of neuronal and oligodendrocyte-specific genes in individual thalamic nuclei.
Considerable evidence based on the study of postmortem brain tissue suggests deficits in both neuronal and myelin systems in schizophrenia (SZ). To date, the majority of the biochemical and molecular biological studies have focused on the cerebral cortex. Most information traveling to or from the cortex is relayed or synaptically gated through the thalamus, and numerous studies suggest structural and functional abnormalities in interconnected regions of the thalamus and cortex in SZ. The present study extends our gene expression studies of neuronal and myelin systems to the thalamus. Quantitative PCR was employed to assess the expression of 10 genes in 5 divisions of the thalamus which were precisely harvested using Laser Capture Microdissection. The divisions studied were present on coronal sections at the level of the centromedian nucleus (CMN) taken from 14 schizophrenic and 16 normal control postmortem brains. The genes examined were specific for oligodendrocytes (MAG, CNP, MBP), neurons (ENO2), glutamatergic neurons (VGlut1, VGlut2, PV, CB) or GABAergic neurons (GAD65, GAD67). Expression levels for each of these markers were quantitated and compared between diagnoses, between sexes, and across nuclei. CB was much more highly expressed in the CMN in SZs compared to NCs. No other diagnosis related differences in gene expression were observed. The expression levels of CNP and MAG, but not MBP, were highly correlated with one another and both, but not MBP, were much more highly expressed in females than in males in all thalamic divisions examined. All markers were differentially expressed across nuclei.

17583597
Introduction to the special section: Myelin and oligodendrocyte abnormalities in schizophrenia.
A central tenet of modern views of the neurobiology of schizophrenia is that the symptoms of schizophrenia arise from a failure of adequate communication between different brain regions and disruption of the circuitry that underlies behaviour and perception. Historically this disconnectivity syndrome has been approached from a neurotransmitter-based perspective. However, efficient communication between brain circuits is also contingent on saltatory signal propagation and salubrious myelination of axons. The papers in this Special Section examine the neuroanatomical and molecular biological evidence for abnormal myelination and oligodendroglial function in schizophrenia through studies of post-mortem brain tissue and animal model systems. The picture that emerges from the studies described suggests that although schizophrenia is not characterized by gross abnormalities of white matter such as those evident in multiple sclerosis, it does involve a profound dysregulation of myelin-associated gene expression, reductions in oligodendrocyte numbers, and marked abnormalities in the ultrastructure of myelin sheaths.

17291370
Variations in oligodendrocyte-related gene expression across multiple cortical regions: implications for the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.
The disconnectivity syndrome hypothesis of schizophrenia suggests that communication between multiple brain circuits and regions may be disrupted. Microarray studies analysed gene expression in 15 different brain regions derived from 13 persons with schizophrenia and controls. The superior temporal gyrus, cingulate gyrus and hippocampus evidence the greatest numbers of abnormally expressed genes. Gene ontology categorization suggested that gene classes associated with oligodendrocytes and myelin function were among the most profoundly affected. qPCR and additional microarray studies have validated these oligodendrocyte- and myelin-associated findings in independent cohorts. At least some of the affected genes are associated with the regulation of axoglial contacts, axon calibre and the integrity of functional elements involved in signal propagation. The confluence of emerging evidence shows that myelination abnormalities are major components of the neurobiology of schizophrenia and suggest that re-evaluation of some long-held hypotheses and beliefs regarding the biological substrates of schizophrenia may be warranted.

17646849
CNTNAP2 gene dosage variation is associated with schizophrenia and epilepsy.
A homozygous mutation of the CNTNAP2 gene has been associated with a syndrome of focal epilepsy, mental retardation, language regression and other neuropsychiatric problems in children of the Old Order Amish community. Here we report genomic rearrangements resulting in haploinsufficiency of the CNTNAP2 gene in association with epilepsy and schizophrenia. Genomic deletions of varying sizes affecting the CNTNAP2 gene were identified in three non-related Caucasian patients. In contrast, we did not observe any dosage variation for this gene in 512 healthy controls. Moreover, this genomic region has not been identified as showing large-scale copy number variation. Our data thus confirm an association of CNTNAP2 to epilepsy outside the Old Order Amish population and suggest that dosage alteration of this gene may lead to a complex phenotype of schizophrenia, epilepsy and cognitive impairment.

17579610
Molecular dissection of NRG1-ERBB4 signaling implicates PTPRZ1 as a potential schizophrenia susceptibility gene.
Neuregulin and the neuregulin receptor ERBB4 have been genetically and functionally implicated in schizophrenia. In this study, we used the yeast two-hybrid system to identify proteins that interact with ERBB4, to identify genes and pathways that might contribute to schizophrenia susceptibility. We identified the MAGI scaffolding proteins as ERBB4-binding proteins. After validating the interaction of MAGI proteins with ERBB4 in mammalian cells, we demonstrated that ERBB4 expression, alone or in combination with ERBB2 or ERBB3, led to the tyrosine phosphorylation of MAGI proteins, and that this could be further enhanced with receptor activation by neuregulin. As MAGI proteins were previously shown to interact with receptor phosphotyrosine phosphatase beta/zeta (RPTPbeta), we postulated that simultaneous binding of MAGI proteins to RPTPbeta and ERBB4 forms a phosphotyrosine kinase/phosphotyrosine phosphatase complex. Studies in cultured cells confirmed both a spatial and functional association between ERBB4, MAGI and RPTPbeta. Given the evidence for this functional association, we examined the genes coding for MAGI and RPTPbeta for genetic association with schizophrenia in a Caucasian United Kingdom case-control cohort (n= approximately 1400). PTPRZ1, which codes for RPTPbeta, showed significant, gene-wide and hypothesis-wide association with schizophrenia in our study (best individual single-nucleotide polymorphism allelic P=0.0003; gene-wide P=0.0064; hypothesis-wide P=0.026). The data provide evidence for a role of PTPRZ1, and for RPTPbeta signaling abnormalities, in the etiology of schizophrenia. Furthermore, the data indicate a role for RPTPbeta in the modulation of ERBB4 signaling that may in turn provide further support for an important role of neuregulin/ERBB4 signaling in the molecular basis of schizophrenia.

