20227393
Prostaglandin E2 modulates components of the Wnt signaling system in bone and prostate cancer cells.
Both Wnt signaling and prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) play pivotal roles in bone development, remodeling, osteoporosis and prostate cancer (PCa) bone metastases. We investigated the effects of PGE(2) on Wnt signaling in osteoblast-lineage cells and Wnt-inhibitor expression in PCa cells. We demonstrate that low dose PGE(2) (0.1 microM) promotes Wnt signaling while higher doses of PGE(2) (1.0-10 microM) inhibit these same parameters in osteoblast-lineage cells. The differential effects of low vs high-dose PGE(2) on pre-osteoblasts may be attributed to dose-dependent modulation of prostaglandin receptor (EP) subtype expression; with lower doses increasing the expression the cAMP-stimulatory EP4 receptor subtype and higher doses increasing the expression of the cAMP-inhibitory EP3 receptor subtype. Moreover, we demonstrate that high expression levels of COX-2 and PGE(2) promote the secretion of Wnt inhibitors from prostate cancer cells. These data demonstrate that there are dose-dependent effects of PGE(2) on Wnt activation in osteoblast-lineage cells and Wnt-inhibitor expression in PCa cells which may have clinical implications in the management.

17669719
Concomitant secretion of glucocorticoid, androgens, and mineralocorticoid by an adrenocortical carcinoma: case report and review of literature.
To present a case of concomitant secretion of cortisol, androgens, and 11-deoxycorticosterone (DOC) by an adrenocortical carcinoma and review the literature in an attempt to identify similar cases. The patient's medical history, physical examination, laboratory data, computed tomographic scan, and histopathologic results were analyzed and summarized in a case report, and an extensive review of the literature was performed. Endocrinologic data showed excess cortisol production, substantially elevated testosterone and androstenedione levels, and profoundly increased DOC in the setting of suppressed aldosterone. An abdominal computed tomographic scan showed a left adrenal tumor. A left adrenalectomy was performed, and the histopathologic diagnosis was stage II adrenocortical carcinoma. The review of the pertinent literature revealed the absence of any identical cases in the past. Our patient presented with a rare case of cosecretion of cortisol, testosterone, androstenedione, and DOC by an adrenocortical carcinoma, resulting in a clinical picture consistent with Cushing's syndrome, hyperandrogenism, and primary hypermineralocorticoidism. We recommend the routine performance of a DOC assay in the setting of mineralocorticoid excess in association with low plasma aldosterone levels.

17646262
Androgens promote preosteoblast differentiation via activation of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway.
Although androgens stimulate bone formation the precise events underlying these effects have not been elucidated. Wnt signaling plays a central role in osteoblast development and bone formation. We demonstrated that dihydrotestosterone (DHT) significantly stimulates MC3T3 preosteoblast differentiation with no effect on cell growth. This effect of DHT was accompanied by increased Wnt signaling in the same cells. Moreover, the stimulatory effects of DHT on preosteoblast differentiation were inhibited by overexpression of soluble frizzed-related protein (sFRP), a naturally occurring Wnt antagonist. These results suggest that androgens promote preosteoblastic differentiation via effects on the canonical Wnt signaling pathway.

17575141
Androgen-induced Wnt signaling in preosteoblasts promotes the growth of MDA-PCa-2b human prostate cancer cells.
The high morbidity and mortality associated with prostate cancer (PCa) result from its tendency to metastasize to bone where it produces predominantly osteoblastic lesions. The Wnt signaling pathway plays an important role in embryogenesis, tumorigenesis, osteoblast development, and bone formation. Androgen signaling via the androgen receptor (AR) is critical in both PCa and bone cell growth. We examined the effects of androgens on cell growth and Wnt signaling in the AR-positive MDA-PCa-2b cell line and MC3T3 preosteoblasts, grown alone and in coculture. We show that the potent androgen dihydrotestosterone increases AR expression and transcriptional activity only in the preosteoblasts. Although dihydrotestosterone induced an 80% increase in PCa cell growth when the cells were grown alone, dihydrotestosterone had a more significant effect on MDA-PCa-2b cell proliferation (3.2-fold increase) when the PCa cells were cocultured with preosteoblasts. Dihydrotestosterone addition to preosteoblasts promoted Wnt-dependent transcriptional reporter activity associated with GSK3beta(S-9) phosphorylation and accumulation of nuclear beta-catenin as well as elevated Runx2 expression. In addition, the increased proliferation of PCa cells in coculture with MC3T3 cells in response to dihydrotestosterone was abrogated by the addition of either exogenous DKK-1 or sFRP-1 protein, two naturally occurring Wnt antagonists. Finally, we show that the paracrine growth-promoting effect of androgens is limited to MDA-PCa-2b cells. These data imply that Wnt signaling is involved in the androgen-regulated crosstalk between preosteoblasts and PCa cells and suggest that androgens may stimulate growth of some prostate tumor cells indirectly, via up-regulation of Wnt signaling in bone cells.

