21325424
Marburg Virus VP40 Antagonizes Interferon Signaling in a Species-Specific Manner.
Marburgviruses are zoonotic pathogens that cause lethal hemorrhagic fever in humans and nonhuman primates. However, they do not cause lethal disease in immunocompetent mice unless they are adapted to this species. The adaptation process can therefore provide insight into the specific virus-host interactions that determine virulence. In primate cells, the Lake Victoria marburgvirus Musoke strain (MARV) VP40 matrix protein antagonizes alpha/beta interferon (IFN-?/?) and IFN-? signaling by inhibiting the activation of the cellular tyrosine kinase Jak1. Here, VP40 from the Ravn strain (RAVV VP40)-from a distinct Marburg virus clade-is demonstrated to also inhibit IFN signaling in human cells. However, neither MARV nor RAVV VP40 effectively inhibited IFN-signaling in mouse cells, as assessed by assays of the antiviral effects of IFN-?/? and the IFN-?/?-induced phosphorylation of Jak1, STAT1, and STAT2. In contrast, the VP40 from a mouse-adapted RAVV (maRAVV) did inhibit IFN signaling. Effective Jak1 inhibition correlated with the species from which the cells were derived and did not depend upon whether Jak1 was of human or mouse origin. Of the seven amino acid changes that accumulated in VP40 during mouse adaptation, two (V57A and T165A) are sufficient to allow efficient IFN signaling antagonism by RAVV VP40 in mouse cells. The same two changes also confer efficient IFN antagonist function upon MARV VP40 in mouse cells. The mouse-adaptive changes did not affect the budding of RAVV VP40 in mouse cells, suggesting that this second major function of VP40 did not undergo adaptation. These data identify an apparent determinant of RAVV host range and virulence and define specific genetic determinants of this function.

21263462
Ebolavirus VP35 suppresses IFN production from conventional but not plasmacytoid dendritic cells.
Ebolaviruses naturally infect a wide variety of cells including macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs), and the resulting cytokine and interferon-?/? (IFN) responses of infected cells are thought to influence viral pathogenesis. The VP35 protein impairs RIG-I-like receptor-dependent signaling to inhibit IFN production, and this function has been suggested to promote the ineffective host immune response characteristic of ebolavirus infection. To assess the impact of VP35 on innate immunity in biologically relevant primary cells, we used a recombinant Newcastle disease virus encoding VP35 (NDV/VP35) to infect macrophages and conventional DCs, which primarily respond to RNA virus infection via RIG-I-like pathways. VP35 suppressed not only IFN but also tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-? secretion, which are normally produced from these cells upon NDV infection. Additionally, in cells susceptible to the activity of VP35, IRF7 activation is impaired. In contrast, NDV/VP35 infection of plasmacytoid DCs, which activate IRF7 and produce IFN through TLR-dependent signaling, leads to robust IFN production. When plasmacytoid DCs deficient for TLR signaling were infected, NDV/VP35 was able to inhibit IFN production. Consistent with this, VP35 was less able to inhibit TLR-dependent versus RIG-I-dependent signaling in vitro. These data demonstrate that ebolavirus VP35 suppresses both IFN and cytokine production in multiple primary human cell types. However, cells that utilize the TLR pathway can circumvent this inhibition, suggesting that the presence of multiple viral sensors enables the host to overcome viral immune evasion mechanisms.Immunology and Cell Biology advance online publication, 25 January 2011; doi:10.1038/icb.2010.169.

20975689
Pandemic 2009 H1N1 vaccine protects against 1918 Spanish influenza virus.
The 1918 influenza A virus caused the most devastating pandemic, killing approximately 50 million people worldwide. Immunization with 1918-like and classical swine H1N1 virus vaccines results in cross-protective antibodies against the 2009 H1N1 pandemic influenza, indicating antigenic similarities among these viruses. In this study, we demonstrate that vaccination with the 2009 pandemic H1N1 vaccine elicits 1918 virus cross-protective antibodies in mice and humans, and that vaccination or passive transfer of human-positive sera reduced morbidity and conferred full protection from lethal challenge with the 1918 virus in mice. The spread of the 2009 H1N1 influenza virus in the population worldwide, in addition to the large number of individuals already vaccinated, suggests that a large proportion of the population now have cross-protective antibodies against the 1918 virus, greatly alleviating concerns and fears regarding the accidental exposure/release of the 1918 virus from the laboratory and the use of the virus as a bioterrorist agent.

20686031
Basic residues within the ebolavirus VP35 protein are required for its viral polymerase cofactor function.
The ebolavirus (EBOV) VP35 protein binds to double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), inhibits host alpha/beta interferon (IFN-?/?) production, and is an essential component of the viral polymerase complex. Structural studies of the VP35 C-terminal IFN inhibitory domain (IID) identified specific structural features, including a central basic patch and a hydrophobic pocket, that are important for dsRNA binding and IFN inhibition. Several other conserved basic residues bordering the central basic patch and a separate cluster of basic residues, called the first basic patch, were also identified. Functional analysis of alanine substitution mutants indicates that basic residues outside the central basic patch are not required for dsRNA binding or for IFN inhibition. However, minigenome assays, which assess viral RNA polymerase complex function, identified these other basic residues to be critical for viral RNA synthesis. Of these, a subset located within the first basic patch is important for VP35-nucleoprotein (NP) interaction, as evidenced by the inability of alanine substitution mutants to coimmunoprecipitate with NP. Therefore, first basic patch residues are likely critical for replication complex formation through interactions with NP. Coimmunoprecipitation studies further demonstrate that the VP35 IID is sufficient to interact with NP and that dsRNA can modulate VP35 IID interactions with NP. Other basic residue mutations that disrupt the VP35 polymerase cofactor function do not affect interaction with NP or with the amino terminus of the viral polymerase. Collectively, these results highlight the importance of conserved basic residues from the EBOV VP35 C-terminal IID and validate the VP35 IID as a potential therapeutic target.

20126449
Protection of mice against lethal challenge with 2009 H1N1 influenza A virus by 1918-like and classical swine H1N1 based vaccines.
The recent 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus infection in humans has resulted in nearly 5,000 deaths worldwide. Early epidemiological findings indicated a low level of infection in the older population (>65 years) with the pandemic virus, and a greater susceptibility in people younger than 35 years of age, a phenomenon correlated with the presence of cross-reactive immunity in the older population. It is unclear what virus(es) might be responsible for this apparent cross-protection against the 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus. We describe a mouse lethal challenge model for the 2009 pandemic H1N1 strain, used together with a panel of inactivated H1N1 virus vaccines and hemagglutinin (HA) monoclonal antibodies to dissect the possible humoral antigenic determinants of pre-existing immunity against this virus in the human population. By hemagglutinination inhibition (HI) assays and vaccination/challenge studies, we demonstrate that the 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus is antigenically similar to human H1N1 viruses that circulated from 1918-1943 and to classical swine H1N1 viruses. Antibodies elicited against 1918-like or classical swine H1N1 vaccines completely protect C57B/6 mice from lethal challenge with the influenza A/Netherlands/602/2009 virus isolate. In contrast, contemporary H1N1 vaccines afforded only partial protection. Passive immunization with cross-reactive monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) raised against either 1918 or A/California/04/2009 HA proteins offered full protection from death. Analysis of mAb antibody escape mutants, generated by selection of 2009 H1N1 virus with these mAbs, indicate that antigenic site Sa is one of the conserved cross-protective epitopes. Our findings in mice agree with serological data showing high prevalence of 2009 H1N1 cross-reactive antibodies only in the older population, indicating that prior infection with 1918-like viruses or vaccination against the 1976 swine H1N1 virus in the USA are likely to provide protection against the 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus. This data provides a mechanistic basis for the protection seen in the older population, and emphasizes a rationale for including vaccination of the younger, naïve population. Our results also support the notion that pigs can act as an animal reservoir where influenza virus HAs become antigenically frozen for long periods of time, facilitating the generation of human pandemic viruses.

20084112
Marburg virus evades interferon responses by a mechanism distinct from ebola virus.
Previous studies have demonstrated that Marburg viruses (MARV) and Ebola viruses (EBOV) inhibit interferon (IFN)-alpha/beta signaling but utilize different mechanisms. EBOV inhibits IFN signaling via its VP24 protein which blocks the nuclear accumulation of tyrosine phosphorylated STAT1. In contrast, MARV infection inhibits IFNalpha/beta induced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT2. MARV infection is now demonstrated to inhibit not only IFNalpha/beta but also IFNgamma-induced STAT phosphorylation and to inhibit the IFNalpha/beta and IFNgamma-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of upstream Janus (Jak) family kinases. Surprisingly, the MARV matrix protein VP40, not the MARV VP24 protein, has been identified to antagonize Jak and STAT tyrosine phosphorylation, to inhibit IFNalpha/beta or IFNgamma-induced gene expression and to inhibit the induction of an antiviral state by IFNalpha/beta. Global loss of STAT and Jak tyrosine phosphorylation in response to both IFNalpha/beta and IFNgamma is reminiscent of the phenotype seen in Jak1-null cells. Consistent with this model, MARV infection and MARV VP40 expression also inhibit the Jak1-dependent, IL-6-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT3. Finally, expression of MARV VP40 is able to prevent the tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak1, STAT1, STAT2 or STAT3 which occurs following over-expression of the Jak1 kinase. In contrast, MARV VP40 does not detectably inhibit the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT2 or Tyk2 when Tyk2 is over-expressed. Mutation of the VP40 late domain, essential for efficient VP40 budding, has no detectable impact on inhibition of IFN signaling. This study shows that MARV inhibits IFN signaling by a mechanism different from that employed by the related EBOV. It identifies a novel function for the MARV VP40 protein and suggests that MARV may globally inhibit Jak1-dependent cytokine signaling.

20071589
Mutations abrogating VP35 interaction with double-stranded RNA render Ebola virus avirulent in guinea pigs.
Ebola virus (EBOV) protein VP35 is a double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) binding inhibitor of host interferon (IFN)-alpha/beta responses that also functions as a viral polymerase cofactor. Recent structural studies identified key features, including a central basic patch, required for VP35 dsRNA binding activity. To address the functional significance of these VP35 structural features for EBOV replication and pathogenesis, two point mutations, K319A/R322A, that abrogate VP35 dsRNA binding activity and severely impair its suppression of IFN-alpha/beta production were identified. Solution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography reveal minimal structural perturbations in the K319A/R322A VP35 double mutant and suggest that loss of basic charge leads to altered function. Recombinant EBOVs encoding the mutant VP35 exhibit, relative to wild-type VP35 viruses, minimal growth attenuation in IFN-defective Vero cells but severe impairment in IFN-competent cells. In guinea pigs, the VP35 mutant virus revealed a complete loss of virulence. Strikingly, the VP35 mutant virus effectively immunized animals against subsequent wild-type EBOV challenge. These in vivo studies, using recombinant EBOV viruses, combined with the accompanying biochemical and structural analyses directly correlate VP35 dsRNA binding and IFN inhibition functions with viral pathogenesis. Moreover, these studies provide a framework for the development of antivirals targeting this critical EBOV virulence factor.

19939917
Hemagglutinin-pseudotyped green fluorescent protein-expressing influenza viruses for the detection of influenza virus neutralizing antibodies.
Influenza virus is a highly contagious virus that causes yearly epidemics and occasional pandemics of great consequence. Influenza virus neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) are promising prophylactic and therapeutic reagents. Detection of NAbs in serum samples is critical to evaluate the prevalence and spread of new virus strains. Here we describe the development of a simple, sensitive, specific, and safe screening assay for the rapid detection of NAbs against highly pathogenic influenza viruses under biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) conditions. This assay is based on the use of influenza viruses in which the hemagglutinin (HA) gene is replaced by a gene expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP). These GFP-expressing influenza viruses replicate to high titers in HA-expressing cell lines, but in non-HA-expressing cells, their replication is restricted to a single cycle.

19775255
Zaire Ebola virus entry into human dendritic cells is insensitive to cathepsin L inhibition.
Cathepsins B and L contribute to Ebola virus (EBOV) entry into Vero cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts. However, the role of cathepsins in EBOV-infection of human dendritic cells (DCs), important targets of infection in vivo, remains undefined. Here, EBOV-like particles containing a beta-lactamase-VP40 fusion reporter and Ebola virus were used to demonstrate the cathepsin dependence of EBOV entry into human monocyte-derived DCs. However, while DC infection is blocked by cathepsin B inhibitor, it is insensitive to cathepsin L inhibitor. Furthermore, DCs pre-treated for 48 h with TNFalpha were generally less susceptible to entry and infection by EBOV. This decrease in infection was associated with a decrease in cathepsin B activity. Thus, cathepsin L plays a minimal, if any, role in EBOV infection in human DCs. The inflammatory cytokine TNFalpha modulates cathepsin B activity and affects EBOV entry into and infection of human DCs.

19694547
Evasion of interferon responses by Ebola and Marburg viruses.
The filoviruses, Ebola virus (EBOV) and Marburg virus (MARV), cause frequently lethal viral hemorrhagic fever. These infections induce potent cytokine production, yet these host responses fail to prevent systemic virus replication. Consistent with this, filoviruses have been found to encode proteins VP35 and VP24 that block host interferon (IFN)-alpha/beta production and inhibit signaling downstream of the IFN-alpha/beta and the IFN-gamma receptors, respectively. VP35, which is a component of the viral nucleocapsid complex and plays an essential role in viral RNA synthesis, acts as a pseudosubstrate for the cellular kinases IKK-epsilon and TBK-1, which phosphorylate and activate interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7). VP35 also promotes SUMOylation of IRF-7, repressing IFN gene transcription. In addition, VP35 is a dsRNA-binding protein, and mutations that disrupt dsRNA binding impair VP35 IFN-antagonist activity while leaving its RNA replication functions intact. The phenotypes of recombinant EBOV bearing mutant VP35s unable to inhibit IFN-alpha/beta demonstrate that VP35 IFN-antagonist activity is critical for full virulence of these lethal pathogens. The structure of the VP35 dsRNA-binding domain, which has recently become available, is expected to provide insight into how VP35 IFN-antagonist and dsRNA-binding functions are related. The EBOV VP24 protein inhibits IFN signaling through an interaction with select host cell karyopherin-alpha proteins, preventing the nuclear import of otherwise activated STAT1. It remains to be determined to what extent VP24 may also modulate the nuclear import of other host cell factors and to what extent this may influence the outcome of infection. Notably, the Marburg virus VP24 protein does not detectably block STAT1 nuclear import, and, unlike EBOV, MARV infection inhibits STAT1 and STAT2 phosphorylation. Thus, despite their similarities, there are fundamental differences by which these deadly viruses counteract the IFN system. It will be of interest to determine how these differences influence pathogenesis.

19515782
Nipah virus sequesters inactive STAT1 in the nucleus via a P gene-encoded mechanism.
The Nipah virus (NiV) phosphoprotein (P) gene encodes the C, P, V, and W proteins. P, V, and W, have in common an amino-terminal domain sufficient to bind STAT1, inhibiting its interferon (IFN)-induced tyrosine phosphorylation. P is also essential for RNA-dependent RNA polymerase function. C is encoded by an alternate open reading frame (ORF) within the common amino-terminal domain. Mutations within residues 81 to 113 of P impaired its polymerase cofactor function, as assessed by a minireplicon assay, but these mutants retained STAT1 inhibitory function. Mutations within the residue 114 to 140 region were identified that abrogated interaction with and inhibition of STAT1 by P, V, and W without disrupting P polymerase cofactor function. Recombinant NiVs were then generated. A G121E mutation, which abrogated inhibition of STAT1, was introduced into a C protein knockout background (C(ko)) because the mutation would otherwise also alter the overlapping C ORF. In cell culture, relative to the wild-type virus, the C(ko) mutation proved attenuating but the G121E mutant virus replicated identically to the C(ko) virus. In cells infected with the wild-type and C(ko) viruses, STAT1 was nuclear despite the absence of tyrosine phosphorylation. This latter observation mirrors what has been seen in cells expressing NiV W. In the G121E mutant virus-infected cells, STAT1 was not phosphorylated and was cytoplasmic in the absence of IFN stimulation but became tyrosine phosphorylated and nuclear following IFN addition. These data demonstrate that the gene for NiV P encodes functions that sequester inactive STAT1 in the nucleus, preventing its activation and suggest that the W protein is the dominant inhibitor of STAT1 in NiV-infected cells.

19241254
Neutralizing anti-influenza virus monoclonal antibodies: therapeutics and tools for discovery.
The human antibody response to influenza virus infection plays a protective role against re-infection, yet little molecular detail is available regarding how human antibodies, when characterized at the monoclonal level, neutralize this important human pathogen. Recent studies, using a diverse array of strategies, have isolated and characterized human anti-virus neutralizing antibodies and shed light not only on the specificity and origin of these antibodies but on their potential for therapeutic use against influenza virus infection.

19211754
Nipah virus edits its P gene at high frequency to express the V and W proteins.
Nipah virus (NiV) is predicted to encode four proteins from its P gene (P, V, W, and C) via mRNA editing and an alternate open reading frame. By use of specific antibodies, the expression of the V, W, and C proteins in NiV-infected cells has now been confirmed. Analysis of the P-gene transcripts shows a ratio of P:V:W mRNA of 1:1:1, but this differs over time, with greater proportions of V and W transcripts observed as the infection progresses. Eighty-two percent of transcripts are edited, with up to 11 G insertions observed. This exceptionally high editing frequency ensures expression of the V and W proteins.

19153231
Ebola virus protein VP35 impairs the function of interferon regulatory factor-activating kinases IKKepsilon and TBK-1.
The Ebola virus (EBOV) VP35 protein antagonizes the early antiviral alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) response. We previously demonstrated that VP35 inhibits the virus-induced activation of the IFN-beta promoter by blocking the phosphorylation of IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), a transcription factor that is crucial for the induction of IFN-alpha/beta expression. Furthermore, VP35 blocks IFN-beta promoter activation induced by any of several components of the retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)/melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA-5)-activated signaling pathways including RIG-I, IFN-beta promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1), TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK-1), and IkappaB kinase epsilon (IKKepsilon). These results suggested that VP35 may target the IRF kinases TBK-1 and IKKepsilon. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments now demonstrate physical interactions of VP35 with IKKepsilon and TBK-1, and the use of an IKKepsilon deletion construct further demonstrates that the amino-terminal kinase domain of IKKepsilon is sufficient for interactions with either IRF-3 or VP35. In vitro, either IKKepsilon or TBK-1 phosphorylates not only IRF-3 but also VP35. Moreover, VP35 overexpression impairs IKKepsilon-IRF-3, IKKepsilon-IRF-7, and IKKepsilon-IPS-1 interactions. Finally, lysates from cells overexpressing IKKepsilon contain kinase activity that can phosphorylate IRF-3 in vitro. When VP35 is expressed in the IKKepsilon-expressing cells, this kinase activity is suppressed. These data suggest that VP35 exerts its IFN-antagonist function, at least in part, by blocking necessary interactions between the kinases IKKepsilon and TBK-1 and their normal interaction partners, including their substrates, IRF-3 and IRF-7.

18636086
The tumour suppressor CYLD is a negative regulator of RIG-I-mediated antiviral response.
On detecting viral RNAs, the RNA helicase retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) activates the interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) signalling pathway to induce type I interferon (IFN) gene transcription. How this antiviral signalling pathway might be negatively regulated is poorly understood. Microarray and bioinformatic analysis indicated that the expression of RIG-I and that of the tumour suppressor CYLD (cylindromatosis), a deubiquitinating enzyme that removes Lys 63-linked polyubiquitin chains, are closely correlated, suggesting a functional association between the two molecules. Ectopic expression of CYLD inhibits the IRF3 signalling pathway and IFN production triggered by RIG-I; conversely, CYLD knockdown enhances the response. CYLD removes polyubiquitin chains from RIG-I as well as from TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1), the kinase that phosphorylates IRF3, coincident with an inhibition of the IRF3 signalling pathway. Furthermore, CYLD protein level is reduced in the presence of tumour necrosis factor and viral infection, concomitant with enhanced IFN production. These findings show that CYLD is a negative regulator of RIG-I-mediated innate antiviral response.

18547656
Progress in identifying virulence determinants of the 1918 H1N1 and the Southeast Asian H5N1 influenza A viruses.
The 1918 pandemic H1N1 influenza virus and the recently emerged Southeast Asian H5N1 avian influenza virus are unique among influenza A virus isolates in their high virulence for humans and their lethality for a variety of animal species without prior adaptation. Reverse genetic studies have implicated several viral genes as virulence determinants. For both the 1918 and H5N1 viruses, the hemagglutinin and the polymerase complex contribute to high virulence. Non-structural proteins NS1 and PB1-F2, which block host antiviral responses, also influence pathogenesis. Additionally, recent studies correlate high levels of viral replication and induction of strong proinflammatory responses with the high virulence of these viruses. Defining how individual viral proteins promote enhanced replication, inflammation and severe disease will provide insight into the pathogenesis of severe influenza virus infections and suggest novel therapeutic approaches.

18480443
A five-amino-acid deletion of the eastern equine encephalitis virus capsid protein attenuates replication in mammalian systems but not in mosquito cells.
Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV) is a human and veterinary pathogen that causes sporadic cases of fatal neurological disease. We previously demonstrated that the capsid protein of EEEV is a potent inhibitor of host cell gene expression and that this function maps to the amino terminus of the protein. We now identify amino acids 55 to 75, within the N terminus of the capsid, as critical for the inhibition of host cell gene expression. An analysis of stable EEEV replicons expressing mutant capsid proteins corroborated these mapping data. When deletions of 5 to 20 amino acids within this region of the capsid were introduced into infectious EEEV, the mutants exhibited delayed replication in Vero cells. However, the replication of the 5-amino-acid deletion mutant in C710 mosquito cells was not affected, suggesting that virus replication and assembly were affected in a cell-specific manner. Both 5- and 20-amino-acid deletion mutant viruses exhibited increased sensitivity to interferon (IFN) in cell culture and impaired replication and complete attenuation in mice. In summary, we have identified a region within the capsid protein of EEEV that contributes to the inhibition of host gene expression and to the protection of EEEV from the antiviral effects of IFNs. This region is also critical for EEEV pathogenesis.

18220960
Influenza viruses: basic biology and potential drug targets.
Influenza A and influenza B viruses are continuing causes of morbidity and mortality on an annual basis. Influenza A viruses have historically caused periodic pandemics in the human population, sometimes with devastating consequences, such as in 1918. Fears of a new pandemic have increased in recent years because of continuing outbreaks of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza viruses in birds with occasional, but often lethal infection of humans. Despite their importance as human pathogens, the antiviral drugs approved to treat influenza virus infections are currently limited to two targets, the viral neuraminidase and the viral ion channel, M2. The use of the M2 inhibitors amantadine and rimantadine is further limited by the propensity of these drugs to select for drug resistant variants. However, the replication cycle of influenza viruses has been intensively studied and is receiving increased attention. New opportunities exist to develop novel antiviral strategies targeting these viruses.

17928350
Ebola virus VP24 proteins inhibit the interaction of NPI-1 subfamily karyopherin alpha proteins with activated STAT1.
The Zaire ebolavirus protein VP24 was previously demonstrated to inhibit alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta)- and IFN-gamma-induced nuclear accumulation of tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT1 (PY-STAT1) and to inhibit IFN-alpha/beta- and IFN-gamma-induced gene expression. These properties correlated with the ability of VP24 to interact with the nuclear localization signal receptor for PY-STAT1, karyopherin alpha1. Here, VP24 is demonstrated to interact not only with overexpressed but also with endogenous karyopherin alpha1. Mutational analysis demonstrated that VP24 binds within the PY-STAT1 binding region located in the C terminus of karyopherin alpha1. In addition, VP24 was found to inhibit PY-STAT1 binding to both overexpressed and endogenous karyopherin alpha1. We assessed the binding of both PY-STAT1 and the VP24 proteins from Zaire, mouse-adapted Zaire, and Reston Ebola viruses for interaction with all six members of the human karyopherin alpha family. We found, in contrast to previous studies, that PY-STAT1 can interact not only with karyopherin alpha1 but also with karyopherins alpha5 and alpha6, which together comprise the NPI-1 subfamily of karyopherin alphaS. Similarly, all three VP24s bound and inhibited PY-STAT1 interaction with karyopherins alpha1, alpha5, and alpha6. Consistent with their ability to inhibit the karyopherin-PY-STAT1 interaction, Zaire, mouse-adapted Zaire, and Reston Ebola virus VP24s displayed similar capacities to inhibit IFN-beta-induced gene expression in human and mouse cells. These findings suggest that VP24 inhibits interaction of PY-STAT1 with karyopherins alpha1, alpha5, or alpha6 by binding within the PY-STAT1 binding region of the karyopherins and that this function is conserved among the VP24 proteins of different Ebola virus species.

17434557
Ebola virus-like particle-induced activation of NF-kappaB and Erk signaling in human dendritic cells requires the glycoprotein mucin domain.
Dendritic cells (DCs), important early targets of Ebola virus (EBOV) infection in vivo, are activated by Ebola virus-like particles (VLPs). To better understand this phenomenon, we have systematically assessed the response of DCs to VLPs of different compositions. VLPs containing the viral matrix protein (VP40) and the viral glycoprotein (GP), were found to induce a proinflammatory response highly similar to a prototypical DC activator, LPS. This response included the production of several proinflammatory cytokines, activation of numerous transcription factors including NF-kappaB, the functional importance of which was demonstrated by employing inhibitors of NF-kappaB activation, and activation of ERK1/2 MAP kinase. In contrast, VLPs constituted with a mutant GP lacking the heavily glycosylated mucin domain showed impaired NF-kappaB and Erk activation and induced less DC cytokine production. We conclude that the GP mucin domain is required for VLPs to stimulate human dendritic cells through NF-kappaB and MAPK signaling pathways.

17267491
Capsid protein of eastern equine encephalitis virus inhibits host cell gene expression.
Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV) causes sporadic but often severe cases of human and equine neurological disease in North America. To determine how EEEV may evade innate immune responses, we screened individual EEEV proteins for the ability to rescue the growth of a Newcastle disease virus expressing green fluorescent protein (NDV-GFP) from the antiviral effects of interferon (IFN). Only expression of the EEEV capsid facilitated NDV-GFP replication. Inhibition of the antiviral effects of IFN by the capsid appears to occur through a general inhibition of cellular gene expression. For example, the capsid inhibited the expression of several reporter genes under the control of RNA polymerase II promoters. In contrast, capsid did not inhibit expression from a T7 RNA polymerase promoter construct, suggesting that the inhibition of gene expression is specific and is not a simple manifestation of toxicity. The inhibition correlated both with capsid-induced phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha and with capsid-mediated inhibition of cellular mRNA accumulation. Mapping analysis identified the N terminus as the region important for the inhibition of host gene expression, suggesting that this inhibition is independent of capsid protease activity. Finally, when cell lines containing EEEV replicons encoding capsid were selected, replicons consistently acquired mutations that deleted all or part of the capsid, for example, amino acids 18 to 135. Given that the amino terminus of the capsid is required to inhibit host cell gene expression, these data suggest that capsid expression from the replicons is ultimately toxic to host cells, presumably because of its ability to inhibit gene expression.

