21086978
Tamoxifen metabolite isomer separation and quantification by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.
Tamoxifen (Tam), the antiestrogen used to treat estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer is a pro-drug that is converted to its major active metabolites, endoxifen and 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen (4-OH-Tam) by various biotransformation enzymes of which cytochrome P450-2D6 (CYP2D6) is key. The usual Tam dose is 20 mg daily; however, the plasma active metabolite concentrations vary due to common genetic variants encoding the biotransformation enzymes and environmental factors (e.g., concomitant drugs) that inhibit these enzymes. Effective treatment depends on adequate Tam conversion to its active isomers. To monitor metabolite plasma levels, a novel liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method was developed to separate and quantitate Tam, N-desmethyl-tamoxifen (ND-Tam), and tamoxifen-N-oxide (Tam-N-oxide), and the E, Z, and Z' isomers of endoxifen and 4-OH-Tam. Known standards were used to identify each metabolite/isomer. Quantitation of these metabolites in plasma was linear from 0.6 to 2000 nM. Intra- and inter-assay reproducibilities were 0.2-8.4% and 0.6-6.3%, respectively. Accuracy determined by spike experiments with known standards was 86-103%. Endoxifen, 4-OH-Tam, and their isomers were stable in fresh frozen plasma for ?6 months. This method provides the first sensitive, specific, accurate, and reproducible quantitation of Tam and its metabolite isomers for monitoring Tam-treated breast cancer patients.

19836982
Newborn screening and early biochemical follow-up in combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria, cblC type, and utility of methionine as a secondary screening analyte.
Combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria, cobalamin C (cblC) type, is an inherited disorder of vitamin B(12) metabolism caused by mutations in MMACHC. CblC typically presents in the neonatal period with neurological deterioration, failure to thrive, cytopenias, and multisystem pathology including renal and hepatic dysfunction. Rarely, affected individuals present in adulthood with gait ataxia and cognitive decline. Treatment with hydroxocobalamin may ameliorate the clinical features of early-onset disease and prevent clinical late-onset disease. Propionic acidemia (PA), methylmalonic acidemia (MMA), and various disorders of cobalamin metabolism are characterized by elevated propionylcarnitine (C3) on newborn screening (NBS). Distinctions can be made between these disorders with secondary analyte testing. Elevated methionine is already routinely used as a NBS marker for cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency. We propose that low methionine may be useful as a secondary analyte for specific detection of cbl disorders among a larger pool of infants with elevated C3 on NBS. Retrospective analysis of dried blood spot (DBS) data in patients with molecularly confirmed cblC disease. Nine out of ten patients with confirmed cblC born in New York between 2005 and 2008 had methionine below 13.4mumol/L on NBS. Elevated C3, elevated C3:C2 ratio, and low methionine were incorporated into a simple screening algorithm that can be used to improve the specificity of newborn screening programs and provide a specific and novel method of distinguishing cblC from other disorders of propionate metabolism prior to recall for confirmatory testing. It is anticipated that this algorithm will aid in early and specific detection of cobalamin C, D, and F diseases, with no additional expense to NBS laboratories screening for organic acidemias and classical homocystinuria.

