21572163
Cognitive Effects of Atypical Antipsychotic Medications in Patients With Alzheimer's Disease: Outcomes From CATIE-AD.
Objective: The impact of the atypical antipsychotics olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone on cognition in patients with Alzheimer's disease is unclear. The authors assessed the effects of time and treatment on neuropsychological functioning during the Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness-Alzheimer's Disease study (CATIE-AD). Method: CATIE-AD included 421 outpatients with Alzheimer's disease and psychosis or agitated/aggressive behavior who were randomly assigned to receive masked, flexible-dose olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, or placebo. Based on their clinicians' judgment, patients could discontinue the originally assigned medication and receive another randomly assigned medication. Patients were followed for 36 weeks, and cognitive assessments were obtained at baseline and at 12, 24, and 36 weeks. Outcomes were compared for 357 patients for whom data were available for at least one cognitive measure at baseline and one follow-up assessment that took place after they had been on their prescribed medication or placebo for at least 2 weeks. Results: Overall, patients showed steady, significant declines over time in most cognitive areas, including in scores on the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE; -2.4 points over 36 weeks) and the cognitive subscale of the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale (-4.4 points). Cognitive function declined more in patients receiving antipsychotics than in those given placebo on multiple cognitive measures, including the MMSE, the cognitive subscale of the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale, and a cognitive summary score summarizing change on 18 cognitive tests. Conclusions: In CATIE-AD, atypical antipsychotics were associated with worsening cognitive function at a magnitude consistent with 1 year's deterioration compared with placebo. Further cognitive impairment is an additional risk of treatment with atypical antipsychotics that should be considered when treating patients with Alzheimer's disease.

21187583
Profiles of Alzheimer's disease-related pathology in an aging urban population sample in India.
Systematic studies on Alzheimer's disease (AD)-related pathology that complement clinical and epidemiological data on dementia from low and middle income countries are rare. We report the first large study on AD-related pathology in autopsy service-derived brains from an urban center in India, a low/middle income country, and compare findings with a similar sample from New York. Amyloid-? plaques and neurofibrillary tangles were assessed in 91 brain specimens derived from hospital autopsy cases from Mumbai, India (age 60+ years; mean age 71.1 years, ± 8.3 SD; range 60-107 years) and compared with identically examined age-matched sample obtained in New York. These cases had no known clinical history of dementia. Our study showed that in comparison with the New York sample, the mean brain weight of the Mumbai sample was lower (p = 0.013) and mean diffuse plaque density was higher (p = 0.019), while differences in mean density and counts of neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques were not statistically significant (p > 0.05). Our findings indicate that the burden of AD-related pathology was approximately equivalent in Mumbai and New York samples, which is at variance with expected lower AD-related lesion burden based on the clinical/epidemiological studies suggesting lower prevalence of AD in India.

20977323
ICAD 2010: Detection may hold the key to treatment. International Conference on Alzheimer Disease (ICAD) 2010 Honolulu, HI, USA, 10–15 July 2010.
The Alzheimer's Association International Conference on Alzheimer's Disease was held on July 10-15 in Honolulu (HI, USA). Over 3800 attendees participated, attending sessions that included more than 1700 posters and 200 oral presentations. The meeting, first organized in 1988 by Khalid Iqbal and Bengt Winblad, became an annual event in 2009, and under the current design includes not only well-established themes of interest, but investigator-initiated sessions also. The Alzheimer's Association started managing the conference in 2000 in partnership with the founders, and abstracts for the meeting are published in the association's journal, Alzheimer's & Dementia. Key themes of this year's conference included validation of biomarkers, drug development, the value of screening for cognitive loss and dementia and the proposal of a new criteria for Alzheimer's disease.

20975515
Utilization of Antihypertensives, Antidepressants, Antipsychotics, and Hormones in Alzheimer Disease.
This study explores the longitudinal relationship between patient characteristics and use of 4 drug classes (antihypertensives, antidepressants, antipsychotics, and hormones) that showed significant changes in use rates over time in patients with Alzheimer disease. Patient/caregiver-reported prescription medication usage was categorized by drug class for 201 patients from the Predictors Study. Patient characteristics included use of cholinesterase inhibitors and/or memantine, function, cognition, living situation, baseline age, and sex. Assessment interval, year of study entry, and site were controlled for. Before adjusting for covariates, useage increased for antihypertensives (47.8% to 62.2%), antipsychotics (3.5% to 27.0%), and antidepressants (32.3% to 40.5%); use of hormones decreased (19.4% to 5.4%). After controlling for patient characteristics, effects of time on the use of antidepressants were no longer significant. Antihypertensive use was associated with poorer functioning, concurrent use of memantine, and older age. Antipsychotic use was associated with poorer functioning and poorer cognition. Antidepressant use was associated with younger age, poorer functioning, and concurrent use of cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine. Hormone use was associated with being female and younger age. Findings suggest accurate modeling of the Alzheimer disease treatment paradigm for certain subgroups of patients should include antihypertensives and antipsychotics in addition to cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine.

20921876
Adding Delayed Recall to the Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale is Useful in Studies of Mild Cognitive Impairment But Not Alzheimer Disease.
To determine if the addition of delayed recall (DR) assessment adds sensitivity to the cognitive subscale of the Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS-cog) in clinical trials in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer Disease (AD). Memory, particularly DR, is the most sensitive test for early detection of AD and MCI. However, it is not clear that assessment of DR adds benefit for measuring change over time after a diagnosis is made or in clinical trials. The ADAS-cog is the most commonly used tool to assess treatment efficacy in AD clinical trials. In an attempt to improve sensitivity to change, assessment of DR after the 3-trial, 10-word list was added to the standard 11-item ADAS-cog. We examined the added value of the DR in participants with MCI and AD followed for at least 1 year. Data from 111 subjects with AD and 259 subjects with MCI who were randomly assigned to the placebo arm of 2 clinical trials were included. Participants with AD had Mini-Mental State Examination scores of 13 to 27 and those with MCI had 24 to 30. We calculated the ADAS-cog11 score based on the original 11 items (range: best to worse, 0 to 70), the DR item score (range: 0 to 10 words not recalled), and the ADAS-cog12 (range: 0 to 80). We assessed the rate of missing items for DR over time, the change scores, the association between scores and baseline performance, and used longitudinal mixed effects regression models to examine the rate of change. At baseline AD subjects were near floor on DR (8.93±1.6 SD) and showed little change over 1 year (0.12±1.34); the MCI subjects baseline DR was 6.2±2.2 with 1-year change of 0.20±1.7. We compared standardized change (change/SD) for ADAS-cog11, and 12 in MCI and found a 10% improvement with ADAS-cog12; there was no improvement in the AD group. In a subset of MCI and AD cases with matching Mini-Mental State Examination (23 to 27), the ADAS-cog12 provided an 18% improvement in standardized change in MCI subjects, with no benefit in the AD cohort, primarily owing to increased variance. CONCLUSIONS/RELEVANCE: The addition of DR to the ADAS-cog score increased the ability to detect change in subjects with MCI over 1 year compared with the ADAS-cog11 but increased the variance in subjects with AD, even in those with mild impairment These findings speak to the need to tailor outcome measures to the specific study population and diagnosis for maximal efficiency and economy when conducting clinical trials.

20625271
Longitudinal Medication Usage in Alzheimer Disease Patients.
This study examined in detail patterns of cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEIs) and memantine use and explored the relationship between patient characteristics and such use. Patients with probable Alzheimer disease AD (n=201) were recruited from the Predictors Study in 3 academic AD centers and followed from early disease stages for up to 6 years. Random effects logistic regressions were used to examine effects of patient characteristics on ChEIs/memantine use over time. Independent variables included measures of function, cognition, comorbidities, the presence of extrapyramidal signs, psychotic symptoms, age, sex, and patient's living situation at each interval. Control variables included assessment interval, year of study entry, and site. During a 6-year study period, rate of ChEIs use decreased (80.6% to 73.0%) whereas memantine use increased (2.0% to 45.9%). Random effects logistic regression analyses showed that ChEI use was associated with better function, no psychotic symptoms, and younger age. Memantine use was associated with better function, poorer cognition, living at home, later assessment interval, and later year of study entry. Results suggest that high rate of ChEI use and increasing memantine use over time are consistent with current practice guidelines of initiation of ChEIs in mild-to-moderate AD patients and initiation of memantine in moderate-to-severe patients.

20592583
Pilot study to show the feasibility of a multicenter trial of home-based assessment of people over 75 years old.
This report describes a pilot study to evaluate feasibility of new home-based assessment technologies applicable to clinical trials for prevention of cognitive loss and Alzheimer disease. Community-dwelling nondemented individuals >or=75 years old were recruited and randomized to 1 of 3 assessment methodologies: (1) mail-in questionnaire/ live telephone interviews (MIP); (2) automated telephone with interactive voice recognition (IVR); and (3) internet-based computer Kiosk (KIO). Brief versions of cognitive and noncognitive outcomes were adapted to the different methodologies and administered at baseline and 1-month. An Efficiency measure, consisting of direct staff-to-participant time required to complete assessments, was also compared across arms. Forty-eight out of 60 screened participants were randomized. The dropout rate across arms from randomization through 1-month was different: 33% for KIO, 25% for IVR, and 0% for MIP (Fisher Exact Test P=0.04). Nearly all participants who completed baseline also completed 1-month assessment (38 out of 39). The 1-way ANOVA across arms for total staff-to-participant direct contact time (ie, training, baseline, and 1-month) was significant: F (2,33)=4.588; P=0.017, with lowest overall direct time in minutes for IVR (Mn=44.4; SD=21.5), followed by MIP (Mn=74.9; SD=29.9), followed by KIO (Mn=129.4; SD=117.0). In this sample of older individuals, a higher dropout rate occurred in those assigned to the high-technology assessment techniques; however, once participants had completed baseline in all 3 arms, they continued participation through 1 month. High-technology home-based assessment methods, which do not require live testers, began to emerge as more time-efficient over the brief time of this pilot, despite initial time-intensive participant training.

20558395
Tarenflurbil: mechanisms and myths.


20381196
Evidence against a role for rare ADAM10 mutations in sporadic Alzheimer Disease.
The Alzheimer amyloid protein precursor (APP) is subject to proteolysis by ADAM10 and ADAM17, precluding the formation of Abeta. Recently, coding variations in ADAM10 resulting in altered function have been reported in familial Alzheimer disease (AD). The authors carried out a large-scale (n = 576: Controls, 271; AD, 305) resequencing study of ADAM10 in sporadic AD. The results do not support a significant role for ADAM10 mutations in AD. The results also make it clear that the careful examination of ancestry required in any case-control comparison is especially true with rare variations, where even a very small number of variations might form the basis of scientific conclusions.

20101716
Current treatment and recent clinical research in Alzheimer's disease.
The transition from either epidemiological observation or the bench to rigorously tested clinical trials in patients with Alzheimer's disease is crucial in understanding which treatments are beneficial to patients. The amyloid hypothesis has undergone scrutiny recently, as many trials aimed at reducing amyloid and plaque have been completed or are in the testing phase. Examples include modulation of the secretases involved in beta amyloid formation, anti-aggregation agents, and immunotherapeutic trials. Other therapies targeting hyperphosphorylated tau and novel targets such as enhancement of mitochondrial function, serotonin receptors, receptor for advanced glycation end products, and nerve growth factor, as well as other strategies, are discussed. A brief review of the current Food and Drug Administration-approved treatments is included.

20017949
Acute dosing of latrepirdine (Dimebon), a possible Alzheimer therapeutic, elevates extracellular amyloid-beta levels in vitro and in vivo.
Recent reports suggest that latrepirdine (Dimebon, dimebolin), a retired Russian antihistamine, improves cognitive function in aged rodents and in patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the mechanism(s) underlying this benefit remain elusive. AD is characterized by extracellular accumulation of the amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptide in the brain, and Abeta-lowering drugs are currently among the most popular anti-amyloid agents under development for the treatment of AD. In the current study, we assessed the effect of acute dosing of latrepirdine on levels of extracellular Abeta using in vitro and in vivo experimental systems. We evaluated extracellular levels of Abeta in three experimental systems, under basal conditions and after treatment with latrepirdine. Mouse N2a neuroblastoma cells overexpressing Swedish APP were incubated for 6 hr in the presence of either vehicle or vehicle + latrepirdine (500pM-5 muM). Synaptoneurosomes were isolated from TgCRND8 mutant APP-overexpressing transgenic mice and incubated for 0 to 10 min in the absence or presence of latrepirdine (1 muM or 10 muM). Drug-naïve Tg2576 Swedish mutant APP overexpressing transgenic mice received a single intraperitoneal injection of either vehicle or vehicle + latrepirdine (3.5 mg/kg). Picomolar to nanomolar concentrations of acutely administered latrepirdine increased the extracellular concentration of Abeta in the conditioned media from Swedish mutant APP-overexpressing N2a cells by up to 64% (p = 0.01), while a clinically relevant acute dose of latrepirdine administered i.p. led to an increase in the interstitial fluid of freely moving APP transgenic mice by up to 40% (p = 0.01). Reconstitution of membrane protein trafficking and processing is frequently inefficient, and, consistent with this interpretation, latrepirdine treatment of isolated TgCRND8 synaptoneurosomes involved higher concentrations of drug (1-10 muM) and led to more modest increases in extracellular Abeta(x-42 )levels (+10%; p = 0.001); of note, however, was the observation that extracellular Abeta(x-40 )levels did not change. Here, we report the surprising association of acute latrepirdine dosing with elevated levels of extracellular Abeta as measured in three independent neuron-related or neuron-derived systems, including the hippocampus of freely moving Tg2576 mice. Given the reported association of chronic latrepirdine treatment with improvement in cognitive function, the effects of chronic latrepirdine treatment on extracellular Abeta levels must now be determined.

19697298
Evaluating cognition in an elderly cohort via telephone assessment.
Longitudinal neuropsychological assessment provides the opportunity to observe the earliest transition to cognitive impairment in healthy, elderly individuals. We examined the feasibility, and its comparability to in-person assessment, of a telephone administered battery of established neuropsychological measures of cognitive functioning in healthy, elderly women. Fifty-four women (age = 79 +/- 7.7; education = 15.4 +/- 3.3) who were in self-reported good health were recruited from senior centers and other community sources. A two-way cross-over design was used in which participants were randomly assigned to receive either (1) in-person neuropsychological assessment followed by telephone assessment and (2) telephone assessment followed by in-person assessment, separated by approximately 4 weeks. Linear regression models were used to determine whether there were performance differences by method (in-person vs. telephone), and equivalence testing assessed comparability of the two methods. There were no statistically significant differences in performance between in-person and telephone assessments on most neuropsychological tests, with the exception of digit span backward, Oral Trail Making Test Part A, and delayed recall on the SRT, the latter likely related to non-comparable exposure (6-trials in-person vs. 3-trials telephone). Equivalence testing differences fell in the pre-specified clinical equivalence zones, providing evidence of comparability of the two methods. These pilot data support telephone administration of a neuropsychological battery that yields comparable performance to in-person assessment with respect to most instruments. Significant differences in scores on some measures suggest care should be taken in selecting specific measures used in a neuropsychological battery administered by telephone.

19651699
Cognitive performance in community-dwelling English- and Spanish-speaking seniors.
to examine the association of language (English vs Spanish), and commonly used measures of memory and word fluency among older adults. cross-sectional. community-based settings in New York City, including senior centres and residential complexes. four hundred and twenty independently living adults aged 60 or older (mean 73.8 years). participants completed the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE), animal naming test (ANT) and Wechsler Memory Scale III (WMS) Story A immediate and delayed subtests. Scores were examined by strata of language, age or education and for different thresholds of the MMSE. We tested the association of language and cognitive test performance using multivariable linear regression. twenty-one per cent of subjects were interviewed in Spanish and 16.2% reported poor-fair English proficiency. The mean WMS scores were not statistically different between English and Spanish groups (immediate recall, 9.9 vs 9.5, P = 0.44; delayed recall, 8.0 vs 7.6, P = 0.36, respectively), whereas ANT scores did differ (16.6 vs 14.3, P < 0.0001). These associations were consistent across MMSE thresholds. The association of language and ANT score was not significant after accounting for education. we found little difference in performance on the Story A subtests from the WMS suggesting that this test may be used for both English- and Spanish-speaking populations. Results suggest that variations in ANT performance may be accounted for by adjusting for the level of education. These results have important implications for the generalisability of test scores among diverse older populations.

19584451
Impact of APOE epsilon4 on the cognitive performance of a sample of non-demented Puerto Rican nonagenarians.
APOE epsilon4 is a major risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. It has also been associated with cognitive impairment and cognitive decline in young-olds, but the impact of the epsilon4 allele on cognitive function in very late life is still unclear. The object of this study was to evaluate the association of the epsilon4 allele of APOE with the cognitive performance of a sample of non-demented oldest-olds. Eighty-seven Spanish-speaking Puerto Rican non-demented nonagenarians were administered a complete neuropsychological assessment and provided a blood sample used for APOE genotyping. A factor analysis generated two factors: 1) verbal memory; and 2) visuo-spatial, naming and attention tasks, accounting for 43.6% of the overall variance in the 13 original neuropsychological variables. The multivariate analysis reflected, after controlling for gender, education, and age, the APOE epsilon4 carriers performed better in overall cognition (both factors analyzed together) than non-carriers (T<formula>;{2}</formula> = 0.082, F(2,80) = 3.289, p = 0.042). Neither gender nor the gender by APOE epsilon4 status interaction was associated with differences in cognition. In conclusion, the results of this study suggest that, among these Puerto Rican non-demented nonagenarians, being an APOE epsilon4 allele carrier is associated with better cognition.

19515101
Health literacy and cognitive performance in older adults.
To study the relationship between health literacy and memory and verbal fluency in older adults. Cross-sectional cohort. Twenty senior centers and apartment buildings in New York, New York. Independently living, English- and Spanish-speaking adults aged 60 and older (N=414). Health literacy was measured using the Short Test of Functional Health Literacy in Adults (S-TOFHLA). The associations between S-TOFHLA scores and immediate and delayed recall (Wechsler Memory Scale II), verbal fluency (Animal Naming), and global cognitive function (Mini-Mental State Examination, MMSE) were modeled using multivariable logistic and linear regression. Health literacy was inadequate in 24.3% of participants. Impairment of immediate recall occurred in 20.4%; delayed recall, 15.0%; verbal fluency, 9.9%; and MMSE, 17.4%. Abnormal cognitive function was strongly associated with inadequate health literacy: immediate recall (adjusted odds ratio (AOR)=3.44, 95% confidence interval (CI)=1.71-6.94, P<.001), delayed recall (AOR=3.48, 95% CI=1.58-7.67, P=.002), and verbal fluency (AOR=3.47, 95% CI=1.44-8.38, P=.006). These associations persisted in subgroups that excluded individuals with normal age-adjusted MMSE scores. Memory and verbal fluency are strongly associated with health literacy, independently of education and health status, even in those with subtle cognitive dysfunction. Reducing the cognitive burden of health information might mitigate the detrimental effects of limited health literacy in older adults. Research that examines the effect of materials modified to older adults' cognitive limitations on health literacy and health outcomes is needed.

19293568
The neuropsychological performance of nondemented Puerto Rican nonagenarians.
While the oldest old are the fastest growing segment of the US population, normative neuropsychological data for nondemented oldest old Spanish speakers are nonexistent. This study sought to evaluate the neuropsychological performance of nondemented nonagenarians residing in Puerto Rico and to compare their results with those of a similar English-speaking sample from New York. We studied 81 subjects who had a complete CERAD neuropsychological assessment in Spanish. We used multiple regression analysis to predict performance on the CERAD battery and ANCOVA to compare the Puerto Rico and New York samples. In 10 out of the 13 neuropsychological tests administered, education was a significant predictor of performance. There were significant differences between the Puerto Rico and New York groups only in the Trail Making Tests. In this Puerto Rican sample, education was the strongest predictor of neuropsychological performance, which is consistent with previous studies. When education level is properly accounted for, the performance of Puerto Rican nonagenarians in the CERAD battery does not differ from the performance of US English-speaking nonagenarians.

18955963
Non-amyloid approaches to neuroprotection.


18827045
A multi-center, randomized, double blind placebo-controlled trial of estrogens to prevent Alzheimer's disease and loss of memory in women: design and baseline characteristics.
Observational studies and small clinical trials suggested that hormone replacement therapy (HRT) decreases risk of cognitive loss and Alzheimer's disease (AD) in postmenopausal women and may have value in primary prevention. A clinical trial was designed to determine if HRT delays AD or memory loss. This report describes the rationale and original design of the trial and details extensive modifications that were required to respond to unanticipated findings that emerged from other studies during the course of the trial. The trial was designed as a multi-center, placebo-controlled primary prevention trial for women 65 years of age or older with a family history of dementia. Recruitment from local sites was supplemented by centralized efforts to use names of Medicare beneficiaries. Inclusion criteria included good general health and intact memory functioning. Participants were randomized to HRT or placebo in a 1:1 ratio. Assignment was stratified by hysterectomy status and site. The primary outcomes were incident AD and memory decline on neuropsychological testing. Enrollment began in March 1998. In response to the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) May 2002 report of increased incidence of heart disease, stroke, pulmonary embolism, and breast cancer among women randomized to HRT, participants were re-consented with a revised consent form. Procedural modifications, including discontinuation of study medication and a modification of the planned primary outcome based on a final enrollment below the target enrollment (N = 477), were enacted in response to the subsequent WHI Memory Study report of increased risk of dementia and poorer cognitive function with HRT. The mean length of treatment exposure prior to discontinuation was 2.14 years. Participants' mean age at baseline was 72.8; mean education was 14.2 years. Minority participation was 19% and 34% had a hysterectomy. The study continues to follow these participants for a total of 5 years blind to the original medication assignment. Results reported from the WHI during the course of this study mandated extensive procedural modifications, including discontinuing recruitment before completion and halting study medication. Alternative strategies for study redesign that were considered are discussed.

18805604
Cardiovascular risk and memory in non-demented elderly women.
To determine whether cardiovascular (CV) risk is associated with subtle memory deficits in non-demented, healthy older women with a family history of Alzheimer disease (AD). Baseline data of 375 participants from a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled primary prevention trial to test the efficacy of hormone replacement therapy in delaying AD and cognitive decline were analyzed. All subjects were women over 65 with a family history of AD who had normal cognition and no active heart disease at baseline. A baseline memory composite score was calculated, consisting of immediate and delayed recall of verbal and nonverbal material. Multiple linear regression was performed to examine the association of relative CV risk with memory functioning; age, ethnicity and education level were included as covariates. Mean baseline memory composite score was significantly higher in those with low relative CHD risk than those with high relative CHD risk. These findings suggest that subtle elevation of CHD risk may negatively affect memory functioning even in otherwise healthy, non-demented older women without a history of heart disease.

18239198
Increased neurofibrillary tangles in patients with Alzheimer disease with comorbid depression.
Recent evidence suggests that a history of major depression may lead to increases in hippocampal neuropathology in Alzheimer disease (AD). The authors tested the hypothesis that neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are more pronounced in the brains of patients with AD with comorbid depression as compared with patients with AD without depression. Brain samples from patients were selected from the U.S. National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center database. The primary analysis included 7164 individuals: 6468 had AD as the primary neuropathologic diagnosis and 696 were considered neuropathologically normal. Depression at study inclusion was rated as present or absent in consensus conferences. Neuropathologic ratings from the Consortium to Establish a Registry in Alzheimer's Disease rating of neuritic plaques and Braak staging of neurofibrillary tangles were used for between-group analyses. Brains of patients with AD with comorbid depression showed higher levels of cortical tangle formation than brains of patients with AD without comorbid depression. Results remained stable when controlling for age, gender, level of education, and cognitive status. Within patients with AD, comorbid depression increased the odds for advanced neuropathologic disease stage (odds ratio: 1.47; 95% confidence interval: 1.03-2.08). In AD, the presence of depression comorbidity corresponds to increases in AD-related neuropathologic changes beyond age, gender, level of education, and cognitive status, suggesting an interaction between depression and the neuropathologic processes in AD.

17342414
The impact of nutrition on cognition in the elderly.
The possibility that nutritional manipulation may protect against cognitive decline and dementia is an inviting prospect. However data supporting a beneficial effect of a particular dietary pattern is limited. Although studies have demonstrated a health benefit to dietary plans that are high in fiber, whole grains, natural sugar and fish while maintaining lower intake in meat dairy and poultry, the ability to identify the most salient factors of these diets have been unsuccessful. Several aspects of diet have been studied in detail and provided support for potential mechanisms for improving cognition. Clinical trials have explored these mechanisms through supplementation studies with minimal benefits being observed. Continuing work to hone the mechanisms and refine our knowledge of dietary benefits is described.

19595846
Undertreatment of patients with Alzheimer's disease in an elderly United States population.
The aim of this study was to assess the undertreatment of elderly mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients in the United States utilizing baseline data from a community-based trial that has established comparability to national survey samples on demographic characteristics. Baseline data were used from an open-label, 12-week, postapproval study of compliance with galantamine, an AChEI and nicotinic receptor modulator, and vitamin E. A total of 2,114 patients from 406 community-based US practices in which physicians had previously treated patients with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEIs) were included in the study. This population reflects a large, ethnically diverse patient pool consistent with the demographics of the elderly population in the United States, atypical of those enrolled in most AD trials. The majority of patients (64.5%) were described by either themselves or their caregivers as not having received prior AChEI treatment. Positive associations were found between past AChEI treatment and longer time since diagnosis, white race, higher education, medical care by a neurologist, and older caregivers. The likelihood of having received previous AChEI treatment was higher among white patients (61.9%) than among those from other ethnic groups combined (25.8%). The similarity of patient demographic characteristics to the 2000 US Census figures for the population aged >65 years makes this data set a potentially powerful tool for planning public health initiatives. Findings suggest that patients with mild to moderate AD are undertreated and that specialist and nonspecialist organizations should discuss and implement ways to optimize management of this disease.

