20497781
Advanced glycation end products in foods and a practical guide to their reduction in the diet.
Modern diets are largely heat-processed and as a result contain high levels of advanced glycation end products (AGEs). Dietary advanced glycation end products (dAGEs) are known to contribute to increased oxidant stress and inflammation, which are linked to the recent epidemics of diabetes and cardiovascular disease. This report significantly expands the available dAGE database, validates the dAGE testing methodology, compares cooking procedures and inhibitory agents on new dAGE formation, and introduces practical approaches for reducing dAGE consumption in daily life. Based on the findings, dry heat promotes new dAGE formation by >10- to 100-fold above the uncooked state across food categories. Animal-derived foods that are high in fat and protein are generally AGE-rich and prone to new AGE formation during cooking. In contrast, carbohydrate-rich foods such as vegetables, fruits, whole grains, and milk contain relatively few AGEs, even after cooking. The formation of new dAGEs during cooking was prevented by the AGE inhibitory compound aminoguanidine and significantly reduced by cooking with moist heat, using shorter cooking times, cooking at lower temperatures, and by use of acidic ingredients such as lemon juice or vinegar. The new dAGE database provides a valuable instrument for estimating dAGE intake and for guiding food choices to reduce dAGE intake.

20006791
Identifying advanced glycation end products as a major source of oxidants in aging: implications for the management and/or prevention of reduced renal function in elderly persons.
Aging is characterized by increasing inflammation and oxidant stress (OS). Reduced renal function was present in more than 20% of normal-aged individuals sampled in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) cross-sectional study of the US population. Longitudinal studies in the United States and Italy showed that renal function does not decline in some individuals, suggesting that a search for causes of the loss of renal function in some persons might be indicated and interventions to reduce this outcome should be sought. Because advanced glycation end products (AGEs) induce both inflammation and OS, accumulate with age, and primarily are excreted by the kidney, one outcome of reduced renal function in aging could be decreased AGE disposal. The build-up of AGEs with reduced renal function could contribute to inflammation, increased oxidant stress, and accumulation of AGEs in aging. In fact, results from a longitudinal study of normal aging adults in Italy showed that the most significant correlation with mortality was the level of renal function. A clear link between inflammation, OS, AGEs, and chronic disease was shown in studies of mice that showed that reduction of AGE levels by drugs or decreased intake of AGEs reduces chronic kidney disease (CKD) and cardiovascular disease of aging. The data support a role for AGEs in the development of renal lesions in aging mice and reveal that AGEs in the diet are very important contributors to renal and cardiovascular lesions. AGEs signal through two receptors, one of which is anti-inflammatory (AGER1) and the other is proinflammatory (RAGE). Overexpression of AGER1 protects against OS and acute vascular injury. The reduction of AGEs in the diet is as efficient in preventing aging-related cardiovascular and renal lesions in mice as that seen with calorie restriction. Studies in normal adults of all ages and those with CKD suggest that the findings in mice may be directly applicable to both aging and CKD. Namely, the dietary content of AGEs determines the serum levels of AGEs and inflammatory mediators and urine AGE levels in both normal subjects and CKD patients. Importantly, reduction of AGEs controls these changes in both normal subjects and CKD patients, and the phenotypic changes in AGER1 are reduced in CKD patients by decreasing the amount of AGEs consumed with the diet. These data suggest that the changes in renal function in normal aging may be subject to control and this subject deserves renewed attention.

19946325
Role of oxidants/inflammation in declining renal function in chronic kidney disease and normal aging.
Oxidant stress (OS) and inflammation increase in normal aging and in chronic kidney disease (CKD), as observed in human and animal studies. In cross-sectional studies of the US population, these changes are associated with a decrease in renal function, which is exhibited by a significant proportion of the population. However, since many normal adults have intact renal function, and longitudinal studies show that some persons maintain normal renal function with age, the link between OS, inflammation, and renal decline is not clear. In aging mice, greater oxidant intake is associated with increased age-related CKD and mortality, which suggests that interventions that reduce OS and inflammation may be beneficial for older individuals. Both OS and inflammation can be readily lowered in normal subjects and patients with CKD stage 3-4 by a simple dietary modification that lowers intake and results in reduced serum and tissue levels of advanced glycation end products. Diabetic patients, including those with microalbuminuria, have a decreased ability to metabolize and excrete oxidants prior to observable changes in serum creatinine. Thus, OS and inflammation may occur in the diabetic kidney at an early time. We review the evidence that oxidants in the diet directly lead to increased serum levels of OS and inflammatory mediators in normal aging and in CKD. We also discuss a simple dietary intervention that helps reduce OS and inflammation, an important and achievable therapeutic goal for patients with CKD and aging individuals with reduced renal function.

19820033
Protection against loss of innate defenses in adulthood by low advanced glycation end products (AGE) intake: role of the antiinflammatory AGE receptor-1.
Increased oxidant stress and inflammation (OS/infl) are linked to both aging-related diseases and advanced glycation end products (AGEs). Whereas AGE receptor-1 (AGER1) reduces OS/infl in animals, this has not been assessed in normal humans. The objectives of the study were to determine whether AGER1 correlates with AGEs and OS/infl and a reduction of dietary AGEs (dAGEs) lowers OS/infl in healthy adults and chronic kidney disease (CKD-3) patients. This study was cross-sectional with 2-yr follow-up studies of healthy adults and CKD-3 patients, a subset of which received a reduced AGE or regular diet. The study was conducted at general community and renal clinics. Participants included 325 healthy adults (18-45 and >60 yr old) and 66 CKD-3 patients. An isocaloric low-AGE (30-50% reduction) or regular diet was given to 40 healthy subjects for 4 months and to nine CKD-3 patients for 4 wk. Relationships between age, dAGEs, serum AGEs, peripheral mononuclear cell AGE-receptors, and OS/Infl before and after reduction of dAGE intake were measured. AGEs, oxidant stress, receptor for AGE, and TNFalpha were reduced in normal and CKD-3 patients after the low-AGE diet, independently of age. AGER1 levels in CKD-3 patients on the low-AGE diet resembled 18- to 45-yr-old normal subjects. Dietary, serum, and urine AGEs correlated positively with peripheral mononuclear cell AGER1 levels in healthy participants. AGER1 was suppressed in CKD-3 subjects, whereas receptor for AGE and TNFalpha were increased. Reduction of AGEs in normal diets may lower oxidant stress/inflammation and restore levels of AGER1, an antioxidant, in healthy and aging subjects and CKD-3 patients. AGE intake has implications for health outcomes and costs and warrants further testing.

18448795
Advanced glycation end product homeostasis: exogenous oxidants and innate defenses.
Increased oxidative stress (OS) underlies many chronic diseases prevalent in aging. Data in humans confirm the hypothesis that advanced glycation end products (AGEs) and other oxidants derived from the diet may be major contributors to increased OS in normal adults as well as those with diabetes mellitus or kidney failure. Mice fed a diet with a lowered (approximately 50%) content of AGEs or a typical calorie-restricted (CR) diet, accumulated a smaller amount of AGEs, maintained normal levels of AGE receptor-1 (AGER1), and did not have increased oxidant stress or cardiac or kidney fibrosis with aging. However, the findings in mice fed a CR diet with an increased content of AGEs resembled those in mice fed a nonrestricted diet that had the usual higher content of AGEs. Thus, there was an inverse correlation between the dietary AGE content, the AGER1 to receptor for AGE (RAGE) ratio, OS, organ damage, and life span. In both humans and mice, there was an inverse correlation between the AGER1 to RAGE ratio and the levels of OS.

18359409
Trends in mineral metabolism: Kidney Early Evaluation Program (KEEP) and the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 1999-2004.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with mineral metabolism dysregulation, cardiovascular disease, and premature mortality. No study specifically examined mineral metabolism trends in a generalizable sample of patients at increased CKD risk. This cross-sectional analysis from November 1, 2005, to December 31, 2006, of calcium, phosphorus, and parathyroid hormone (PTH) includes 2,646 individuals with estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) less than 60 mL/min/1.73 m(2) in the National Kidney Foundation Kidney Early Evaluation Program (KEEP), a community-based health-screening program targeting individuals 18 years and older with diabetes, hypertension, or family history of kidney disease, diabetes, or hypertension. A parallel analysis of National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 1999-2004 data was performed. In KEEP, as eGFR decreased from 55 to less than 60 mL/min/1.73 m(2) to less than 30 mL/min/1.73 m(2), calcium level decreased (9.55 +/- 0.47 to 9.34 +/- 0.62 mg/dL; P < 0.001), phosphorus level increased (3.70 +/- 0.59 to 4.15 +/- 0.80 mg/dL; P < 0.001), and PTH level increased (66.3 +/- 36.3 to 164 +/- 109 pg/mL; mean, 80.8 +/- 57.0 pg/mL; P < 0.001). NHANES 1999-2004 showed similar trends, with PTH values not as high. Individuals within opinion-based Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiatives targets from the highest to the lowest eGFR group were as follows: calcium, 93.0% to 92.3% (KEEP) and 97.4% to 89.6% (NHANES); phosphorus, 90.4% to 90.3% (KEEP) and 91.6% to 87.1% (NHANES); and PTH, 46.1% to 31.2% (KEEP) and 56.4% to 36.1% (NHANES). In a community-based CKD screening population, increased PTH level occurs early in patients with stage 3, typically with normal calcium and phosphorus levels. These findings support the importance of including PTH with calcium and phosphorus monitoring for individuals with eGFR less than 60 mL/min/1.73 m(2).

18363599
How should dialysis fluid be individualized for the chronic hemodialysis patient? Bicarbonate.


18256374
Endothelial dysfunction in patients with chronic kidney disease results from advanced glycation end products (AGE)-mediated inhibition of endothelial nitric oxide synthase through RAGE activation.
Advanced glycation end products, known pro-inflammatory and pro-oxidative compounds that accumulate in patients with chronic kidney disease, may play a major role in their high prevalence of endothelial dysfunction and subsequent cardiovascular disease. This study examined the association of advanced glycation end product accumulation with cellular receptor for advanced glycation end product expression and endothelial dysfunction as well as the mechanisms of this association in chronic kidney disease. A cross-sectional study was conducted of ambulatory patients without diabetes and with different stages of chronic kidney disease (n = 51), compared with gender- and age-matched healthy subjects. Fasting blood was obtained for measurement of advanced glycation end products and mRNA receptor for advanced glycation end product expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Endothelial reactivity was assessed by the microcirculatory response to local ischemia (postocclusive reactive hyperemia) and local hyperthermia (thermal hyperemia). Sera were pooled and passed through affinity columns to separate advanced glycation end product-rich fractions, which were incubated with human aortic endothelial cells, with or without blockade of receptor for advanced glycation end product, to measure their effect on endothelial nitric oxide synthase. Glomerular filtration rate correlated with serum advanced glycation end product, mRNA receptor for advanced glycation end product levels, postocclusive reactive hyperemia, and thermal hyperemia. Serum advanced glycation end product correlated with receptor for advanced glycation end product and inversely with postocclusive reactive hyperemia. Advanced glycation end product-rich fractions from chronic kidney disease sera suppressed endothelial nitric oxide synthase expression of human aortic endothelial cells compared with sera from healthy subjects, an effect abrogated by receptor for advanced glycation end product blockade. This study demonstrates for the first time an association of excess advanced glycation end product burden with increased peripheral blood mononuclear cell mRNA receptor for advanced glycation end product and in vivo endothelial dysfunction in patients with chronic kidney disease. Endothelial dysfunction in chronic kidney disease may be partly mediated by advanced glycation end product-induced inhibition of endothelial nitric oxide synthase through receptor for advanced glycation end product activation.

17699361
Advanced glycation end products and nephrotoxicity of high-protein diets.
The popularity of high-protein diets has surged recently as obesity has become more and more common in the United States and other developed nations. In view of the high prevalence of type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease among obese people, it is important to understand potential effects of high-protein diets on the kidney. The hypothesis that high-protein diets are nephrotoxic because of their excessive dietary advanced glycation end product (AGE) content and an increased amino acid load that enhances AGE formation in situ was explored. This review discusses the following evidence: (1) High-protein diets are deleterious to the kidney; (2) AGE are metabolic mediators of kidney damage; (3) dietary protein-derived AGE contribute to proinflammatory and pro-oxidative processes in diabetes and kidney disease; and (4) dietary protein-derived AGE produce functional and structural abnormalities that are involved in kidney damage. Future research should consider dietary AGE as a potential therapeutic target for kidney disease in obesity, diabetes, and perhaps other causes of chronic kidney disease.

17635818
Phosphorus homeostasis in normal health and in chronic kidney disease patients with special emphasis on dietary phosphorus intake.
Elevated serum phosphorus has been identified as a cardiovascular risk factor in chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients and a clear understanding of phosphorus homeostasis is very important for practicing nephrologists. At any particular point, serum phosphorus levels reflect the balance between movements of this mineral from and into the intestine, bone, intracellular space, and kidneys. We briefly review here all these exchanges with a particular emphasis on dietary phosphorus intake. Despite all the oral phosphorus binders currently available in the market, dietary restriction of this mineral remains a cornerstone for the prevention and treatment of hyperphosphatemia. An effective restriction of dietary intake of phosphorus requires prescription of a moderate protein intake (0.9-1.0 g/kg/day) and restricted consumption of highly processed fast and convenience foods. Phosphorus added during food processing is an important source of this mineral because of its magnitude and high bioavailabilty. Moreover, as food manufacturers are not required to label the amount of phosphorus added during food processing, a significant amount of the current daily phosphorus intake remains unaccounted when estimating phosphorus intake in CKD patients. The recent development of low phosphorus-containing food products represents a very useful addition for CKD patients.

17496238
Single oral challenge by advanced glycation end products acutely impairs endothelial function in diabetic and nondiabetic subjects.
The current study was designed to test the acute effects of dietary advanced glycation end products (AGEs) on endothelial function of diabetic and nondiabetic subjects. Flow-mediated dilation (FMD) of the brachial artery and serum levels of AGEs, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1), vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1), and glucose were assessed before and after a single oral AGE challenge (approximately 1.8 x 10(6) AGE units) in 44 diabetic and 10 nondiabetic subjects. The diabetic patients had higher baseline levels of serum AGEs (P = 0.020), PAI-1 (NS), and VCAM-1 (P = 0.033) and lower baseline values of FMD compared with nondiabetic subjects (P = 0.032). Ninety minutes after a single oral AGE challenge, serum AGEs and PAI-1 levels increased and FMD decreased significantly in both healthy subjects (AGEs: 7.2 +/- 0.5 to 9.3 +/- 1 units/ml, P = 0.014; PAI-1: 5.4 +/- 0.4 to 6.8 +/- 0.4 ng/ml, P = 0.007; and FMD: 9.9 +/- 0.7 to 7.4 +/- 0.9%, P = 0.019) and diabetic subjects (AGEs: 10.5 +/- 0.7 to 14.2 +/- 1 units/ml, P = 0.020; PAI-1: 6.5 +/- 1 to 10 +/- 2 ng/ml, P = 0.030; and FMD: 5.4 +/- 0.4 to 4.0 +/- 0.3%, P = 0.032). Serum glucose and VCAM-1 levels remained unchanged. Significant increases in serum AGEs can occur together with altered clinical measures of endothelial function in diabetic and nondiabetic subjects after a single modest AGE-rich beverage. Thus, repeated or chronic exposure to high AGE diets could over time lead to and/or accelerate vascular disease.

17452738
Circulating glycotoxins and dietary advanced glycation endproducts: two links to inflammatory response, oxidative stress, and aging.
Oxidative stress (OS) and inflammatory mediators increase with aging. The levels of advanced glycation endproducts (AGEs), prooxidant factors linked to chronic diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and renal disease, also increase with aging. AGEs are readily derived from heat-treated foods. We propose that the excess consumption of certain AGEs via the diet enhances OS and inflammatory responses in healthy adults, especially in elderly persons. We examined 172 young (<45 years old) and older (>60 years old) healthy individuals to determine whether the concentration of specific serum AGEs (N(epsilon)-carboxymethyl-lysine [CML] or methylglyoxal [MG] derivatives) were higher in older compared to younger persons and whether, independent of age, they correlated with the intake of dietary AGEs, as well as with circulating markers of OS and inflammation. Body weight, body mass index (BMI), and serum AGE, CML, and MG derivatives were higher in older participants, independent of gender. Serum CML correlated with levels of 8-isoprostanes (r = 0.448, p =.0001) as well as with Homeostasis Model Assessment index (HOMA), an index of insulin resistance (r = 0.247, p =.044). The consumption of dietary AGEs, but not of calories, correlated independently with circulating AGEs (CML: r = 0.415, p =.0001 and MG: r = 0.282, p =.002) as well as with high sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) (r = 0.200, p =.042). Circulating indicators of AGEs (CML and MG derivatives), although elevated in older participants, correlate with indicators of inflammation and OS across all ages. Indicators of both AGEs and OS are directly influenced by the intake of dietary AGEs, independent of age or energy intake. Thus, reduced consumption of these oxidants may prove a safe economic policy to prevent age-related diseases, especially in an aging population.

17406658
Cerebrovascular effects of hemodialysis in chronic kidney disease.
Patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) undergoing hemodialysis are known to suffer cognitive deficits and stroke of unknown etiology. It has been suspected that the treatment itself may contribute to the syndrome by unknown mechanisms, which we investigated in this study. End-stage renal disease patients on hemodialysis (n=19) or peritoneal dialysis (PD, n=5) were compared with 14 healthy controls. Subjects participated in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) measurements of cerebral atrophy, cerebral blood flow (CBF) arterial spin labeled-MRI (ASL-MRI), quantitative Doppler blood flow through the internal carotid artery, and cerebral oxymetry. The Doppler and oxymetry procedures were also performed at the beginning and end of a single hemodialysis session. End-stage renal disease patients on hemodialysis showed significant cerebral atrophy, associated with longer hemodialysis duration and cognitive deficits, including focal bilateral lesions in the caudate nucleus and midbrain. Cerebral oxygenation was extremely low before dialysis (rSO(2) 41+/-13, compared with 70+/-2 in controls, P<0.02) and improved only slightly after dialysis. Carotid blood flow was also very low at the start of dialysis (115+/-28 mL/sec, versus 193+/-56 in controls, P<0.005) but normalized at the end of the session (181 mL/sec). The PD patients showed intermediate values, between the hemodialysis and controls. Notably, duration of hemodialysis treatment predicted global gray-matter volume (r=-0.74), change of blood flow during dialysis (r=-0.65), and baseline rSO(2) (r=-0.65). The findings suggest that ESRD patients on hemodialysis suffer low CBF during the interdialytic cycle. Coupled with low cerebral oxygenation levels and atherosclerosis, this may contribute significantly to the etiology of the observed cerebral atrophy, cognitive deficits, and high stroke prevalence.

20840475
25-OH-vitamin D deficiency and cellular alloimmunity as measured by panel of reactive T cell testing in dialysis patients.
Primed antidonor alloreactive T cells are detrimental to transplant outcome, but factors that impact the strength of this immune response prior to transplantation are unknown. We tested peripheral blood mononuclear cells from dialysis patients, against panels of allogeneic, primary B-cell lines in a newly standardized IFN? ELISPOT panel of reactive T cell (PRT) assay. Results were correlated with known alloantibody-sensitizing events and other clinical parameters. As 25-OH-vitamin D deficiency is associated with enhanced cellular immunity, is common in dialysis patients and is correctable, we assessed the relationship between serum 25-OH-vitamin D and the PRT. Using independent test and validation cohorts we found that low serum levels of 25-OH-vitamin D (<26 ng/mL) correlated with high-PRT values (in the upper 50th percentile, OR 0.02, p = 0.01) independent of age, sex, race, previous transplant, transfusion, pregnancy, time on dialysis, panel of reactive antibody, iPTH, and treatment with 1,25-OH-vitamin D. The data provide a potential mechanism for the possible relationship between vitamin D deficiency and poor posttransplant outcome, and support studies to test the impact of 25-OH-vitamin D repletion on alloimmunity and allograft injury in kidney transplant candidates.

17667983
Advanced glycation endproducts induce podocyte apoptosis by activation of the FOXO4 transcription factor.
Advanced glycation endproducts (AGEs) and a receptor for AGEs (RAGE) have been linked in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy. RAGE is usually localized to podocytes and is increased in diabetes. RAGE activation increases reactive oxygen species production, which mediates hyperglycemia-induced podocyte apoptosis in early diabetic nephropathy. Here, we examined the interaction of AGE and RAGE on podocyte apoptosis. When we exposed murine cultured podocytes to bovine serum albumin (BSA) that was modified by AGEs or to carboxymethyl-lysine BSA, more apoptosis was found when compared with unmodified BSA. Similarly, more podocytes underwent detachment and apoptosis when cultured on AGE-modified collagen IV than on native collagen IV. AGEs isolated from sera of patients with chronic kidney disease also caused apoptosis of podocytes. Apoptosis was diminished by small interference RNA (siRNA) for RAGE in podocytes exposed to AGE-BSA, but not to AGE-modified collagen IV. Both AGE- and carboxymethyl-lysine modified-BSA activated p38MAP kinase and inhibition of this kinase reduced the apoptotic effect of AGE-BSA. Exposure to AGE-BSA was associated with Akt dephosphorylation and FOXO4 transcriptional activation leading to an increase in the expression of an effector protein of apoptosis, Bim. siRNA for FOXO4 abolished AGE-BSA-induced apoptosis of podocytes. Our study suggests that an AGE-RAGE interaction contributes to podocyte apoptosis by activation of the FOXO4 transcription factor.

