21425268
Targeting oligodendrocyte protection and remyelination in multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the brain and spinal cord with a presumed autoimmune etiology. Conduction block in demyelinated axons underlies early neurological symptoms, whereas axonal transection is believed responsible for more permanent later deficits. Approved treatments for the disease are immunoregulatory and reduce the rate of lesion formation and clinical exacerbation, but are only partially effective in preventing the onset of disability in multiple sclerosis patients. Approaches that directly protect myelin-producing oligodendrocytes and enhance remyelination may improve long-term outcomes and reduce the rate of axonal transection. Studies in genetically modified animals have improved our understanding of mechanisms underlying central nervous system pathology in multiple sclerosis models, and have identified pathways that regulate oligodendrocyte viability and myelin repair. However, although clinical trials are ongoing, many have been unsuccessful, and no treatments are yet approved that target these areas in multiple sclerosis. In this review, we examine avenues for oligodendrocyte protection and endogenous myelin repair in animal models of demyelination and remyelination, and their relevance as therapeutics in human patients.

20169621
TGFbeta1 induces Jagged1 expression in astrocytes via ALK5 and Smad3 and regulates the balance between oligodendrocyte progenitor proliferation and differentiation.
Notch1 receptor signaling regulates oligodendrocyte progenitor differentiation and myelin formation in development, and during remyelination in the adult CNS. In active multiple sclerosis lesions, Notch1 localizes to oligodendrocyte lineage cells, and its ligand Jagged1 is expressed by reactive astrocytes. Here, we examined induction of Jagged1 in human astrocytes, and its impact on oligodendrocyte differentiation. In human astrocyte cultures, the cytokine TGFbeta1 induced Jagged1 expression and blockade of the TGFbeta1 receptor kinase ALK5 abrogated Jagged1 induction. TGFbeta2 and beta3 had similar effects, but induction was not observed in response to the TGFbeta family member activin A or other cytokines. Downstream, TGFbeta1 activated Smad-dependent signaling, and Smad-independent pathways that included PI3 kinase, p38, and JNK MAP kinase, but only inhibition of the Smad-dependent pathway blocked Jagged1 expression. SiRNA inhibition of Smad3 downregulated induction of Jagged1, and this was potentiated by Smad2 siRNA. Purified oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) nucleofected with Notch1 intracellular signaling domain displayed a shift towards proliferation at the expense of differentiation, demonstrating functional relevance of Notch1 signaling in OPCs. Furthermore, human OPCs plated onto Jagged1-expressing astrocytes exhibited restricted differentiation. Collectively, these data illustrate the mechanisms underlying Jagged1 induction in human astrocytes, and suggest that TGFbeta1-induced activation of Jagged1-Notch1 signaling may impact the size and differentiation of the OPC pool in the human CNS.

19855010
Notch1 signaling plays a role in regulating precursor differentiation during CNS remyelination.
In the developing CNS, Notch1 and its ligand, Jagged1, regulate oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelin formation, but their role in repair of demyelinating lesions in diseases such as multiple sclerosis remains unresolved. To address this question, we generated a mouse model in which we targeted Notch1 inactivation to oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) using Olig1Cre and a floxed Notch1 allele, Notch1(12f). During CNS development, OPC differentiation was potentiated in Olig1Cre:Notch1(12f/12f) mice. Importantly, in adults, remyelination of demyelinating lesions was also accelerated, at the expense of proliferation within the progenitor population. Experiments in vitro confirmed that Notch1 signaling was permissive for OPC expansion but inhibited differentiation and myelin formation. These studies also revealed that astrocytes exposed to TGF-beta1 restricted OPC maturation via Jagged1-Notch1 signaling. These data suggest that Notch1 signaling is one of the mechanisms regulating OPC differentiation during CNS remyelination. Thus, Notch1 may represent a potential therapeutical avenue for lesion repair in demyelinating disease.

19734214
IL-11 regulates autoimmune demyelination.
Current therapies for the autoimmune demyelinating disease multiple sclerosis (MS) target inflammation, but do not directly address neuroprotection or lesion repair. Cytokines of the gp130 family regulate survival and differentiation of both neural and immune cells, and we recently identified expression of the family member IL-11 in active MS plaques. In this study, we show that IL-11 regulates the clinical course and neuropathology of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a demyelinating model that mimics many of the clinical and pathologic features of MS. Importantly, the effects of IL-11 are achieved via a combination of immunoregulation and direct neuroprotection. IL-11R-alpha-null (IL-11Ralpha(-/-)) mice displayed a significant increase in clinical severity and neuropathology of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis compared with wild-type littermates. Inflammation, demyelination, and oligodendrocyte and neuronal loss were all exacerbated in IL-11Ra(-/-) animals. Conversely, wild-type mice treated with IL-11 displayed milder clinical signs and neuropathology than vehicle-treated controls. In cocultures of murine myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein(35-55)-specific CD4+ T lymphocytes and CD11c+ APCs, IL-11 treatment resulted in a significant decrease in T cell-derived effector cytokine production. This effect was generated via modulation of CD11c+ APC-mediated lymphocyte activation, and was associated with a decrease in the size of the CD11c+ cell population. Conversely, IL-11 strongly reduced apoptosis and potentiated mitosis in primary cultures of mouse oligodendrocyte progenitors. Collectively, these data reveal that IL-11 regulates inflammatory demyelination via a unique combination of immunoregulation and neuroprotection. IL-11 signaling may represent a therapeutic avenue to restrict CNS inflammation and potentiate oligodendrocyte survival in autoimmune demyelinating disease.

19174516
VEGF-mediated disruption of endothelial CLN-5 promotes blood-brain barrier breakdown.
Breakdown of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) is an early and significant event in CNS inflammation. Astrocyte-derived VEGF-A has been implicated in this response, but the underlying mechanisms remain unresolved. Here, we identify the endothelial transmembrane tight junction proteins claudin-5 (CLN-5) and occludin (OCLN) as targets of VEGF-A action. Down-regulation of CLN-5 and OCLN accompanied up-regulation of VEGF-A and correlated with BBB breakdown in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, an animal model of CNS inflammatory disease. In cultures of brain microvascular endothelial cells, VEGF-A specifically down-regulated CLN-5 and OCLN protein and mRNA. In mouse cerebral cortex, microinjection of VEGF-A disrupted CLN-5 and OCLN and induced loss of barrier function. Importantly, functional studies revealed that expression of recombinant CLN-5 protected brain microvascular endothelial cell cultures from a VEGF-induced increase in paracellular permeability, whereas recombinant OCLN expressed under the same promoter was not protective. Previous studies have shown CLN-5 to be a key determinant of trans-endothelial resistance at the BBB. Our findings suggest that its down-regulation by VEGF-A constitutes a significant mechanism in BBB breakdown.

20637510
Glatiramer acetate-reactive T lymphocytes regulate oligodendrocyte progenitor cell number in vitro: role of IGF-2.
Glatiramer acetate (GA) is an immunomodulator approved for therapy of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS), but recent findings indicate that it may also have additional, neurotrophic effects. Here, we found that supernatants from human GA-reactive T lymphocytes potentiated oligodendrocyte numbers in rodent and human oligodendrocyte progenitor (OPC) cultures. Effects of Th2-polarized lines were stronger than Th1-polarized cells. Microarray and ELISA analyses revealed that neurotrophic factors induced in Th2- and Th1-polarized GA-reactive lines included IGF-2 and BMP-7 respectively, and functional studies confirmed IGF-2 as trophic for OPCs. Our results support the concept that GA therapy may result in supportive effects on oligodendrocytes in RRMS patients.

