21607193
Treatment of Basal cell carcinoma with curettage followed by imiquimod 3.75% cream.
Basal cell carcinoma is the most common form of nonmelanoma skin cancer in the United States. Treatment modalities include both surgical, medical, or combination therapy. In the following case, the authors report the successful treatment of a basal cell carcinoma on the nose with curettage followed by topical imiquimod 3.75% cream.

21062599
Acquired fibrokeratoma presenting as multiple plantar nodules.
Acquired digital fibrokeratoma is a rare benign fibroepithelial tumor that typically presents as a solitary asymptomatic nodule on the finger or toe. Middle-aged adults are most commonly affected. Here we discuss an unusual case of acquired digital fibrokeratoma presenting as a cluster of multiple nodules on the sole of a 15-year-old boy.

19940753
Pagetoid reticulosis after radiotherapy of primary cutaneous anaplastic large-cell lymphoma.
We describe a 60-year-old man with a history of primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma on the chest, who presented with a new scaly red plaque on the same site 11 years after radiation therapy. Histological examination revealed a dense epidermotropic infiltrate of atypical mononuclear cells consistent with pagetoid reticulosis. Immunohistochemistry revealed the infiltrate to be CD4, CD8, and CD30. Remarkably, all the atypical cells were strongly CD30, and furthermore, the CD30 cells were found exclusively in the epidermis. In the initial cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma lesion, the CD4, CD8, and focally CD30 atypical cells were well confined within the dermis with no epidermal component. To our knowledge, the present case seems to be the first description of pagetoid reticulosis presenting at the site of a previously treated dermal anaplastic large cell lymphoma. This case also represents an extreme presentation of epidermotropism and CD30 expression in pagetoid reticulosis.

18095998
Dabska tumor arising in lymphangioma circumscriptum.
We describe a case of Dabska tumor (DT) occurring within a large congenital lymphangioma circumscriptum on the thigh of a 14-year-old female. Diagnostic biopsy showed numerous intravascular papillary projections lined by atypical endothelial cells within the anastomosing vascular channels of a lymphangioma circumscriptum. DT is regarded as a vascular tumor of intermediate malignant potential, most probably of lymphatic origin. Although it has been described in pre-existing lymphangiomas, to the best of our knowledge this is the first case to be described in a pre-existing lymphangioma circumscriptum. During a follow-up of 9 years, the lymphangioma circumscriptum has recurred, but there has been no evidence of DT recurrence or metastasis.

