20461063
SERCA2a gene transfer enhances eNOS expression and activity in endothelial cells.
Congestive heart failure (HF) is associated with impaired endothelium-dependent nitric oxide-mediated vasodilatation. The aim of this study was to examine the effects of sarco/endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca(2+)-ATPase 2a (SERCA2a) gene transfer on endothelial function in a swine HF model. Two months after the creation of mitral regurgitation to induce HF, the animals underwent intracoronary injection of adeno-associated virus (AAV) carrying SERCA2a (n = 7) or saline (n = 6). At 4 months, coronary flow (CF) was measured in the mid-portion of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery. In the failing animals, CF was decreased significantly; SERCA2a gene transfer rescued CF to levels observed in sham-group [ml/min/g, 0.47 +/- 0.064 saline versus 0.89 +/- 0.116, SERCA2a; P < 0.05; 1.00 +/- 0. 185 sham P = NS (nonsignificant)]. In coronary arteries from HF animals, SERCA2a and endothelial isoform of nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) protein expression were decreased, but restored to normal levels by SERCA2a gene transfer. In human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAECs), SERCA2a overexpression increased eNOS expression, phosphorylation, eNOS promoter activity, Ca(2+) storage capacity, and enhanced histamine-induced calcium oscillations, eNOS activity, and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) production. Thus, SERCA2a gene transfer increases eNOS expression and activity by modulating calcium homeostasis to improve CF. These findings suggest that SERCA2a gene transfer improves vascular reactivity in the setting of HF.

20078230
Sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase as a therapeutic target for heart failure.
The cardiac isoform of the sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)ATPase (SERCA2a) plays a major role in controlling excitation/contraction coupling. In both experimental and clinical heart failure, SERCA2a expression is significantly reduced which leads to abnormal Ca(2+) handling and deficient contractility. A large number of studies in isolated cardiac myocytes and in small and large animal models of heart failure showed that restoring SERCA2a expression by gene transfer corrects the contractile abnormalities and improves energetics and electrical remodeling. Following a long line of investigation, a clinical trial is underway to restore SERCA2a expression in patients with heart failure using adeno-associated virus type 1. This review addresses the following issues regarding heart failure gene therapy: i) new insights on calcium regulation by SERCA2a; ii) SERCA2a as a gene therapy target in animal models of heart failure; iii) advances in the development of viral vectors and gene delivery; and iv) clinical trials on heart failure using SERCA2a. This review focuses on the new advances in SERCA2a- targeted gene therapy made in the last three years. In conclusion, SERCA2a is an important therapeutic target in various cardiovascular disorders. Ongoing clinical gene therapy trials will provide answers on its safety and applicability.

