21358326
HIV-associated nephropathy: pathogenesis.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is characterized histologically by a collapsing form of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), microcystic tubular dilation, interstitial inflammation and fibrosis. In this review, we provide a summary of the current state of knowledge about the mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of HIVAN. Two variants in the ApoL1 gene have been identified as the susceptibility alleles that account for a majority of the increased risk of FSGS and nondiabetic end-stage renal disease in blacks. HIVAN1 and HIVAN2 are the other host susceptibility genes that have been identified in animal models for HIVAN. HIV infects renal tubular epithelial cells likely through direct cell-cell transmission. Both in-vivo and in-vitro evidence suggests that Nef and Vpr are the key viral genes mediating HIVAN. Nef induces podocyte dysfunction, whereas Vpr induces renal tubular epithelial cell apoptosis. HIVAN results from direct infection by HIV-1 and expression of viral genes, especially Nef and Vpr, in renal epithelial cells in a genetically susceptible host. The infected renal epithelium acts as a separate viral compartment from the blood and facilitates evolution of strains distant from blood. Dysregulation of several host cellular pathways, including those involved in cell cycle and apoptosis, ultimately results in the unique histopathological syndrome of HIVAN.

21335514
Virological synapses allow HIV-1 uptake and gene expression in renal tubular epithelial cells.
In animal models of HIV-associated nephropathy, the expression of HIV regulatory genes in epithelial cells is sufficient to cause disease, but how the CD4-negative epithelial cells come to express HIV genes is unknown. Here, we co-cultured T cells infected with fluorescently tagged HIV with renal tubular epithelial cells and observed efficient virus transfer between these cells. The quantity of HIV transferred was much greater than that achieved by exposure to large amounts of cell-free virus and occurred without a requirement for CD4 or Env. The transfer required stable cell-cell adhesion, which could be blocked by sulfated polysaccharides or poly-anionic compounds. We found that the internalization of virus could lead to de novo synthesis of viral protein from incoming viral RNAs even in the presence of a reverse transcriptase inhibitor. These results illustrate an interaction between infected T cells and nonimmune cells, supporting the presence of virological synapses between HIV-harboring T cells and renal tubular epithelial cells, allowing viral uptake and gene expression in epithelial cells.

21150871
Role of the retinoic acid receptor-? in HIV-associated nephropathy.
All-trans retinoic acid protects against the development of HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) in HIV-1 transgenic mice (Tg26). In vitro, all-trans retinoic acid inhibits HIV-induced podocyte proliferation and restores podocyte differentiation markers by activating its receptor-? (RAR?). Here, we report that Am580, a water-soluble RAR?-specific agonist, attenuated proteinuria, glomerosclerosis, and podocyte proliferation, and restored podocyte differentiation markers in kidneys of Tg26 mice. Furthermore, RAR?-/- Tg26 mice developed more severe kidney and podocyte injury than did RAR?+/- Tg26 mice. Am580 failed to ameliorate kidney injury in RAR?-/- Tg26 mice, confirming our hypothesis that Am580 acts through RAR?. Although the expression of RAR?-target genes was suppressed in the kidneys of Tg26 mice and of patients with HIVAN, the expression of RAR? in the kidney was not different between patients with HIVAN and minimal change disease. However, the tissue levels of retinoic acid were reduced in the kidney cortex and isolated glomeruli of Tg26 mice. Consistent with this, the expression of two key enzymes in the retinoic acid synthetic pathway, retinol dehydrogenase type 1 and 9, and the overall enzymatic activity for retinoic acid synthesis were significantly reduced in the glomeruli of Tg26 mice. Thus, a defect in the endogenous synthesis of retinoic acid contributes to loss of the protection by retinoic acid in HIVAN. Hence, RAR? agonists may be potential agents for the treatment of HIVAN.

20670716
The future of malpractice reform.


20562105
Up-regulation of the homophilic adhesion molecule sidekick-1 in podocytes contributes to glomerulosclerosis.
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a leading cause of nephrotic syndrome and end-stage renal disease worldwide. Although the mechanisms underlying this important disease are poorly understood, the glomerular podocyte clearly plays a central role in disease pathogenesis. In the current work, we demonstrate that the homophilic adhesion molecule sidekick-1 (sdk-1) is up-regulated in podocytes in FSGS both in rodent models and in human kidney biopsy samples. Transgenic mice that have podocyte-specific overexpression of sdk-1 develop gradually progressive heavy proteinuria and severe FSGS. We also show that sdk-1 associates with the slit diaphragm linker protein MAGI-1, which is already known to interact with several critical podocyte proteins including synaptopodin, alpha-actinin-4, nephrin, JAM4, and beta-catenin. This interaction is mediated through a direct interaction between the carboxyl terminus of sdk-1 and specific PDZ domains of MAGI-1. In vitro expression of sdk-1 enables a dramatic recruitment of MAGI-1 to the cell membrane. Furthermore, a truncated version of sdk-1 that is unable to bind to MAGI-1 does not induce podocyte dysfunction when overexpressed. We conclude that the up-regulation of sdk-1 in podocytes is an important pathogenic factor in FSGS and that the mechanism involves disruption of the actin cytoskeleton possibly via alterations in MAGI-1 function.

20404718
HIV-1 viral protein r induces ERK and caspase-8-dependent apoptosis in renal tubular epithelial cells.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is the most common cause of end-stage renal disease in persons with HIV/AIDS and is characterized by focal glomerulosclerosis and dysregulated renal tubular epithelial cell (RTEC) proliferation and apoptosis. HIV-1 viral protein r (Vpr) has been implicated in HIV-induced RTEC apoptosis but the mechanisms of Vpr-induced RTEC apoptosis are unknown. The aim of this study was therefore to determine the mechanisms of Vpr-induced apoptosis in RTEC. Apoptosis and caspase activation were analyzed in human RTEC (HK2) after transduction with Vpr-expressing and control lentiviral vectors. Bax and BID were inhibited with lentiviral shRNA, and ERK activation was blocked with the MEK1,2 inhibitor, U0126. Vpr induced apoptosis as indicated by caspase 3/7 activation, PARP-1 cleavage and mitochondrial injury. Vpr activated both caspases-8 and 9. Inhibition of Bax reduced Vpr-induced apoptosis, as reported in other cell types. Additionally, Vpr-induced cleavage of BID to tBID and suppression of BID expression prevented Vpr-induced apoptosis. Since sustained ERK activation can activate caspase-8 in some cell types, we studied the role of ERK in Vpr-induced caspase-8 activation. Vpr induced sustained ERK activation in HK2 cells and incubation with U0126 reduced Vpr-induced caspase-8 activation, BID cleavage and apoptosis. We detected phosphorylated ERK in RTEC in HIVAN biopsy specimens by immunohistochemistry. These studies delineate a novel pathway of Vpr-induced apoptosis in RTEC, which is mediated by sustained ERK activation, resulting in caspase 8-mediated cleavage of BID to tBID, thereby facilitating Bax-mediated mitochondrial injury and apoptosis.

20098331
Microalbuminuria is associated with all-cause and AIDS mortality in women with HIV infection.
Prevalence of microalbuminuria is increased in patients with HIV. Microalbuminuria is associated with increased mortality in other populations, including diabetics, for whom microalbuminuria testing is standard of care. We investigated whether microalbuminuria is associated with mortality in HIV-infected women not receiving antiretroviral therapy. Urinalysis for proteinuria and semiquantitative testing for microalbuminuria were performed in specimens from 2 consecutive visits in 1547 HIV-infected women enrolled in the Women's Interagency HIV Study in 1994-1995. Time to death was modeled using proportional hazards analysis. Compared with women without albuminuria, the hazard ratio (HR) for all-cause mortality was increased in women with 1 (HR: 3.4; 95% CI: 2.2 to 5.2) or 2 specimens positive for either proteinuria or microalbuminuria (HR: 3.9; 95% CI: 2.1 to 7.0). The highest risk was observed in women with both specimens positive for proteinuria (HR: 5.8; 95% CI: 3.4 to 9.8). The association between albuminuria and all-cause mortality risk remained significant after adjustment for demographics, HIV disease severity, and related comorbidities. Similar results were obtained for AIDS death. We identified a graded relationship between albuminuria and the risk of all-cause and AIDS mortality.

20005487
The pathogenesis of HIV-associated nephropathy.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is one of the leading causes of ESRD in HIV-1-seropositive patients. Patients typically present with heavy proteinuria and chronic renal failure with pathologic findings of collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). The disease is caused by direct infection of renal epithelial cells by HIV-1 in a genetically susceptible host. The genetic factors responsible for the susceptibility to HIVAN among blacks include a noncoding variant in the podocyte-expressed gene nonmuscle myosin, heavy chain 9 (MYH9) as well as other genes yet to be identified. Podocyte and tubular dysfunction results from the expression of viral genes, in particular nef and vpr, and the subsequent dysregulation of numerous host factors, including critical signaling pathways, inflammatory mediators, and others. The identification of these factors has the potential to provide novel therapeutic targets to prevent and treat this important disease.

19726511
FAT10: a novel mediator of Vpr-induced apoptosis in human immunodeficiency virus-associated nephropathy.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated nephropathy is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in HIV-infected persons. Vpr-induced cell cycle dysregulation and apoptosis of renal tubular epithelial cells are important components of the pathogenesis of HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN). FAT10 is a ubiquitin-like protein that is upregulated in renal tubular epithelial cells in HIVAN. In these studies, we report that Vpr induces increased expression of FAT10 in tubular cells and that inhibition of FAT10 expression prevents Vpr-induced apoptosis in human and murine tubular cells. Moreover, we found that Vpr interacts with FAT10 and that these proteins colocalize at mitochondria. These studies establish FAT10 as a novel mediator of Vpr-induced cell death.

19657269
HIV-1 Vpr activates the DNA damage response in renal tubule epithelial cells.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is a major cause of HIV-related morbidity and mortality. Pathogenesis involves direct infection of the glomerular and tubular epithelial cells leading to characteristic disorder. Recently, we have shown that HIV-1 Vpr causes hypertrophy, hyperploidy, and apoptosis. Here, we report that Vpr activates the DNA damage response resulting in the observed renal phenotype. Renal sections from the HIVAN transgenic mouse model and human biopsies both show an abundant DNA damage response.

19052538
The spectrum of kidney disease in patients with AIDS in the era of antiretroviral therapy.
With prolonged survival and aging of the HIV-infected population in the era of antiretroviral therapy, biopsy series have found a broad spectrum of HIV-related and co-morbid kidney disease in these patients. Our study describes the variety of renal pathology found in a prospective cohort of antiretroviral-experienced patients (the Manhattan HIV Brain Bank) who had consented to postmortem organ donation. Nearly one-third of 89 kidney tissue donors had chronic kidney disease, and evidence of some renal pathology was found in 75. The most common diagnoses were arterionephrosclerosis, HIV-associated nephropathy and glomerulonephritis. Other diagnoses included pyelonephritis, interstitial nephritis, diabetic nephropathy, fungal infection and amyloidosis. Excluding 2 instances of acute tubular necrosis, slightly over one-third of the cases would have been predicted using current diagnostic criteria for chronic kidney disease. Based on semi-quantitative analysis of stored specimens, pre-mortem microalbuminuria testing could have identified an additional 12 cases. Future studies are needed to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of more sensitive methods for defining chronic kidney disease, in order to identify HIV-infected patients with early kidney disease who may benefit from antiretroviral therapy and other interventions known to delay disease progression and prevent complications.

19013322
HIV-associated nephropathy: clinical presentation, pathology, and epidemiology in the era of antiretroviral therapy.
The classic kidney disease of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, HIV-associated nephropathy, is characterized by progressive acute renal failure, often accompanied by proteinuria and ultrasound findings of enlarged, echogenic kidneys. Definitive diagnosis requires kidney biopsy, which shows collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis with associated microcystic tubular dilatation and interstitial inflammation. Podocyte proliferation is a hallmark of HIV-associated nephropathy, although this classic pathology is observed less frequently in antiretroviral-treated patients. The pathogenesis of HIV-associated nephropathy involves direct HIV infection of renal epithelial cells, and the widespread introduction of combination antiretroviral therapy has had a significant impact on the natural history and epidemiology of this unique disease. These observations have established antiretroviral therapy as the cornerstone of treatment for HIV-associated nephropathy in the absence of prospective clinical trials. Adjunctive therapy for HIV-associated nephropathy includes angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor blockers, as well as corticosteroids in selected patients with significant interstitial inflammation or rapid progression.

19013321
Kidney disease in HIV infection: introduction.


18753863
The impact of hepatitis C virus coinfection on HIV-related kidney disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
In the era of antiretroviral therapy, non-AIDS complications such as kidney disease are important contributors to morbidity and mortality. To estimate the impact of hepatitis C coinfection on the risk of kidney disease in HIV patients. Two investigators identified English-language citations in MEDLINE and Web of Science from 1989 through 1 July 2007. References of selected articles were reviewed. Observational studies and clinical trials of HIV-related kidney disease and antiretroviral nephrotoxicity were eligible if they included at least 50 subjects and reported hepatitis C status. Data on study characteristics, population, and kidney disease outcomes were abstracted by two independent reviewers. After screening 2516 articles, 27 studies were eligible and 24 authors confirmed or provided data. Separate meta-analyses were performed for chronic kidney disease outcomes (n = 10), proteinuria (n = 4), acute renal failure (n = 2), and indinavir toxicity (n = 5). The pooled incidence of chronic kidney disease was higher in patients with hepatitis C coinfection [6.2 versus 4.0%; relative risk 1.49, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.08-2.06]. In meta-regression, prevalence of black race and the proportion of patients with documented hepatitis C status were independently associated with the risk of chronic kidney disease. The relative risk associated with hepatitis C coinfection was significantly increased for proteinuria (1.15; 95% CI 1.02-1.30) and acute renal failure (1.64; 95% CI 1.21-2.23), with no significant statistical heterogeneity. The relative risk of indinavir toxicity was 1.59 (95% CI 0.99-2.54) with hepatitis C coinfection. Hepatitis C coinfection is associated with a significant increase in the risk of HIV-related kidney disease.

18625721
Retinoic acid utilizes CREB and USF1 in a transcriptional feed-forward loop in order to stimulate MKP1 expression in human immunodeficiency virus-infected podocytes.
Nef-induced podocyte proliferation and dedifferentiation via mitogen-activated protein kinase 1,2 (MAPK1,2) activation plays a role in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nephropathy pathogenesis. All-trans retinoic acid (atRA) reverses the HIV-induced podocyte phenotype by activating cyclic AMP (cAMP)/protein kinase A (PKA) and inhibiting MAPK1,2. Here we show that atRA, through cAMP and PKA, triggers a feed-forward loop involving CREB and USF1 to induce biphasic stimulation of MKP1. atRA stimulated CREB and USF1 binding to the MKP1 gene promoter, as shown by gel shifting and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. CREB directly mediated the early phase of atRA-induced MKP1 stimulation; whereas the later phase was mediated by CREB indirectly through induction of USF1. These findings were confirmed by a reporter gene assay using the MKP1 promoter with mutation of CRE or Ebox binding sites. Consistent with these findings, the biological effects of atRA on podocytes were inhibited by silencing either MKP1, CREB, or USF1 with small interfering RNA. atRA also induced CREB phosphorylation and MKP1 expression and reduced MAPK1,2 phosphorylation in kidneys of HIV type 1-infected transgenic mice. We conclude that atRA induces sustained activation of MKP1 to suppress Nef-induced activation of the Src-MAPK1,2 pathway, thus returning the podocyte to a more differentiated state. The mechanism involves a feed-forward loop where activation of one transcription factor (TF) (CREB) leads to induction of a second TF (USF1).

18614999
HIV-1 Vpr inhibits cytokinesis in human proximal tubule cells.
Transgenic mouse models of HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) show that expression of HIV-1 genes in kidney cells produces collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and microcystic tubular disease typical of the human disease. HIV-1 vpr plays an important role in the glomerulosclerosis of HIVAN, especially when it is associated with nef expression in podocytes. Further, Vpr is reported to exacerbate tubular pathology. Here we determined effects of vpr expression on renal tubular epithelial cell function by transducing them with a pseudotyped lentivirus vector carrying HIV-1 vpr and control genes. Vpr expression in the cultured cells impaired cytokinesis causing cell enlargement and multinucleation. This profound in vitro phenotype caused us to reexamine the HIVAN mouse model and human HIVAN biopsies to see if similar changes occur in vivo. Both showed abundant hypertrophic tubule cells similar to the in vitro finding that represents a previously unappreciated aspect of the human disease. Additionally, multinucleated tubular cells were identified in the murine HIVAN model and increased chromosome number was detected in tubular cells of human HIVAN biopsies. Our study provides evidence of a new clinical phenotype in HIVAN that may result from the ability of Vpr to impair cytokinesis.

18443354
HIV-1 upregulates VEGF in podocytes.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is characterized by collapsing FSGS. Because transgenic mice with podocyte-specific overexpression of the vascular endothelial growth factor 164 (VEGF164) isoform also develop collapsing FSGS, we sought to determine whether VEGF plays a role in HIVAN. Compared with controls, immunohistochemistry revealed that kidneys from HIV-1-transgenic mice (Tg26) and from patients with HIVAN had greater expression of both VEGF and its transcriptional regulator, hypoxia-inducible factor 2alpha (HIF-2alpha). Similarly, mRNA and protein levels of VEGF and HIF-2alpha were increased in HIV-infected podocytes in vitro, and this transcriptional upregulation was found to be stimulated by the HIV viral protein Nef in a Src kinase-and Stat3-dependent manner. HIV-1 also upregulated VEGFR2 and its co-receptor neuropilin-1 and suppressed the expression of semaphorin 3a in the podocyte. Exogenous VEGF stimulated proliferation and de-differentiation of podocytes, which are features of collapsing FSGS, and VEGFR2 neutralizing antibodies reversed these features in podocytes infected with HIV-1 or isolated from Tg26 mice. In conclusion, HIV-1 induces VEGF and VEGFR2 expression in podocytes, and this may be a critical step in the pathogenesis of HIVAN.

18391591
HIV-associated nephropathy.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is a unique form of collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis that typically occurs in patients with advanced HIV disease. The pathogenesis of HIVAN involves direct HIV infection and gene expression in tubular and glomerular epithelial cells; in effect, HIVAN can be considered a natural illustration of gene delivery to the kidney. HIV infection or expression of HIV genes results in dysregulation of tubular and glomerular epithelial cells and induction of local inflammatory cascades. Specific HIV genes, in particular Nef and Vpr, play prominent and synergistic roles in the pathogenesis of HIVAN, while other viral genes are not required for the development of HIVAN. The disproportionate burden of HIVAN and HIV-related end-stage renal disease in blacks suggests that host genetic factors are also important in the pathogenesis of HIVAN. Preliminary genetic studies in the mouse model have identified a potential genetic susceptibility locus, and a number of host genes are differentially expressed in the setting of HIVAN or HIV infection. The current management of HIVAN couples antiretroviral therapy with adjunctive agents that target downstream effects of HIV gene expression in the kidney. Future therapies could also target different steps in the pathogenesis of HIVAN, including viral replication, epithelial cell entry and viral gene expression, and downstream cellular pathways.

18362617
Fact and fiction: debunking myths in the US healthcare system.
The United States has the most expensive and complex healthcare system in the world. Despite the magnitude of funds spent on the system, Americans do not achieve the high standards of health seen in other developed countries. The current model of health insurance has failed to deliver efficient and effective healthcare. The administrative costs and lack of buying power that arise out of the existing multipayer system are at the root of the problem. The current system also directly contributes to the rising number of uninsured and underinsured Americans. This lack of insurance leads to poorer health outcomes, and a significant amount of money is lost into the system by paying for these complications. Experience from other countries suggests that tangible improvements can occur with conversion to a single-payer system. However, previous efforts at reform have stalled. There are many myths commonly held true by both patients and physicians. This inscrutability of the US healthcare system may be the major deterrent to its improvement. A discussion of these myths can lead to increased awareness of the inequality of our healthcare system and the possibilities for improvement.

18234668
HIV-1 Nef disrupts the podocyte actin cytoskeleton by interacting with diaphanous interacting protein.
The ability of the human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1) protein Nef to induce cytoskeleton changes in infected host cells is a key event in viral replication. In renal podocytes, we found that Nef induced loss of stress fibers and increased lamellipodia, pathological changes leading to proteinuria in HIV-associated nephropathy. These morphological changes were mediated by Nef-induced Rac1 activation and RhoA inhibition. We identified a new interaction between Nef and diaphanous interacting protein (DIP), a recently described regulator of Rho and Rac signaling. We found that the Src homology 3 binding domain of DIP and the Nef PXXP motif were required for this interaction. Nef also interacts with Vav2 in podocytes. DIP and Vav2 both interact directly with Nef in a competitive manner. DIP interacts with p190RhoGAP, and intact DIP was required for Nef-induced phosphorylation of p190RhoGAP. DIP also interacts with Vav2, and although DIP enhanced baseline phosphorylation of Vav2, it was not required for Nef-induced Vav2 activation. In Nef-infected podocytes, Src kinase induces phosphorylation of DIP, p190RhoGAP, and Vav2, leading to RhoA inhibition and Rac1 activation. Inhibition of the Nef-induced signaling pathway by using a dominant negative of either Src or DIP or siRNA for DIP or p190RhoAGAP restored RhoA activity and stress fiber formation in Nef-infected podocytes, whereas siRNA for Vav2 reduced Rac1 activity and formation of lamellipodia. We conclude that in HIV-infected podocytes, Nef, through the recruitment of DIP and p190RhoAGAP to Nef-Src complex, activates p190RhoAGAP and down-regulates RhoA activity.

17885301
Chronic kidney disease in HIV infection: an urban epidemic.
Kidney disease is an important complication of HIV, particularly in minority populations. We describe the burden of chronic kidney disease among 1239 adults followed at an urban AIDS center, with an estimated prevalence of 15.5% (n = 192). Independent predictors of kidney disease included older age, black race, hepatitis C virus exposure, and lower CD4 cell count. These data suggest that chronic kidney disease remains a common complication of HIV infection in the era of antiretroviral therapy.

17699507
HIV-1 and HIV-Associated Nephropathy 25 Years Later.
Twenty-five years after the first published description of AIDS, HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) remains an important cause of kidney disease in HIV-infected patients. The pathogenesis of HIVAN involves direct HIV infection of the kidney, with both viral and host genetic factors playing an important role. The widespread use of antiretroviral therapy has influenced the epidemiology of HIV-related kidney disease, and the nephrology community should support efforts to improve access to therapy and limit HIV transmission in susceptible minority populations. This article reviews the history of HIV and HIVAN, focusing on advances in the understanding of pathogenesis, epidemiology, and treatment.

17570932
Podocytes in HIV-associated nephropathy.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is the leading cause of end-stage renal failure in HIV-1 seropositive patients. The pathologic findings include collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis with proliferation of epithelial cells in Bowman's space. Anatomically, these cells correspond to podocytes and exhibit a unique phenotype with loss of many differentiation markers including synaptopodin and dysregulation of the cell cycle markers consistent with proliferation. Podocyte dysfunction appears to be a direct result of HIV-1 protein expression, specifically Nef and Vpr as well as specific host factors that have yet to be elucidated. The mechanism by which Nef induces podocyte proliferation and dedifferentiation has been traced to its ability to activate several signaling pathways including Src-Stat3 and ras-raf-MAPK1, 2. Activation of the cAMP/PKA pathway with all-trans-retinoic acid appears to modulate these changes and returns podocytes to a differentiated, nonproliferating phenotype.

17524746
HIV-associated nephropathy in the era of antiretroviral therapy.
With improved survival in the era of antiretroviral therapy, kidney disease has emerged as an important complication of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection and antiretroviral therapy. The classic kidney disease of HIV infection, HIV-associated nephropathy, occurs almost exclusively in patients of African descent. HIV-associated nephropathy is characterized by collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis with associated tubular dilatation and interstitial inflammation, although the histology may be more subtle in patients receiving antiretroviral therapy. Renal epithelial cells are infected by HIV-1, which results in epithelial cell proliferation and induction of local inflammatory pathways. Even with appropriate therapy, the kidney is a reservoir for HIV-1. Although the widespread introduction of antiretroviral therapy has had a beneficial impact on the epidemiology of HIV-associated nephropathy, the burden of kidney disease is likely to increase as a result of antiretroviral toxicity, reduction in competing mortality risks, and the increasing prevalence of HIV-1 infection in patients at risk for kidney disease.

