20179201
Vascular endothelial growth factor-C induces lymphangitic carcinomatosis, an extremely aggressive form of lung metastases.
The lymphatic system is an important pathway for tumor dissemination to the lymph nodes, but to which extent it contributes to the formation of distant metastases remains unknown. We report that induction of lymphangiogenesis by vascular endothelial growth factor-C (VEGF-C) at the secondary site, in the lung, facilitates expansion of already disseminated cancer cells throughout the lung tissue. By using orthotopic spontaneous metastasis models in nude mice, we show that VEGF-C expression by tumor cells altered the pattern of pulmonary metastases from nodular to diffuse and facilitated disease progression. Metastases expressing VEGF-C were tightly associated with the airways, in contrast to the control cells that were scattered in the lung parenchyma, throughout the alveolar region. VEGF-C induced lung lymphangiogenesis and promoted intralymphatic spread of metastases in the lung and formation of tumor emboli in the pulmonary arteries. This pattern of metastasis corresponds to lymphangitic carcinomatosis metastatic phenotype in human cancer patients, an extremely aggressive pattern of pulmonary metastases. In accordance, pulmonary breast cancer metastases from patients which were classified as lymphangitic carcinomatosis showed high levels of VEGF-C expression in cancer cells. These data show that VEGF-C promotes late steps of the metastatic process and identify the VEGF-C/VEGF receptor-3 pathway as the target not only for prevention of metastases, but also for treatment of established metastatic disease.

19734869
Blocking the path of lymphatic vessels.


19587009
Inflamed lymphatic endothelium suppresses dendritic cell maturation and function via Mac-1/ICAM-1-dependent mechanism.
The lymphatic system is essential for the generation of immune responses by facilitating immune cell trafficking to lymph nodes. Dendritic cells (DCs), the most potent APCs, exit tissues via lymphatic vessels, but the mechanisms of interaction between DCs and the lymphatic endothelium and the potential implications of these interactions for immune responses are poorly understood. In this study, we demonstrate that lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) modulate the maturation and function of DCs. Direct contact of human monocyte-derived DCs with an inflamed, TNF-alpha-stimulated lymphatic endothelium reduced expression of the costimulatory molecule CD86 by DCs and suppressed the ability of DCs to induce T cell proliferation. These effects were dependent on adhesive interactions between DCs and LECs that were mediated by the binding of Mac-1 on DCs to ICAM-1 on LECs. Importantly, the suppressive effects of the lymphatic endothelium on DCs were observed only in the absence of pathogen-derived signals. In vivo, DCs that migrated to the draining lymph nodes upon inflammatory stimuli, but in the absence of a pathogen, showed increased levels of CD86 expression in ICAM-1-deficient mice. Together, these data demonstrate a direct role of LECs in the modulation of immune response and suggest a function of the lymphatic endothelium in preventing undesired immune reactions in inflammatory conditions.

18519976
Lymphatic vessel activation in cancer.
Most cancerous lesions metastasize through the lymphatic system and the status of regional lymph nodes is the most important indicator of a patient's prognosis. The extent of lymph node involvement with cancer is also an important parameter used for determining treatment options. Although the importance of the lymphatic system for metastasis has been well recognized, traditionally, the lymphatic vessels have not been considered actively involved in the metastatic process. Recent evidence, however, indicates that the activation of the lymphatic system is an important factor in tumor progression to metastasis. Tumor lymphangiogenesis has been associated with increased propensity for metastasis, and lymphatic vessel density has emerged as another promising prognostic indicator. More recently, lymphangiogenesis in the sentinel lymph nodes has been shown to contribute to malignant progression. In addition to its role as a transport system for tumor cells, the lymphatic system may also be more actively involved in metastases by directly facilitating tumor cell recruitment into the lymphatic vessels. This review highlights recent advances in our understanding of the mechanisms by which lymphatic vessels participate in metastasis.

17360402
Lymphotoxin beta receptor signaling is required for inflammatory lymphangiogenesis in the thyroid.
Infiltration of lymphocytes into the thyroid gland and formation of lymph node-like structures is a hallmark of Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Here we demonstrate that lymphatic vessels are present within these infiltrates. Mice overexpressing the chemokine CCL21 in the thyroid (TGCCL21 mice) developed similar lymphoid infiltrates and lymphatic vessels. TGCCL21 mice lacking mature T and B cells (RAGTGCCL21 mice) did not have cellular infiltrates or increased number of lymphatic vessels compared with controls. Transfer of CD3(+)CD4(+) T cells into RAGTGCCL21 mice promoted the development of LYVE-1(+)podoplanin(+)Prox-1(+) vessels in the thyroid. Genetic deletion of lymphotoxin beta receptor or lymphotoxin alpha abrogated development of lymphatic vessels in the inflamed areas in the thyroid but did not affect development of neighboring lymphatics. These results define a model for the study of inflammatory lymphangiogenesis in the thyroid and implicate lymphotoxin beta receptor signaling in this process.

