21498720
No circulating cytomegalovirus in five patients with glioblastoma multiforme.
Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common and most aggressive type of primary brain tumor, accounting for 52% of all primary brain tumor cases and 20% of all intracranial tumors. Recently, evidence for a viral cause has been postulated, possibly SV40 or more likely cytomegalovirus (CMV). One report indicated that 80% of patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme have detectable cytomegalovirus DNA in their peripheral blood, while sero-positive normal donors and other surgical patients did not exhibit detectable virus. In the current study, we examined peripheral blood of 5 patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme. Peripheral blood was collected in anticoagulated tubes from five patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme referred for radiation therapy. We used standard methods for detecting CMV by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and peripheral blood culture. None of our patients had circulating CMV. There are four subtypes of glioblastoma. We hypothesize that circulating CMV might be limited to some, but not all of these subtypes, and that our failure to detect CMV might be attributed to the fact that none of these patients had the appropriate subtype or subtypes.

19716765
Severe pandemic (H1N1) 2009 influenza with false negative direct fluorescent antibody assay: case series.
Between May and June of 2009 we observed 4 patients that presented with severe influenza-like symptoms and respiratory failure. All cases tested negative for influenza A and B by direct fluorescent antibody assay. Further investigation revealed all cases to be positive for pandemic (H1N1) 2009 influenza virus by real-time RT-PCR. This article includes a description of these cases and the characteristics associated with them.

19405113
Mycobacterium avium complex infection in a neck abscess: a diagnostic pitfall in fine-needle aspiration biopsy of head and neck lesions.
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) is a useful tool in the diagnosis of mycobacterial disease, especially Mycobacterium tuberculosis. However, nontuberculous mycobacterial infection diagnosed with FNAB material is much rarer, with Mycobacterium avium complex being the most common. In this report, we present the case of a 21-year-old HIV positive man, who presented with a unilateral, tender, enlarging cervical neck mass. FNAB had revealed acute inflammation. Mycobacterium avium complex grew in culture from the material that was aspirated and was confirmed by DNA probe. Because of the paucity of articles on this subject in the cytology literature, it is important to reiterate the value of the material aspirated at the bedside and the clinic in the diagnosis of infectious disease. When faced with antibiotic-resistant cellulitis and abscesses, the FNAB material must be sent for acid fast bacteria smears and culture.

