21425264
Multiple sclerosis therapeutic pipeline: opportunities and challenges.
The year 2010 marked the beginning of the era of oral medications for the treatment of multiple sclerosis, with the approval of dalfampridine to improve walking and fingolimod as the first oral disease-modifying agent. This review provides an overview of these and other emerging therapies, with an emphasis on the opportunities for new treatment paradigms they have the potential to offer, followed by a discussion of the challenges they will pose in the new era of multiple sclerosis management. Therapeutics in late-stage development for MS include non-selective immunosupressants, targeted immune-modulators, and monoclonal antibodies. Oral agents including cladribine, teriflunomide, laquinimod, and dimethyl fumarate, as well as monoclonal antibodies alemtuzumab, daclizumab, and rituximab are considered. Potential side effects and adverse event monitoring, including opportunistic infections, emergent malignancies, and other systemic consequences of immunosuppression are discussed in a unified section. Challenges of optimally staging, sequencing, and combining treatments in the expanding multiple sclerosis armamentarium are discussed. This review emphasizes the multifactorial decision making that these new therapeutics will warrant in terms of patient selection and personalization/individualization of therapy, and the increasingly interdisciplinary approach that will be necessitated by the new generation of agents.

18306250
A case from the department of neurology.
Uncompleted suicide attempts are a significant cause of morbidity, which in catastrophic cases can be both medically and ethically challenging to manage. We discuss the case of a 63-year-old man who survived a suicide attempt by venlafaxine (Effexor) overdose, causing an intracranial hemorrhage and leaving him in an apparently awake but noncommunicative state. Ethical concerns arose when considering if he should be indefinitely maintained on life support. These include the difficulties of characterizing his level of consciousness and prognosis; establishing his decisional capacity regarding end-of-life decisions in a setting of depression and suicidality; and assessing the suitability of a surrogate decision-maker. In conclusion, we discuss whether the fact that his grave neurological condition was caused by a suicide attempt was relevant to the decision to continue or withdraw life support.

