21234711
Cutting Edge: The Etiology of Autoimmune Thyroid Diseases.
Significant progress has been made in our understanding of the mechanisms leading to autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD). For the first time, we are beginning to unravel these mechanisms at the molecular level. AITD, including Graves' disease (GD) and Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT), are common autoimmune diseases affecting the thyroid. They have a complex etiology that involves genetic and environmental influences. Seven genes have been shown to contribute to the etiology of AITD. The first AITD gene discovered, HLA-DR3, is associated with both GD and HT. More recently, this association was dissected at the molecular level when it was shown that substitution of the neutral amino acids Ala or Gln with arginine at position beta 74 in the HLA-DR peptide binding pocket is the specific sequence change causing AITD. Non-MHC genes that confer susceptibility to AITD can be classified into two groups: (1) immune-regulatory genes (e.g., CD40, CTLA-4, and PTPN22); (2) thyroid-specific genes-thyroglobulin and TSH receptor genes. These genes interact with environmental factors, such as infection, likely through epigenetic mechanisms to trigger disease. In this review, we summarize the latest findings on disease susceptibility and modulation by environmental factors.

21054240
Analysis of immune regulatory genes' copy number variants in Graves' disease.
Copy number variants (CNVs) have recently been reported to be associated with several autoimmune conditions. Moreover, loci involved in immunity are enriched in CNVs. Therefore, we hypothesized that CNVs in immune genes associated with Graves' disease (GD) may contribute to the etiology of disease. One hundred ninety-one North American Caucasian GD patients and 192 Caucasian controls were analyzed for CNVs in three major immune regulatory genes: CD40, PTPN22, and CTLA-4. Copy number was determined using quantitative-PCR (Q-PCR) assays specifically designed for determining copy numbers in genomic DNA. Additionally, a well-characterized CNV in the amylase gene was typed in a separate dataset of DNA samples that were derived from cell lines or blood. No CNVs could be confirmed in the CD40 and CTLA-4 genes, even though a CD40 CNV is cataloged in the Database of Genomic Variants. Only the PTPN22 CNV was confirmed in our cohort, but it was rare and appeared in only two individuals. A key finding was that the source of DNA has a significant effect on CNV typing. There was a statistically significant increase in amylase locus deletions in cell line-derived DNA compared to blood-derived DNA samples. We conclude that CNV analysis should be performed only using blood-derived DNA Samples. Additionally, the CTLA-4, CD40, and PTPN22 loci do not harbor CNVs that play a role in the etiology of GD.

20837527
Shared molecular amino acid signature in the HLA-DR peptide binding pocket predisposes to both autoimmune diabetes and thyroiditis.
There is strong genetic association between type 1A diabetes (T1D) and autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD). T1D and AITD frequently occur together in the same individual, a condition classified as a variant of the autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 3 (APS3). Because T1D and AITD are individually strongly associated with different HLA class II sequences, we asked which HLA class II pocket sequence and structure confer joint susceptibility to both T1D and AITD in the same individual (APS3v). We sequenced the HLA-DR gene in 105 APS3v patients and 153 controls, and identified a pocket amino acid signature, DR?-Tyr-26, DR?-Leu-67, DR?-Lys-71, and DR?-Arg-74, that was strongly associated with APS3v (P = 5.4 × 10(-14), odds ratio = 8.38). Logistic regression analysis demonstrated that DR?-Leu-67 (P = 9.4 × 10(-13)) and DR?-Arg-74 (P = 1.21 × 10(-13)) gave strong independent effects on disease susceptibility. Structural modeling studies demonstrated that pocket 4 was critical for the development of T1D+AITD; all disease-associated amino acids were linked to areas of the pocket that interact directly with the peptide and, therefore, influence peptide binding. The disease-susceptible HLA-DR pocket was more positively charged (Lys-71, Arg-74) compared with the protective pocket (Ala-71, Gln-74). We conclude that a specific pocket amino acid signature confers joint susceptibility to T1D+AITD in the same individual by causing significant structural changes in the MHC II peptide binding pocket and influencing peptide binding and presentation. Moreover, Arg-74 is a major amino acid position for the development of several autoimmune diseases. These findings suggest that blocking the critical Arg-74 pocket might offer a method for treating certain autoimmune conditions.

20604685
Genetic susceptibility to autoimmune thyroid disease: past, present, and future.
Autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD), including Graves' disease and Hashimoto's thyroiditis, arise due to complex interactions between environmental and genetic factors. There are sound data coming from epidemiological, family, and twin studies demonstrating a strong genetic influence on the development of AITD. In this review we summarize the new findings on the genetic susceptibility to AITD focusing on emerging mechanisms of susceptibility. Candidate gene analysis, whole-genome linkage screening, genome-wide association studies, and whole-genome sequencing are the major technologies that have advanced this field, leading to the identification of at least seven genes whose variants have been associated with AITD. One of the major ones is the HLA-DR gene locus. Recently, it was shown that substitution of the neutral amino acids Ala or Gln with arginine at position beta 74 in the HLA-DR peptide-binding pocket is key to the etiology of both Graves' disease and Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Several other genes have also been shown to confer susceptibility to AITD. These can be classified into two groups: (i) immune regulatory genes (cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated protein 4, CD40, protein tyrosine phosphatase-22, and CD25) and (ii) thyroid-specific genes (thyroglobulin and thyrotropin receptor genes). The influence of individual genes on the development of AITD when assessed in a population appears to be weaker than would be expected from the data showing strong genetic susceptibility to AITD. Two possible mechanisms explaining this discrepancy are gene-gene interactions and subset effects. Significant progress has been made in our understanding of the immunogenetic mechanisms leading to thyroid autoimmunity. For the first time we are beginning to unravel these mechanisms at the molecular level. It is hoped that these new data will be translated into novel therapies and prevention strategies in AITD, such as costimulatory blockade.

20578890
Thyroid disorders: it's very personal.


20303712
Tg.2098 is a major human thyroglobulin T-cell epitope.
An HLA-DR variant containing Arginine at position 74 of the DRbeta1 chain confers a strong genetic susceptibility to autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD), Graves' disease (GD) and Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT), while Glutamine at position DRbeta1-74 is protective. We hypothesized that the DRbeta1-Arg74 variant is able to present pathogenic thyroglobulin (Tg) peptides to T-cells more efficiently, thereby triggering thyroid autoimmunity. Indeed, we have previously identified 4 human Tg (hTg) peptides that bind specifically to DRbeta1-Arg74 with much weaker binding to the protective variant DRbeta1-Gln74. The aim of our study was to examine in vivo whether an hTg peptide that binds strongly and specifically to DRbeta1-Arg74 is capable of stimulating T-cells during the induction of thyroiditis in a "humanized" mouse expressing human DR3, and in patients positive for Tg antibodies. Sequencing of exon 2 of the DR transgene in the DR3 mice, null for endogenous MHC II molecules, confirmed that they expressed the disease-associated DRbeta1-Arg74 variant, thus making them an ideal in vivo model to test the presentation of hTg peptides by DRbeta1-Arg74 HLA-DR. Induction of EAT in the DR3 mice lead to T-cell stimulation and proliferation to Tg.2098, a strong and specific DRbeta1-Arg74 binder, while a non-binding control peptide, Tg.2766 did not induce this response. Moreover, Tg.2098 stimulated T-cells from 4 individuals who were positive for thyroglobulin antibodies, demonstrating that Tg.2098 is an immunogenic peptide capable of being presented in vivo and activating T-cells in EAT and AITD. Energetic analysis of the complex formed by Tg.2098 and DRbeta-Arg74 has shown that the origin of the affinity was determined by residues 1, 7 and 9 in the peptide, while the selectivity of the peptide for the MHC was determined by the Asp in position 4. The disease-protective substitution R74Q, leads to reduction in affinity due to changes in local interaction with D4 as well as non-local interaction with other residues. The electrostatic potential on the surface of the DRbeta-Arg74-Tg.2098 complex has a unique signature which may be recognized by T-cell receptors leading to autoimmune thyroiditis. Taken together these findings suggest that Tg.2098, a strong and specific binder to the disease-associated HLA-DRbeta-Arg74, is a major human T-cell epitope and participant in the pathoetiology of AITD.

20022216
Hepatitis C and interferon induced thyroiditis.
Autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITDs) are complex diseases that develop as a result of interactions between genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors. Significant progress has been made in our understanding of the genetic and environmental triggers contributing to AITD. The major environmental triggers of AITD include iodine, smoking, medications, pregnancy, and possibly stress. In this review we will focus on two well-documented environmental triggers of AITD, hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and interferon alpha (IFNa) therapy. Chronic HCV infection has been shown to be associated with increased incidence of clinical and subclinical autoimmune thyroiditis (i.e. the presence of thyroid antibodies in euthyroid subjects). Moreover, IFNa therapy of chronic HCV infection is associated with subclinical or clinical thyroiditis in up to 40% of cases which can be autoimmune, or non-autoimmune thyroiditis. In some cases interferon induced thyroiditis (IIT) in chronic HCV patients may result in severe symptomatology necessitating discontinuation of therapy. While the epidemiology and clinical presentation of HCV and interferon induced thyroiditis have been well characterized, the mechanisms causing these conditions are still poorly understood.

19942147
Interferon induced thyroiditis.
Interferon-alpha (IFNalpha) is used for the treatment of various disorders, most notable chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. One of the commonest side effects of IFNalpha therapy is thyroiditis, with up to 40% of HCV patients on IFNalpha developing clinical or subclinical disease. In some cases interferon induced thyroiditis (IIT) may result in severe symptomatology necessitating discontinuation of therapy. IIT can manifest as clinical autoimmune thyroiditis, presenting with symptoms of classical Hashimoto's thyroiditis or Graves' disease, or as non-autoimmune thyroiditis. Non-autoimmune thyroiditis can manifest as destructive thyroiditis, with early thyrotoxicosis and later hypothyroidism, or as non-autoimmune hypothyroidism. While the epidemiology and clinical presentation of IIT have been well characterized the mechanisms causing IIT are still poorly understood. It is likely that the hepatitis C virus (HCV) itself plays a role in the disease, as the association between HCV infection and thyroiditis is well established. It is believed that IFNalpha induces thyroiditis by both immune stimulatory effects and by direct effects on the thyroid. Early detection and therapy of this condition are important in order to avoid complications of thyroid disease such as cardiac arrhythmias.

18925838
Influence of the TSH receptor gene on susceptibility to Graves' disease and Graves' ophthalmopathy.
A large gene region, called GD-1, was first described by this laboratory as linked to Graves' disease (GD) and included the gene for the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR). Recent studies have now suggested an association of TSHR intronic polymorphisms with GD. We have taken the opportunity to examine a population of well-characterized patients with autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) typed for an additional thyroid susceptibility gene, the immunoregulatory gene for cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4), to examine its relationship with the susceptibility to GD endowed by TSHR gene polymorphisms. We used TSHR-SNP-rs2268458, located in intron 1 of the TSHR gene, measured using standard PCR-RFLP procedures, as our marker for the TSHR gene association. We genotyped 200 patients with GD, 83 patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT), and 118 healthy controls (all female Caucasians). The allele and genotype frequencies from GD patients, but not HT patients, were significantly different from controls. The frequency of the combined genotype (allele) CC + TC was significantly higher in GD patients versus controls, suggesting that the C-containing genotype increased the risk for GD in a dominant manner (p = 0.018, odds ratio [OR] = 1.8). When compared with CTLA-4 (A/G)(49) single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), we were unable to demonstrate additive risk in patients with established AITD. Further, subsetting the patients (n = 120) into those with clinically significant Graves' ophthalmopathy (GO) showed no association with the TSHR SNP. These results demonstrated that the intronic TSHR-SNP-rs2268458 was associated with GD, but not with HT, thus indicating that the TSHR gene has the potential to increase susceptibility to GD. However, we were not able to demonstrate any additive risk with the CTLA-4 (A/G)(49) SNP, which is, therefore, an independent risk factor for AITD. This suggested that, within the limits of the study population, each of these two genes provided a small contribution to GD susceptibility and that neither was essential. In addition, there was no evidence for the TSHR gene association adding to the risk of developing GO. Direct functional analyses are now needed to help explain the mechanisms of this TSHR gene susceptibility to GD.

17911434
Thyroid epigenetics: X chromosome inactivation in patients with autoimmune thyroid disease.
The autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITDs) are female-predominant diseases with a ratio of approximately seven females to each male. X chromosome inactivation (XCI), an epigenetic phenomenon, has been suggested to be skewed in many such female patients with AITD. We analyzed female genomic DNA from 87 patients with Graves' disease (GD), 47 patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT), and 69 healthy controls. Using an XCI assay based on Hpa II digestion and PCR and DNA sequencing, we found skewed heterozygous XCI (>or=80%) in 20 of 70 GD patients (28.6%) and 11 of 43 HT patients (25.6%), giving a total of 31 of 113 AITD patients (27.4%) with skewed XCI. In contrast, only 5 of 58 healthy controls had skewed XCI (8.6%). Statistical analysis confirmed that XCI skewing was significantly associated with AITD (P = 0.004, OR = 4.0), demonstrating that the degree of XCI is an important contributor to the increased risk of females in developing AITD.

17192819
CTLA-4 gene exon-1 +49 A/G polymorphism: lack of association with autoimmune disease in patients with common variable immune deficiency.
The presence of the G allele of exon-1 +49 A/G polymorphisms of the cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) gene has been described as a risk factor associated with the development of autoimmune diseases. Since Common Variable Immune Deficiency (CVID) is associated with autoimmune manifestations in approximately 25% of patients, we sought to examine the association of the CTLA-4 single nucleotide polymorphism with autoimmunity and other inflammatory complications. Sixteen of 47 CVID (34%) patients had a history of autoimmunity, and 15 (32%) had known granulomatous disease with or without lymphoid hyperplasia. CTLA-4 genotype frequencies were AA 40% (19), AG 45% (21), and GG 15% (7). Allele frequencies were A 63% and G 37%, similar to control populations. There were no significant associations between CTLA-4 exon-1 +49 A/G polymorphism and autoimmune or lymphoid hyperplasia and granulomatous disease in this mostly Caucasian CVID patient population.

21297381
Environmental triggers of thyroiditis: hepatitis C and interferon-?.
Autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD) are postulated to develop as a result of a complex interplay between several genetic and environmental influences. The pathogenesis of AITD is still not clearly defined. However, among the implicated triggers (e.g. iodine, infections, medications), more recent data confirmed strong associations of AITD with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and interferon-? (IFN?) therapy. Moreover, it is likely that HCV and IFN act in synergism to trigger AITD in patients. Indeed, approximately 40% of HCV patients develop either clinical or subclinical disease while receiving IFN?. Interferon induced thyroiditis (IIT) can manifest as non-autoimmune thyroiditis (presenting as destructive thyroiditis, or non-autoimmune hypothyroidism), or autoimmune thyroiditis [presenting with clinical features of Graves' disease (GD) or Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT)]. Although not yet clearly understood, it is thought that IFN? can induce thyroiditis via both immune stimulatory and direct toxic effects on the thyroid. In view of the high frequency of IIT, routine screening and surveillance of HCV patients receiving IFN? is recommended to avoid the complications, such as cardiac arrhythmias, associated with thyrotoxicosis. In summary, IIT is a common clinical problem that can be readily diagnosed with routine thyroid function screening of HCV patients receiving IFN. The treatment of IIT consists of the standard therapy for differing clinical manifestations of IIT such as GD, HT, or destructive thyroiditis. However, anti-thyroid medications are not recommended in this setting since they can potentially be hepatotoxic.

18406788
The immunogenetics of autoimmune diabetes and autoimmune thyroid disease.
Although medical genetics is a well-developed area of interest, relatively little is known about the diseases caused by the combination of many genes. These multiinfluenced diseases include the autoimmune endocrine diseases. Recent advances in the techniques for whole-genome screening have shown a variety of loci that are linked to the development of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and similar data are likely to be soon generated in autoimmune thyroid disease. Here, the authors survey the current state of genetic knowledge in these two areas and describe the investigative and analytical techniques that are now available. (Trends Endocrinol Metab 1997;8:63-70). (c) 1997, Elsevier Science Inc.

