20404718
HIV-1 viral protein r induces ERK and caspase-8-dependent apoptosis in renal tubular epithelial cells.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) is the most common cause of end-stage renal disease in persons with HIV/AIDS and is characterized by focal glomerulosclerosis and dysregulated renal tubular epithelial cell (RTEC) proliferation and apoptosis. HIV-1 viral protein r (Vpr) has been implicated in HIV-induced RTEC apoptosis but the mechanisms of Vpr-induced RTEC apoptosis are unknown. The aim of this study was therefore to determine the mechanisms of Vpr-induced apoptosis in RTEC. Apoptosis and caspase activation were analyzed in human RTEC (HK2) after transduction with Vpr-expressing and control lentiviral vectors. Bax and BID were inhibited with lentiviral shRNA, and ERK activation was blocked with the MEK1,2 inhibitor, U0126. Vpr induced apoptosis as indicated by caspase 3/7 activation, PARP-1 cleavage and mitochondrial injury. Vpr activated both caspases-8 and 9. Inhibition of Bax reduced Vpr-induced apoptosis, as reported in other cell types. Additionally, Vpr-induced cleavage of BID to tBID and suppression of BID expression prevented Vpr-induced apoptosis. Since sustained ERK activation can activate caspase-8 in some cell types, we studied the role of ERK in Vpr-induced caspase-8 activation. Vpr induced sustained ERK activation in HK2 cells and incubation with U0126 reduced Vpr-induced caspase-8 activation, BID cleavage and apoptosis. We detected phosphorylated ERK in RTEC in HIVAN biopsy specimens by immunohistochemistry. These studies delineate a novel pathway of Vpr-induced apoptosis in RTEC, which is mediated by sustained ERK activation, resulting in caspase 8-mediated cleavage of BID to tBID, thereby facilitating Bax-mediated mitochondrial injury and apoptosis.

19959714
The ubiquitin-like protein FAT10 mediates NF-kappaB activation.
NF-kappaB is a central mediator of innate immunity and contributes to the pathogenesis of several renal diseases. FAT10 is a TNF-alpha-inducible ubiquitin-like protein with a putative role in immune response, but whether FAT10 participates in TNF-alpha-induced NF-kappaB activation is unknown. Here, using renal tubular epithelial cells (RTECs) derived from FAT10(-/-) and FAT10(+/+) mice, we observed that FAT10 deficiency abrogated TNF-alpha-induced NF-kappaB activation and reduced the induction of NF-kappaB-regulated genes. Despite normal IkBalpha degradation and polyubiquitination, FAT10 deficiency impaired TNF-alpha-induced IkBalpha degradation and nuclear translocation of p65 in RTECs, suggesting defective proteasomal degradation of polyubiquitinated IkBalpha. In addition, FAT10 deficiency reduced the expression of the proteasomal subunit low molecular mass polypeptide 2 (LMP2). Transduction of FAT10(-/-) RTECs with FAT10 restored LMP2 expression, TNF-alpha-induced IkBalpha degradation, p65 nuclear translocation, and NF-kappaB activation. Furthermore, LMP2 transfection restored IkBalpha degradation in FAT10(-/-) RTECs. In humans, common types of chronic kidney disease associated with tubulointerstitial upregulation of FAT10. These data suggest that FAT10 mediates NF-kappaB activation and may promote tubulointerstitial inflammation in chronic kidney diseases.

19726511
FAT10: a novel mediator of Vpr-induced apoptosis in human immunodeficiency virus-associated nephropathy.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated nephropathy is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in HIV-infected persons. Vpr-induced cell cycle dysregulation and apoptosis of renal tubular epithelial cells are important components of the pathogenesis of HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN). FAT10 is a ubiquitin-like protein that is upregulated in renal tubular epithelial cells in HIVAN. In these studies, we report that Vpr induces increased expression of FAT10 in tubular cells and that inhibition of FAT10 expression prevents Vpr-induced apoptosis in human and murine tubular cells. Moreover, we found that Vpr interacts with FAT10 and that these proteins colocalize at mitochondria. These studies establish FAT10 as a novel mediator of Vpr-induced cell death.

18721845
Pyrazole induced oxidative liver injury independent of CYP2E1/2A5 induction due to Nrf2 deficiency.
Pyrazole can induce CYP2E1 and 2A5, which produce reactive oxygen species (ROS). Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) regulates important antioxidant enzymes to remove ROS. In this study, we applied Nrf2 knockout mice to test the hypothesis that pyrazole will cause hepatotoxicity and elevate oxidative stress to a greater extent in Nrf2 knockout mice compared to wild type mice. Pyrazole induced severe oxidative liver damage in Nrf2 knockout mice but not in wild type mice. Activities and levels of CYP2E1 and 2A5 were elevated by pyrazole in the wild type mice but not in the Nrf2 knockout mice. However, expression or activity of Nrf2-regulated antioxidant enzymes, such as gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase (GCS), heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and glutathione-S-transferase (GST), were upregulated in the pyrazole-treated wild type mice, but to a lesser extent or not at all in the pyrazole-treated Nrf2 knockout mice. Treatment with antioxidants such as vitamin C or S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) or an inhibitor of iNOS prevented the pyrazole-induced oxidative liver damage, thus validating the role of oxidative/nitrosative stress in the pyrazole induced liver injury to the Nrf2 knockout mice. In summary, even though ROS-producing CYP2E1/2A5 were not elevated by pyrazole, impaired antioxidant capacity resulting from Nrf2 deficiency appear to be sufficient to promote pyrazole-induced oxidative liver injury.

