21391411
Using a brief 10-item generic measure of quality of life in English and Spanish speaking diabetic patients.
Validation of the Multicultural Quality of Life Index (MQLI), a 10-item self-rated generic multilingual quality of life (QOL) measure in ethnically-diverse diabetic patients. Diabetic adult patients (n = 180) in New York City completed the MQLI, English or Spanish version. Its internal consistency, factorial structure, and construct validity were analyzed. Depression screening (PHQ-9) scores were used to divide subjects into two sub-samples with presumed different QOL levels. A Cronbach's alpha of 0.92 demonstrated its internal consistency (English-version = 0.90, Spanish-version = 0.94). A one-single factor structure was documented (all items loadings > or = 0.64), accounting for 59% of the items variance in the total sample; similar results were found for each language version. Correlation of the MQLI and PHQ-9 scores yielded an r = -0.58. Mild negative correlations with self-disclosed diagnosis of depression or other mental disorders, diabetes duration, and abnormal sensation on foot exam were found, but were non-significant with other diabetes aspects (e.g., HbA1c, retinopathy). A significant difference (p < 0.001) between the scores of two subsamples with presumed different levels of QOL (means = 8.02 vs. 5.84) was found. Conclusions: The MQLI demonstrated coherence around the QOL concept. It correlated significantly with mental health (particularly depression), duration of diabetes, and possible neuropathy, but not with some diabetes-related factors. Its use in diabetic care settings is recommended, possibly supplemented by QOL diabetic-specific instruments.

19543817
Measuring cultural identity: validation of a modified Cortes, Rogler and Malgady Bicultural Scale in three ethnic groups in New York.
Cultural identity is central to health. Acculturation may be formulated with a bicultural model, assessing in parallel the degree of identification with both the original and the host culture. The Cortes, Rogler and Malgady Bicultural Scale (CRM-BS) is composed of two subscales: "original" culture and "mainstream-United States" (US) culture. It was modified into three ethnic versions: Latino, Korean and Chinese. Validation of the CRM-BS was conducted using health professionals and psychiatric patients from the above three ethnic groups and a control sample of mainstream-US (main-US) health professionals in New York City (n = 394). Mean time of completion was 3.7 min and 73% judged it to be easy to use. Strong test-retest reliability correlation coefficients were found (original culture, 0.78; mainstream-US, 0.82). The internal consistency was documented by high Cronbach's alpha values (original culture, 0.88; mainstream-US, 0.80). Factorial analysis revealed two factors, the first one involving all the items of the original culture and the second all of the mainstream-US items. Concerning its discriminant validity, non-main-US subjects scored significantly higher than main-US subjects on the original culture subscale, and vice versa. Construct validity was assessed comparing intergenerational mean scores on both subscales; as generations become older, mean scores for the original culture decreased, while those for the "host" culture increased. Results for each specific ethnic version are also presented. Cutoff scores were calculated to categorize the involvement with the original culture or the host culture, both of them, or neither.

18274883
Development and validation of the Chinese version of the Multicultural Quality of Life Index (MQLI-Ch).
This study documents the validation study of the Multicultural Quality of Life Index, Chinese version (MQLI-Ch). This self-rated instrument is composed of ten items that correspond to multiple dimensions of the concept of quality of life. Each item is rated on a scale from 1 to 10, according to the subject's culture-informed understanding of the concept. The MQLI-Ch was tested on 144 Chinese subjects (124 psychiatric patients and 20 professionals). It was found to be quite efficient (about 3 min to be completed) and easy to use. A Cronbach's alpha of 0.94 demonstrated its internal consistency. The factor analysis of the ten items yielded one single factor, which accounted for 65.19% of the variance. The test-retest reliability correlation coefficient was 0.80. Its discriminant validity was documented by a highly significant difference (P < 0.001) between the mean scores of the two samples with presumed differences in quality of life. Thus, the MQLI-Ch showed high feasibility, internal structure, reliability and discriminant validity.

