20844048
Species-specific regions of occludin required by hepatitis C virus for cell entry.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a leading cause of liver disease worldwide. As HCV infects only human and chimpanzee cells, antiviral therapy and vaccine development have been hampered by the lack of a convenient small-animal model. In this study we further investigate how the species tropism of HCV is modulated at the level of cell entry. It has been previously determined that the tight junction protein occludin (OCLN) is essential for HCV host cell entry and that human OCLN is more efficient than the mouse ortholog at mediating HCV cell entry. To further investigate the relationship between OCLN sequence and HCV species tropism, we compared OCLN proteins from a range of species for their ability to mediate infection of naturally OCLN-deficient 786-O cells with lentiviral pseudoparticles bearing the HCV glycoproteins. While primate sequences function equivalently to human OCLN, canine, hamster, and rat OCLN had intermediate activities, and guinea pig OCLN was completely nonfunctional. Through analysis of chimeras between these OCLN proteins and alanine scanning mutagenesis of the extracellular domains of OCLN, we identified the second half of the second extracellular loop (EC2) and specific amino acids within this domain to be critical for modulating the HCV cell entry factor activity of this protein. Furthermore, this critical region of EC2 is flanked by two conserved cysteine residues that are essential for HCV cell entry, suggesting that a subdomain of EC2 may be defined by a disulfide bond.

19129450
Internal initiation stimulates production of p8 minicore, a member of a newly discovered family of hepatitis C virus core protein isoforms.
The hepatitis C virus (HCV) core gene is more conserved at the nucleic acid level than is necessary to preserve the sequence of the core protein, suggesting that it contains information for additional functions. We used a battery of anticore antibodies to test the hypothesis that the core gene directs the synthesis of core protein isoforms. Infectious viruses, replicons, and RNA transcripts expressed a p8 minicore containing the C-terminal portion of the p21 core protein and lacking the N-terminal portion. An interferon resistance mutation, U271A, which creates an AUG at codon 91, upregulated p8 expression in Con1 replicons, suggesting that p8 is produced by an internal initiation event and that 91-AUG is the preferred, but not the required, initiation codon. Synthesis of p8 was independent of p21, as shown by the abundant production of p8 from transcripts containing an UAG stop codon that blocked p21 production. Three infectious viruses, JFH-1 (2a core), J6/JFH (2a core), and H77/JFH (1a core), and a bicistronic construct, Bi-H77/JFH, all expressed both p8 and larger isoforms. The family of minicores ranges in size from 8 to 14 kDa. All lack the N-terminal portion of the p21 core. In conclusion, the core gene contains an internal signal that stimulates the initiation of protein synthesis at or near codon 91, leading to the production of p8. Infectious viruses of both genotype 1 and 2 HCV express a family of larger isoforms, in addition to p8. Minicores lack significant portions of the RNA binding domain of p21 core. Studies are under way to determine their functions.

