20301212
Papanicolaou stain may not be necessary in majority of head and neck fine-needle aspirations: evidence from a correlation study between Diff-Quik-based onsite diagnosis and final diagnosis in 287 head and neck fine-needle aspirations.
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) is a useful tool for immediate assessment of palpable lesions, especially in the head and neck region. The objective of this study is to evaluate the degree of correlation between Diff-Quik-based onsite diagnosis (OD) and final diagnosis (FD) and further improve the efficiency of FNA practice. Two hundred and eighty-seven cytopathologist-performed FNAs from the head and neck region were evaluated. Number of passes, number and type of slides and correlation (agreement, modified final diagnosis and disagreement) between OD and FD were evaluated. Among 287 FNAs, the average number of passes per FNA case was 2 (range, 1-5&.rpar;). The mean number of slides reviewed per case was 5 including 2 Diff-Quik (D-Q)-stained slides, 2 Papanicolaou (Pap)-stained slides, and 1 cell block (CB)/1 cytospin (Cy). 247 of 287 (86%) cases showed agreement between OD and FD. FD on 36 out of 287 cases (12.5%) was slightly modified or refined after reviewing additional slides. A major diagnostic discrepancy was noted in four cases (1.5%), three of which were classified as squamous cell carcinoma on final diagnosis, and confirmed on surgical follow-up. Accurate diagnosis can be achieved in the majority (86%) of head and neck FNAs based on immediate examination of D-Q stained slides alone. In a small number of cases (12.5%), reviewing additional slides may refine the final diagnosis. In rare cases, especially cystic squamous lesions, Pap-stained slides appeared to be helpful. It is plausible to use D-Q-stained slides alone with most head and neck FNAs in order to provide more cost effective and efficient triaging and patient management.

20098297
p63 Immunohistochemistry is a useful adjunct in distinguishing sclerosing cutaneous tumors.
Cutaneous sclerosing epithelial neoplasms are often difficult to diagnose. Though various immunohistochemical markers have proved useful, some cases remain a diagnostic challenge. We aimed to assess the utility of p63 immunohistochemical staining in distinguishing microcystic adnexal carcinoma (MAC) from sclerosing basal cell carcinoma (SBCC) and desmoplastic trichoepithelioma (DTE). Biopsy samples from 20 SBCC, 10 DTE, and 5 MAC were examined after immunohistochemical staining with p63. Although all adnexal tumors examined demonstrated p63 expression, the pattern of staining was strikingly different in MAC when compared with other tumor types. MAC exhibited a scattered pattern with p63-positive cells around the periphery of tumor nests and minimal staining within the center of the tumor islands. This pattern was more pronounced at increased depth of infiltration into the dermis. A robust and consistent diffuse pattern of staining with p63 was observed in all SBCCs and DTEs. We believe this pattern reflects the multi-differentiation pathway of MAC, with eccrine/sebaceous differentiation occurring at deeper levels of the dermis. The different staining patterns of MACs compared with DTEs and SBCCs can thus serve asa useful diagnostic adjunct in difficult lesions.

19877114
Prognostic value of quantitative p63 immunostaining in adenoid cystic carcinoma of salivary gland assessed by computerized image analysis.
In a long-term retrospective immunohistochemical study of adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of salivary gland, we investigated the relation of p63 immunodetection to prognosis. Although it is generally agreed that the solid pattern is the most aggressive pattern of growth, ACCs with predominantly cribriform or tubular patterns have an unpredictable clinical course, with a relatively favorable 5-year survival but a low 20-year survival. Formalin-fixed paraffin sections from 35 cases of ACC showing a predominantly better differentiated histopathology, ie, cribriform or tubular patterns of growth, were immunostained for p63. Automated image analysis was used to quantify p63 positivity, using a modification of a previously developed algorithm. Patients alive for more than 10 years had a lower extent of p63 expression than those who died of disease. Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed that separation of patients with morbidity and mortality from those alive with no evidence of disease, could be achieved at a cutoff of 35% p63 positivity (P = .0031, log-rank test). Multivariate analysis using the Cox proportional hazard model revealed p63 and tumor stage to be independent predictors of survival (P = .012 and P = .0003, respectively). To our knowledge, the present study is the first to report prognostic significance of p63 in salivary gland ACC and the first report of a robust and well-studied immunohistochemical stain performable on routinely fixed and processed tissue with prognostic utility.

19369629
Immunohistochemical detection of p63 and XIAP in thymic hyperplasia and thymomas.
We subjected 23 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue blocks (11 cases of thymic hyperplasia and 12 thymomas [3 encapsulated, 8 with capsular invasion, and 1 atypical]) to incubation with monoclonal anti-X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and monoclonal anti-p63 (4A4, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA). Granular or heterogeneous cytoplasmic XIAP staining and nuclear p63 staining were considered positive. We compared thymic hyperplasia with thymoma and capsulated thymoma with thymoma with capsular invasion or atypia. p63 was positive in virtually all thymic epithelial cells in hyperplasia and thymoma. XIAP was negative in all hyperplasia cases except one. Of 12 thymomas, 9 were XIAP+ with focal/weak to diffuse/strong positivity: 2 of 3 encapsulated and 7 of 8 thymomas with capsular invasion were XIAP+. One atypical thymoma was XIAP-. XIAP expression differed significantly between hyperplasia and thymoma (P = .0007) but not between capsulated and invasive thymomas (P = .3797). p63 is consistently positive in nonneoplastic and neoplastic thymic epithelium. XIAP expression in thymoma suggests a possible role in the pathogenesis of thymoma and may be helpful in differentiating thymic hyperplasia from thymoma, especially in small biopsy specimens. However, the level of expression does not correlate with capsular invasion or atypia.

18432259
Immunohistochemical detection of XIAP and p63 in adenomatous hyperplasia, atypical adenomatous hyperplasia, bronchioloalveolar carcinoma and well-differentiated adenocarcinoma.
The critical distinction of bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC), well-differentiated adenocarcinoma (WDAC) of lung, adenomatous hyperplasia (AH) and atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH), is based on morphological criteria alone, and is therefore potentially subjective. We examined expression of two markers, X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), the most potent of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) family, and p63, a marker of bronchial reserve cells (BRC) and squamous cells, in these entities. H&E slides of 37 tissue blocks from 27 patients were reviewed and classified as AH (n=7), AAH (n=8), BAC (n=9) and WDAC (n=13). Immunostaining was performed on 4 mum sections with monoclonal anti-XIAP and monoclonal anti-p63. Granular or heterogeneous cytoplasmic staining for XIAP and nuclear staining for p63 were considered positive. Neither XIAP nor p63 were detected in normal lung alveolar cells. All seven AHs were negative for XIAP and negative or focally positive for p63. All eight AAHs were positive for XIAP and displayed p63 positivity in scattered cells. All BACs displayed XIAP positivity, which ranged from focal/weak to diffuse/strong. p63 was negative in seven and focally positive in two of nine BACs. Twelve of 13 WDACs showed XIAP positivity in a similar pattern to BAC; all were negative for p63. One aberrant case diagnosed on H & E as WDAC was negative for XIAP but strongly positive for p63. Significant XIAP expression appears to be useful for distinguishing AAH from AH. Commonality of XIAP staining in AAH, BAC and WDAC supports the possibility that AAH may be a pre-malignant lesion. The rarity of p63 expression confirms previous reports and supports a nonbronchial histogenesis of these entities. In contrast, diffuse p63 staining may facilitate the identification of rare cases that may have been misclassified as alveolar in origin based on morphology but may be of BRC origin.

18325467
Immunohistochemical detection of the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) in cervical squamous intraepithelial neoplasia and squamous carcinoma.
Premalignant and invasive squamous lesions of the uterine cervix were surveyed for the immunohistochemical detectability of the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), believed to be the most potent of a novel group of proteins designated inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs). IAPs bind and prevent the activation of apoptosis-mediating caspases. Recent cancer biologic studies have implicated IAPs in therapeutic resistance and tumor aggressiveness. XIAP in particular is considered a highly promising target for drug discovery. Forty-four formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded archival tissue sections were deparaffinized; subjected to citrate-based antigen retrieval; and immunostained with anti-XIAP monoclonal antibody (clone 48, BD Biosciences, San Jose, Calif) diluted 1:250, 4 degrees C x 72 hours; and developed using EnVision-Plus (Dako, Carpinteria, Calif) and diaminobenzidine as chromagen. Particulate or heterogeneous cytoplasmic staining was considered positive. Normal squamous epithelium was XIAP-positive in 7 of 34 cases (20.6%). Preinvasive intraepithelial lesions were positively stained in 54.5% of cases. Nineteen of 22 invasive squamous carcinomas were positive (86.4%). The intensity and extensiveness of XIAP immunostaining varied among individual cases, but trended upward with loss of tumor differentiation: 8 of 9 cases with strong staining were poorly differentiated carcinomas. The present study suggests the characteristic link between poor tumor differentiation and more aggressive clinical behavior could in some malignancies be based upon the concomitant induction of XIAP. Induction of XIAP appears to occur in a subset of intraepithelial lesions; in others, XIAP is detected only upon progression to invasive carcinoma. Detection of enhanced XIAP expression may also pinpoint those lesions that might benefit from pharmacologic disruption of XIAP's actions.

18251743
Immunohistochemical detection of XIAP in melanoma.
The X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) is the most potent of the inhibitor of apoptosis family of eight proteins. High levels of XIAP have been found in melanoma cell lines and are believed to play a role in therapeutic resistance in a number of malignancies. XIAP expression has not been investigated in clinically obtained melanoma tissue samples, nor have studies attempted to correlate XIAP expression with prognostic variables or clinical aggressiveness of melanomas. Sixty-seven patients with primary cutaneous malignant melanoma for whom clinical follow up was available were identified from the records of the Mount Sinai Hospital, comprising 37 thin melanomas (Breslow thickness < 1.0 mm) and 30 thick melanomas (Breslow thickness > 1.0 mm). Archival paraffin sections from primary lesions and corresponding metastases were stained with monoclonal anti-XIAP antibody using routine immunohistochemical methods. Six benign intradermal nevi and four in situ melanomas were XIAP negative. 9 of 37 thin melanomas (24%) were XIAP positive. In contrast, 21 of 30 (73%) thick melanomas were XIAP positive, including 3 of 4 ulcerated melanomas that were strongly positive. Over a follow-up period ranging from 6 months to 6 years, 23 melanomas metastasized (22 thick, 1 thin). In total, XIAP was immunohistochemically detected in 17 of 23 metastases (74%). Metastasis occurred in 1 of 9 XIAP-positive thin melanomas; 0 of 28 XIAP-negative thin melanomas; 17 of 22 XIAP-positive thick melanomas, and 5 of 8 XIAP-negative thick melanomas (63%). XIAP is immunohistochemically detectable nearly three times more frequently in thick compared with thin melanomas. These results suggest that XIAP elevation may be correlated with increasing melanoma thickness and tumor progression.

18022123
Immunohistochemical detection of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
The X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) is the most potent member of the IAP group of structurally related caspase inhibitors. Experimental and clinical evidence implicates XIAP in resistance to cancer therapy and in clinical aggressiveness of certain tumors. We examined the expression of XIAP in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Four-micrometer sections from 59 routinely processed specimens of head and neck SCC were subjected to citrate-based antigen retrieval, followed by incubation with monoclonal anti-XIAP antibody (BD Biosciences, San Jose, Calif) and EnVision Plus reagents (Dako, Carpinteria, Calif). Granular cytoplasmic staining was considered positive; the extent and intensity of staining were recorded. Normal squamous epithelium was either nonstaining (n=22), displayed generally weak basal staining (n=9), or moderate basal staining (n=1). Squamous dysplasia or carcinoma in situ was either nonstaining (10 of 18 cases) or displayed generally weak staining (8 of 18 cases). Varying degrees of XIAP positivity were found in 41 (69.5%) of 59 carcinomas. Most of the nonstaining and weakly staining carcinomas were well or moderately differentiated. In contrast, intense and extensive staining was most frequently found in poorly differentiated carcinomas. In keratinized tumor nests, staining was strongest peripherally and became diminished in central keratinized zones. New parameters of tumor aggressiveness are needed for more effective triaging of patients to appropriately aggressive therapies. The present findings suggest that the potent apoptotic inhibitor XIAP may be such a biomarker in head and neck SCCs, of resistance to apoptosis-inducing therapies, and, possibly, of responsiveness to a new class of XIAP-suppressive drugs presently in clinical trials for other malignancies or in preclinical development.

17951200
Immunohistochemical detection of XIAP in mesothelium and mesothelial lesions.
We examined benign and malignant mesothelial tissue samples for the presence of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), a potent constituent of the inhibitor of apoptosis family of caspase inhibitors. We subjected 55 sections (31 malignant mesotheliomas, 2 well-differentiated peritoneal mesotheliomas, 13 pleural mesothelial hyperplasias, and 9 benign mesothelial tissues) from archival formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded surgical tissue blocks to citrate-based antigen retrieval and then incubated them with monoclonal anti-XIAP (clone 48, dilution 1:250; BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) at 4 degrees C for 72 hours and developed them using EnVision-Plus reagents (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA) and diaminobenzidine as the chromogen. Particulate or nonhomogeneous cytoplasmic staining was considered positive. All 9 normal mesothelial samples were negative for XIAP. Of 13 mesothelial hyperplasias, 1 (8%) was weakly positive in fewer than 10% of cells, as was 1 of 2 well-differentiated peritoneal mesotheliomas. Of 31 malignant mesotheliomas, 25 (81%) displayed XIAP positivity. XIAP immunostaining, when strong, allows for distinction of malignant from benign and hyperplastic mesothelial cell populations and is a potentially useful immunodiagnostic marker in small samples and morphologically controversial cases. Elevated expression of XIAP could contribute to tumorigenesis in mesothelioma.

17630106
Immunohistochemical detection of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) in neoplastic and other thyroid disorders.
The X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) is the most potent of the inhibitors of apoptosis, a group of related caspase inhibitors. X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis expression correlates with radio- and chemoresistance and clinical aggressiveness in certain tumors. XIAP expression was examined in 106 specimens from neoplastic and other thyroid disorders, which underwent citrate-based antigen retrieval and staining with monoclonal anti-XIAP. Normal thyroid was XIAP-negative. Of 35 papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTCs), 29 (83%) stained variably in intensity and/or extent. An insular carcinoma was strongly positive and 1 of 4 anaplastic carcinomas moderately positive. Follicular, medullary, and 3 of 4 anaplastic carcinomas, oncocytic neoplasms, and a hyalinizing trabecular tumor were nonstaining. Hashimoto's thyroiditis and adenomatous goiters were either nonstaining or occasionally stained in oncocytic foci. Because XIAP was highly specific for PTC among the thyroid neoplasms, it may be a useful marker for differential diagnosis when used alone or in combination with other markers. XIAP may also be useful in differentiating insular carcinoma from follicular neoplasm in certain difficult cases. In addition, the selective expression of XIAP in PTC and some high-grade thyroid malignancies also provides clues to the role of the apoptotic pathway in the tumorigenesis of these neoplasms.

17350670
Immunohistochemical detection of antiapoptotic protein X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis in mammary carcinoma.
An immunohistochemical survey of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) expression in mammary carcinoma was performed. XIAP, the most potent of the inhibitor of apoptosis family of caspase inhibitors, has been linked to tumor aggressiveness and therapeutic resistance in several malignancies and is considered an attractive target for cancer drug discovery. Routinely processed sections from 94 ductal carcinomas, 9 lobular carcinomas, and 10 ductal carcinomas with lobular components or features were subjected to citrate-based antigen retrieval, immunostained with anti-XIAP (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ), Envision+ reagents (Dako, Carpinteria, CA), and diaminobenzidine. Positive staining was found in 22.7% of grade 1, 44% of grade 2, and 89.5% of grade 3 ductal carcinomas. Strong staining occurred in no cases of grade 1, 13% of grade 2, and 55.2% of grade 3 ductal carcinomas. XIAP staining increased overall with grade of ductal carcinoma in situ as well. The staining intensity of invasive carcinoma correlated with that of the corresponding ductal carcinoma in situ in 70% of cases. Ductal carcinomas overall showed more staining than lobular carcinomas. XIAP is most strongly and commonly detected in grade 3 ductal carcinoma. The degree of XIAP expression appears frequently to be determined in the preinvasive intraductal phase of tumorigenesis. These findings suggest a possible role of XIAP in the more aggressive clinical behavior of grade 3, compared with lower-grade ductal carcinomas.

18831009
Feasibility of immunocytochemical detection of tumor markers (XIAP, phosphohistone H1 and p63) in FNA cellblock samples from head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
One of the major handicaps in contemporary clinical oncology is the inability to predict the responsiveness of any individual's malignancy to specific therapies. The purpose of this study was to test the feasibility of immunocytochemically detecting markers that may be affected by therapy or are predictive of therapeutic responsiveness, including phosphohistone H1 (anti-p-H1 MoAb 12D11) and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) in small samples obtained via fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy procedure, thus improving therapeutic monitoring. p63, a squamous stem cell regulatory protein, was also examined. These three markers were studied in FNA cell block samples of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Twenty-eight alcohol-fixed formalin-postfixed paraffin-embedded cell-block samples from FNAs of patients with HNSCC were subjected to antigen retrieval and then incubated with anti-XIAP, anti-p-H1, and anti-p63, and developed using EnVision-Plus reagents and diaminobenzidine as chromagen; Granular or heterogeneous cytoplasmic staining for XIAP and nuclear staining for p63 and p-H1 were considered positive. Among the 28 cases studied, the overall positive rates for XIAP, p-H1, and p63 were 60.7%, 96.4%, and 92.8%, respectively. The staining intensity for XIAP: + 70.6%, ++ 23.5%, +++ 0%, and ++++ 5.9%; for p-H1: + 48.1%, ++ 11.1%, +++37.0%, and ++++ 3.7%; and for p63: + 11.5%, ++ 23.1%, +++ 53.9%, and ++++ 11.5%. The expression of p-H1 and p63 appeared to be higher and stronger than that of XIAP in HNSCC. This study demonstrated the feasibility of monitoring expression of three tumor markers using FNA samples. p-H1 and XIAP may be useful for monitoring actions of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, XIAP-lowering, and/or apoptosis-inducing drugs, respectively. Future studies will focus on the impact of therapies upon these staining profiles.

