20825264
The pharmacological treatment of bipolar disorder: the question of modern advances.
Lithium has been the mainstay of treatment for patients with bipolar disorder in the United States since 1970. Major treatment guidelines recommend lithium as a first-line treatment for mania and maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder, yet lithium has fallen out of favor while other agents have grown in popularity. The purpose of this review is to examine the evidence for treatments that were available in 1970 and to determine if the field has made any significant advance in the treatment of mania, bipolar depression, and maintenance. We conducted a MEDLINE search through 2009, and examined only English-language, randomized/controlled, placebo, or comparison studies. Tolerability as a factor was not considered for this review. Lithium, valproate, benzodiazepines, and antipsychotics have been reported effective for mania-which was essentially the state of the field in 1970. Despite an FDA indication for the use of lamotrigine for depression and depression maintenance, the supporting evidence is conflicting. For bipolar maintenance, the evidence is overwhelming in support of lithium and very thin for valproate and carbamazepine. There is emerging evidence that several atypical antipsychotics may have efficacy in prevention. The gold standard for treating bipolar disorder in 1970 was lithium, and the gold standard in 2009 remains lithium. Newer agents may increase our armamentarium to some extent, but it is not clear if they represent a major advance in treatment. They still need to be tested against the gold standard.

20368476
Heart rate and blood pressure changes during autonomic nervous system challenge in panic disorder patients.
To test the hypothesis that panic disorder (PD) patients have a heightened or deregulated autonomic nervous system at rest and during autonomic challenge compared with healthy controls (HC); and to test a second hypothesis that severity of illness differentiates patients'; sympathovagal balance both at rest and during orthostatic challenge. Spectral analysis of heart rate (HR) and blood pressure was performed on 30 PD and 10 HC participants during an orthostatic challenge (head-up tilt). PD patients presented higher HR (p < .001), lower heart rate variability (HRV) (p < .015), higher mean diastolic blood pressure (p < .006), higher low-frequency component of HR (p < .001), and a higher ratio of low-frequency to high-frequency component of HR (LF/HF) (p < .022) than HC at baseline. During tilt, PD patients responded with higher HR (p < .039), lower HRV (p < .043), increased mean diastolic blood pressure (p < .028), and a mild increase in LF/HF, whereas controls responded with a five-fold increase in LF/HF (p < .022). Patients with higher illness severity ratings (Clinical Global Impression Scale) showed higher HR (p < .002), lower HRV (p < .026), and a lower total power of systolic blood pressure (p < .02) compared with less ill patients. These findings demonstrate a consistently higher or deregulated autonomic arousal in PD patients at rest and during orthostatic challenge compared with HC. These data also reveal a possible association between the level of anxiety illness severity and sympathovagal balance, which may imply greater cardiac risk.

18840371
Short-term tolerability of a nonazapirone selective serotonin 1A agonist in adults with generalized anxiety disorder: a 28-day, open-label study.
The serotonin 1A (5-hydroxytryptamine 1A [5-HT1A]) receptor likely plays a critical role in anxiety pathophysiology. In this proof-of-concept investigation, we tested the short-term tolerability of PRX-00023, a nonazapirone 5-HT1A selective partial agonist, in outpatients with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). Patients with a diagnosis of GAD, as defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, and Hamilton Anxiety (HAM-A) Rating Scale scores > or =20 were recruited. A 1-week, single-blind placebo run-in was followed by a 28-day,open-label treatment with PRX-00023 QD in a forced-titration protocol: 40 mg (days 1-4), 80 mg (days 5-14), and 120 mg (days 15-28). The primary outcome measures were tolerability and rate of completion of the study. Tolerability was recorded using a table of adverse events (AEs), and measured using laboratory tests, vital signs, and electrocardiogram (ECG) readings. Secondary outcomes included the baseline-to-end point change in HAM-A total score, percentage meeting remission (HAM-A< or =7), and response criteria (> or =50% reduction in HAM-A total score). Twenty-three patients (56.5% female, 65.2% white; mean age, 37.4 years) were enrolled in the study. A total of 21 patients (91.3%) received study medication and 18 (78.3%) completed the study. Two patients withdrew for personal reasons, 1 was discontinued for noncompliance, and 1 was lost to follow-up. One patient was discontinued from the study due to a history of premature ventricular contractions deemed unrelated to the study drug. AEs were reported in 15 patients, with the most common being back pain (3 patients), influenza-like symptoms (without fever) (2), diarrhea (2), dyspepsia (2), and nausea (2). No serious AEs, withdrawal symptoms, ataxia/ dizziness, or sexual dysfunction were reported; there were no clinically significant laboratory, vital sign, or ECG abnormalities. Mean HAM-A total scores were significantly lower at study end point compared with enrollment (13.9 vs 22.9; P < 0.001), with 32% of patients achieving remission and 52% meeting response criteria. In this preliminary, short-term study, PRX-00023 appeared to be generally well tolerated in this sample of patients with GAD.

18839407
Effect of medication and psychotherapy on heart rate variability in panic disorder.
Panic disorder (PD) patients have been shown to have reduced heart rate variability (HRV). Low HRV has been associated with elevated risk for cardiovascular disease. Our aim was to investigate the effects of treatment on heart rate (HR) in patients with PD through a hyperventilation challenge. We studied 54 participants, 43 with Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) PD and 11 controls. Subjects lay supine with their heads in a plastic canopy chamber, resting for 15 min and then breathing at a rate of 30 breaths per minute for 10 min. HRV was sampled for spectral analysis. Clinical and behavioral measures of anxiety were assessed. Treatment was chosen by patients: either 12 weeks of CBT alone or CBT with sertraline. All patients showed significant decrease on clinical measures from baseline and 31 were treatment responders, 8 dropped out of the study before completion of the 12-week treatment phase and 4 were deemed nonresponders after 12 weeks of treatment. Although both treatments led to significant clinical improvement, only CBT alone demonstrated a significant reduction in HR and increase in HRV. Our study replicated the finding that increased HR and decreased HRV occur in PD patients. Given the evidence of cardiac risk related to HRV, CBT appears to have additional benefits beyond symptom reduction. The mechanisms of this difference between CBT and sertraline are unclear and require further study.

18703936
A randomized, double-blind, and placebo-controlled trial of quetiapine augmentation of fluoxetine in major depressive disorder.
The objective of this study was to investigate whether quetiapine, when compared with placebo, can speed the onset of action and improve the quality of response to fluoxetine treatment in patients suffering from major depressive disorder. A total of 114 patients with major depressive disorder were enrolled in an 8-week treatment study. Patients were initiated on a course of fluoxetine treatment and randomized to quetiapine or placebo. Quetiapine was flexibly dosed starting at 25 mg to a maximum of 100 mg daily. Mixed-effects regression showed that quetiapine plus fluoxetine did not achieve 50% reduction in the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale score or improvement in Hamilton Anxiety Scale, Clinical Global Improvement (CGI)-Severity, and CGI-Improvement scores sooner than the fluoxetine plus placebo group; however both groups improved in all scores over time. Mixed-effects linear regression of insomnia scores showed that the quetiapine plus fluoxetine group improved significantly more rapidly compared with the fluoxetine plus placebo group. The study indicates that quetiapine plus fluoxetine did not achieve a reduction in the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale score or improvement in Hamilton Anxiety Scale or CGI scores from baseline sooner than the fluoxetine plus placebo group. The combination of quetiapine and fluoxetine, however, improved sleep over fluoxetine alone over the first few weeks of treatment.

17560768
The effect of doxapram on brain imaging in patients with panic disorder.
Administration of doxapram hydrochloride, a respiratory stimulant, is experienced by panic disorder patients to be similar to panic attacks but has reduced emotional effect in normal volunteers, thus providing a laboratory model of panic for functional imaging. Six panic patients and seven normal control subjects underwent positron emission tomography with (18)F-deoxyglucose imaging after a single-blinded administration of either doxapram or a placebo saline solution. Saline and doxapram were administered on separate days in counterbalanced order. Patients showed a greater heart rate increase on doxapram relative to saline than controls, indicating differential response. On the saline placebo day, patients had greater prefrontal relative activity than controls. In response to doxapram, patients tended to decrease prefrontal activity more than controls, and increased cingulate gyrus and amygdala activity more than controls. This suggests that panic disorder patients activate frontal inhibitory centers less than controls, a tendency that may lower the threshold for panic.

