21461387
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck is an epidemic that reaches all parts of the world. Making the diagnosis relies on the acumen of the clinician and pathologist. Various pathologic subtypes exist and differ in histology and prognosis. High-risk tumors need aggressive treatment and vigilant surveillance to monitor for recurrence. Large tumors, deep tissue invasion, perineural involvement, recurrence, location in high-risk areas, and immunosuppression are implicated in worsening prognosis. Surgery is the mainstay of treatment with adjuvant radiation therapy as needed for aggressive tumors; however, other modalities are potentially useful for low-risk lesions. The use of Mohs surgery has become increasingly useful and has shown high success rates. Involvement of parotid and neck lymph nodes significantly affects outcomes and the physician should be comfortable with management of this complex disease. This paper examines the diagnosis, pathology, clinical course, and treatment options for cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.

19526573
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of granular cell tumor of the tongue: a technique for the aspiration of oral lesions.
Granular cell tumor is most commonly located in the tongue. Despite this common location, there are few reports of fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of the tongue, likely because this is a sensitive area for most patients, and many cytopathologists do not have experience aspirating oral lesions. We report a case of FNAB of a granular cell tumor of the tongue in a 29-year-old man with an unusual presenting history and without symptoms. The diagnosis was made based on the cytomorphology of the direct smears and immunohistochemistry on cell block material. We will also describe cytologic features of the neoplasm, differential diagnosis, and our technique for obtaining the material, as we feel this can be repeated by experienced cytopathologists.

21454406
A Rare Case of Reidel Thyroiditis with Associated Vocal Cord Paralysis: CT and MR Imaging Features.
SUMMARY: Reidel thyroiditis is extremely rare and not only involves the thyroid gland but usually extends to neighboring structures in the neck. A rare complication of this disease is entrapment of the recurrent laryngeal nerve causing a vocal cord paralysis. In fact, to our knowledge, this is likely the only benign thyroid disease to cause such a paralysis. We present a case of a 57-year-old woman with Reidel thyroiditis and a recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis. The CT and MR imaging features are presented as well as a brief review of this disease.

