20179201
Vascular endothelial growth factor-C induces lymphangitic carcinomatosis, an extremely aggressive form of lung metastases.
The lymphatic system is an important pathway for tumor dissemination to the lymph nodes, but to which extent it contributes to the formation of distant metastases remains unknown. We report that induction of lymphangiogenesis by vascular endothelial growth factor-C (VEGF-C) at the secondary site, in the lung, facilitates expansion of already disseminated cancer cells throughout the lung tissue. By using orthotopic spontaneous metastasis models in nude mice, we show that VEGF-C expression by tumor cells altered the pattern of pulmonary metastases from nodular to diffuse and facilitated disease progression. Metastases expressing VEGF-C were tightly associated with the airways, in contrast to the control cells that were scattered in the lung parenchyma, throughout the alveolar region. VEGF-C induced lung lymphangiogenesis and promoted intralymphatic spread of metastases in the lung and formation of tumor emboli in the pulmonary arteries. This pattern of metastasis corresponds to lymphangitic carcinomatosis metastatic phenotype in human cancer patients, an extremely aggressive pattern of pulmonary metastases. In accordance, pulmonary breast cancer metastases from patients which were classified as lymphangitic carcinomatosis showed high levels of VEGF-C expression in cancer cells. These data show that VEGF-C promotes late steps of the metastatic process and identify the VEGF-C/VEGF receptor-3 pathway as the target not only for prevention of metastases, but also for treatment of established metastatic disease.

19587009
Inflamed lymphatic endothelium suppresses dendritic cell maturation and function via Mac-1/ICAM-1-dependent mechanism.
The lymphatic system is essential for the generation of immune responses by facilitating immune cell trafficking to lymph nodes. Dendritic cells (DCs), the most potent APCs, exit tissues via lymphatic vessels, but the mechanisms of interaction between DCs and the lymphatic endothelium and the potential implications of these interactions for immune responses are poorly understood. In this study, we demonstrate that lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) modulate the maturation and function of DCs. Direct contact of human monocyte-derived DCs with an inflamed, TNF-alpha-stimulated lymphatic endothelium reduced expression of the costimulatory molecule CD86 by DCs and suppressed the ability of DCs to induce T cell proliferation. These effects were dependent on adhesive interactions between DCs and LECs that were mediated by the binding of Mac-1 on DCs to ICAM-1 on LECs. Importantly, the suppressive effects of the lymphatic endothelium on DCs were observed only in the absence of pathogen-derived signals. In vivo, DCs that migrated to the draining lymph nodes upon inflammatory stimuli, but in the absence of a pathogen, showed increased levels of CD86 expression in ICAM-1-deficient mice. Together, these data demonstrate a direct role of LECs in the modulation of immune response and suggest a function of the lymphatic endothelium in preventing undesired immune reactions in inflammatory conditions.

