21481334
Reply to: Dose- and Exposure-Response to Ketamine in Depression.


21377656
Tryptophan depletion and emotional processing in healthy volunteers at high risk for depression.
Studies in depressed patients have demonstrated the presence of emotional bias toward negative stimuli, as well as dysregulated brain serotonin function. The present study compared the effects of acute tryptophan depletion (ATD) on both an emotional processing and a planning task in never-depressed healthy volunteers at high and low familial risk for depression. Young adults with no personal psychiatric history were stratified into two groups based on family history (n = 25). Participants were enrolled in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover ATD study and completed the affective go/no-go and Tower of London tasks once during each condition. There was a significant treatment by valence by group interaction on the affective go/no-go, driven primarily by a greater frequency of inappropriate responses to sad than to happy distracters in the high-risk group during ATD. No group differences were observed on the Tower of London. Asymptomatic individuals at high familial risk for depression showed abnormalities in emotional processing while undergoing experimentally induced tryptophan depletion. These findings support emotional processing disturbances as potential trait-level abnormalities associated with the risk of mood disorder.

21353836
The serotonin transporter and emotionality: risk, resilience, and new therapeutic opportunities.


21194898
A selective neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist in chronic PTSD: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, proof-of-concept trial.
The substance P-neurokinin-1 receptor (SP-NK(1)R) system has been extensively studied in experimental models of stress, fear, and reward. Elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) SP levels were reported previously in combat-related PTSD. No medication specifically targeting this system has been tested in PTSD. This proof-of-concept randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial evaluated the selective NK(1)R antagonist GR205171 in predominately civilian PTSD. Following a 2-week placebo lead-in, 39 outpatients with chronic PTSD and a Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS) score ?50 were randomized to a fixed dose of GR205171 (N=20) or placebo (N=19) for 8weeks. The primary endpoint was mean change from baseline to endpoint in the total CAPS score. Response rate (?50% reduction in baseline CAPS) and safety/tolerability were secondary endpoints. CSF SP concentrations were measured in a subgroup of patients prior to randomization. There was significant improvement in the mean CAPS total score across all patients over time, but no significant difference was found between GR205171 and placebo. Likewise, there was no significant effect of drug on the proportion of responders [40% GR205171 versus 21% placebo (p=0.30)]. An exploratory analysis showed that GR205171 treatment was associated with significant improvement compared to placebo on the CAPS hyperarousal symptom cluster. GR205171 was well-tolerated, with no discontinuations due to adverse events. CSF SP concentrations were positively correlated with baseline CAPS severity. The selective NK(1)R antagonist GR205171 had fewer adverse effects but was not significantly superior to placebo in the short-term treatment of chronic PTSD. (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT 00211861, NCT 00383786).

21135850
Cracking the moody brain: lifting the mood with ketamine.


19897179
Safety and efficacy of repeated-dose intravenous ketamine for treatment-resistant depression.
A single subanesthetic (intravenous) IV dose of ketamine might have rapid but transient antidepressant effects in patients with treatment-resistant depression (TRD). Here we tested the tolerability, safety, and efficacy of repeated-dose open-label IV ketamine (six infusions over 12 days) in 10 medication-free symptomatic patients with TRD who had previously shown a meaningful antidepressant response to a single dose. On day 1, patients received a 40-min IV infusion of ketamine (.5 mg/kg) in an inpatient setting with continuous vital-sign monitoring. Psychotomimetic effects and adverse events were recorded repeatedly. The primary efficacy measure was change from baseline in the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) score. If patients showed a > or =50% reduction in MADRS scores on day 2, they received five additional infusions on an outpatient basis (days 3, 5, 8, 10, and 12). Follow-up visits were conducted twice-weekly for > or =4 weeks or until relapse. Ketamine elicited minimal positive psychotic symptoms. Three patients experienced significant but transient dissociative symptoms. Side effects during and after each ketamine infusion were generally mild. The response criterion was met by nine patients after the first infusion as well as after the sixth infusion. The mean (SD) reduction in MADRS scores after the sixth infusion was 85% (12%). Postketamine, eight of nine patients relapsed, on average, 19 days after the sixth infusion (range 6 days-45 days). One patient remained antidepressant-free with minimal depressive symptoms for >3 months. These pilot findings suggest feasibility of repeated-dose IV ketamine for the acute treatment of TRD.

19858825
An integrated approach to evaluate faculty members' research performance.
Medical school administrations need a widely acceptable method of assessing research performance of faculty to make management decisions. The challenge is to identify metrics that allow for comparison across fields. Level of extramural funding, quality of publications, and peer recognition are the commonly used indicators of success. European institutions typically use the impact factors of the journals where their scientists publish, whereas U.S. institutions, including Mount Sinai School of Medicine (MSSM), mostly use grant funding as the major criterion of research productivity. At MSSM, the authors, representing the Dean's Office, collected data on the performance of research faculty in 2006 and 2007 and developed a method to compare the impact factors of publications by individual researchers across disciplines. This was then compared with each individual's research density (grant funding/square foot of research space) to determine whether these measures correlated and whether combining them yielded insights different from using either one independently. Results indicated a weak correlation between the two metrics in 2006 data and no significant correlation in 2007 data. Each faculty member was plotted on a four-quadrant model on the basis of the impact of his or her publications and research density. This dual-metric model allowed for the identification of the strongest and weakest performers and classification of those in between to develop appropriately tailored strategies for mentoring and development at the level of individual faculty. This integrated approach, based on objective numerical criteria, shows promise as a useful method for management of the research enterprise of medical schools.

19545857
Effects of intravenous ketamine on explicit and implicit measures of suicidality in treatment-resistant depression.
Intravenous ketamine has shown rapid antidepressant effects in early trials, making it a potentially attractive candidate for depressed patients at imminent risk of suicide. The Implicit Association Test (IAT), a performance-based measure of association between concepts, may have utility in suicide assessment. Twenty-six patients with treatment-resistant depression were assessed using the suicidality item of the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS-SI) 2 hours before and 24 hours following a single subanesthetic dose of intravenous ketamine. Ten patients also completed IATs assessing implicit suicidal associations at comparable time points. In a second study, nine patients received thrice-weekly ketamine infusions over a 12-day period. Twenty-four hours after a single infusion, MADRS-SI scores were reduced on average by 2.08 points on a 0 to 6 scale (p < .001; d = 1.37), and 81% of patients received a rating of 0 or 1 postinfusion. Implicit suicidal associations were also reduced following ketamine (p = .003; d = 1.36), with reductions correlated across implicit and explicit measures. MADRS-SI reductions were sustained for 12 days by repeated-dose ketamine (p < .001; d = 2.42). These preliminary findings support the premise that ketamine has rapid beneficial effects on suicidal cognition and warrants further study.

19455174
Psychobiology and molecular genetics of resilience.
Every individual experiences stressful life events. In some cases acute or chronic stress leads to depression and other psychiatric disorders, but most people are resilient to such effects. Recent research has begun to identify the environmental, genetic, epigenetic and neural mechanisms that underlie resilience, and has shown that resilience is mediated by adaptive changes in several neural circuits involving numerous neurotransmitter and molecular pathways. These changes shape the functioning of the neural circuits that regulate reward, fear, emotion reactivity and social behaviour, which together are thought to mediate successful coping with stress.

19288975
Riluzole for relapse prevention following intravenous ketamine in treatment-resistant depression: a pilot randomized, placebo-controlled continuation trial.
The N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor antagonist ketamine may have rapid, albeit transient, antidepressant properties. This study in patients with treatment-resistant major depression (TRD) aimed to (1) replicate the acute efficacy of single-dose intravenous (i.v.) ketamine; (2) test the efficacy of the glutamate-modulating agent riluzole in preventing post-ketamine relapse; and (3) examine whether pretreatment with lamotrigine would attenuate ketamine's psychotomimetic effects and enhance its antidepressant activity. Twenty-six medication-free patients received open-label i.v. ketamine (0.5 mg/kg over 40 min). Two hours prior to infusion, patients were randomized to lamotrigine (300 mg) or placebo. Seventeen patients (65%) met response criterion (50% reduction from baseline on the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale) 24 h following ketamine. Lamotrigine failed to attenuate the mild, transient side-effects associated with ketamine and did not enhance its antidepressant effects. Fourteen patients (54%) met response criterion 72 h following ketamine and proceeded to participate in a 32-d, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, flexible-dose continuation trial of riluzole (100-200 mg/d). The main outcome measure was time-to-relapse. An interim analysis found no significant differences in time-to-relapse between riluzole and placebo groups [log-rank chi(2) = 0.17, d.f. = 1, p = 0.68], with 80% of patients relapsing on riluzole vs. 50% on placebo. The trial was thus stopped for futility. This pilot study showed that a sub-anaesthetic dose of i.v. ketamine is well-tolerated in TRD, and may have rapid and sustained antidepressant properties. Riluzole did not prevent relapse in the first month following ketamine. Further investigation of relapse prevention strategies post-ketamine is necessary.

19188629
Neurobiological mechanisms in major depressive disorder.


19188290
Publication bias and the efficacy of antidepressants.


19174682
Resilience in the third year of medical school: a prospective study of the associations between stressful events occurring during clinical rotations and student well-being.
In the third year of medical school students are exposed to many stressful and potentially traumatic events, including witnessing patient suffering or death, personal mistreatment, and poor role modeling by physicians. These experiences may explain increases in anxiety and depression during medical school. However, to date this has not been studied. The present study prospectively measured stressful clerkship events occurring during the 2006-2007 academic year in third-year medical students of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine (n = 125), using surveys completed monthly. Students labeled stressful events traumatic if they met the trauma criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition. The authors measured anxiety, depression, and posttraumatic stress symptoms at the beginning and end of the year and twice during the year. At year's end they also measured students' personal growth. Class participation varied from 106 (85%) at baseline to 82 (66%) at endpoint. Most students (101; 81%) completed at least one monthly survey. Many students reported exposure to trauma as well as personal mistreatment and poor role modeling by superiors. Trauma exposure was positively associated with personal growth at year's end. In contrast, exposure to other stressful events was positively associated with endpoint levels of depression and other stress symptoms. Trauma exposure was common but not associated with poor outcomes by year's end, which suggests that students were resilient. Nonetheless, unprofessional behavior by resident and attending physicians might have adverse effects on the well-being of students.

19152285
Posttraumatic growth in former Vietnam prisoners of war.
This study examined posttraumatic growth in 30 male veterans captured and held as prisoners of war during the Vietnam War. Participants were assessed with structured diagnostic interviews administered by trained clinicians as well as with the Posttraumatic Growth Inventory (PTGI) and other questionnaires measuring dispositional optimism, religious coping, social supports, and purpose in life. Mean age (standard deviation-SD) of participants was 66.7 (6.0) years. Mean total PTGI score (SD) was 66.3 (17.5), indicating a moderate degree of posttraumatic growth. The most strongly endorsed items corresponded to the Appreciation of Life and Personal Strength factors. The group as a whole was optimistic and reported moderate use of positive religious coping. Posttraumatic growth did not significantly differ in repatriates with and without psychopathology, but it was significantly positively correlated with dispositional optimism. In the final regression model, length of captivity and optimism were significant predictors of posttraumatic growth. Our findings confirm that it is possible to achieve long-lasting personal growth even in the face of prolonged extreme adversity. Prospective studies are needed to further evaluate whether pre-existing traits such as optimism can predict growth after trauma.

19058788
Amino acid neurotransmitters assessed by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy: relationship to treatment resistance in major depressive disorder.
Significant alterations in gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamate levels have been previously reported in major depressive disorder (MDD); however, no studies to date have investigated associations between these amino acid neurotransmitters and treatment resistance. The objective of this study was to compare occipital cortex (OCC) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) GABA and glutamate+glutamine (Glx) levels measured by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy ((1)H MRS) in 15 medication-free treatment-resistant depression (TRD) patients with those in 18 nontreatment-resistant MDD (nTRD) patients and 24 healthy volunteers (HVs). Levels of OCC GABA relative to voxel tissue water (W) were decreased in TRD patients compared with both HV (20.2% mean reduction; p = .001; Cohen's d = 1.3) and nTRD subjects (16.4% mean reduction; p = .007; Cohen's d = 1.4). There was a similar main effect of diagnosis for ACC GABA/W levels (p = .047; Cohen's d = .76) with TRD patients exhibiting reduced GABA in comparison with the other two groups (22.4% to 24.5% mean reductions). Group differences in Glx/W were not significant in either brain region. Only GABA results in OCC survived correction for multiple comparisons. Our findings corroborate previous reports of decreased GABA in MDD and provide initial evidence for a distinct neuronal amino acid profile in patients who have failed to respond to several standard antidepressants, possibly indicative of abnormal glutamate/glutamine/GABA cycling. Given interest in novel antidepressant mechanisms in TRD that selectively target amino acid neurotransmitter function, the translational relevance of these findings awaits further study.

18795171
Enduring mental health morbidity and social function impairment in world trade center rescue, recovery, and cleanup workers: the psychological dimension of an environmental health disaster.
The World Trade Center (WTC) attacks exposed thousands of workers to hazardous environmental conditions and psychological trauma. In 2002, to assess the health of these workers, Congress directed the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health to establish the WTC Medical Monitoring and Treatment Program. This program has established a large cohort of WTC rescue, recovery, and cleanup workers. We previously documented extensive pulmonary dysfunction in this cohort related to toxic environmental exposures. Our objective in this study was to describe mental health outcomes, social function impairment, and psychiatric comorbidity in the WTC worker cohort, as well as perceived symptomatology in workers' children. Ten to 61 months after the WTC attack, 10,132 WTC workers completed a self-administered mental health questionnaire. Of the workers who completd the questionnaire, 11.1% met criteria for probable post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 8.8% met criteria for probable depression, 5.0% met criteria for probable panic disorder, and 62% met criteria for substantial stress reaction. PTSD prevalence was comparable to that seen in returning Afghanistan war veterans and was much higher than in the U.S. general population. Point prevalence declined from 13.5% to 9.7% over the 5 years of observation. Comorbidity was extensive and included extremely high risks for impairment of social function. PTSD was significantly associated with loss of family members and friends, disruption of family, work, and social life, and higher rates of behavioral symptoms in children of workers. Working in 9/11 recovery operations is associated with chronic impairment of mental health and social functioning. Psychological distress and psychopathology in WTC workers greatly exceed population norms. Surveillance and treatment programs continue to be needed.

18550033
The case for shifting borderline personality disorder to Axis I.
Through reviewing what is known about the nature, course, and heritability of borderline personality disorder (BPD), we argue for a reconceptualization of this disorder that would lead to its placement on Axis I. Borderline personality disorder is a prevalent and disabling condition, and yet the empirical research into its nature and treatment has not been commensurate with the seriousness of the illness. We not only review empirical evidence about the etiology, phenomenology, and course of the disorder in BPD but we also address fundamental misconceptions about BPD that we believe have contributed to misunderstanding and stigmatization of the disease. Finally, we suggest future directions for research that might permit the identification of core features of this disorder, with a focus on the importance of naturalistic assessments and of assessments through the course of development.

18412102
Recent advances in the neurobiology of anxiety disorders: implications for novel therapeutics.
Anxiety disorders are a highly prevalent and disabling class of psychiatric disorders. This review focuses on new directions in neurobiological research and implications for the development of novel psychopharmacological treatments. Neuroanatomical and neuroimaging research in anxiety disorders has centered on the role of the amygdala, reciprocal connections between the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex, and, most recently, alterations in interoceptive processing by the anterior insula. Anxiety disorders are characterized by alterations in a diverse range of neurochemical systems, suggesting ample novel targets for drug therapies. Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) concentrations are elevated in a subset of anxiety disorders, which suggests the potential utility of CRF receptor antagonists. Pharmacological blockade of the memory-enhancing effects of stress hormones such as glucocorticoids and noradrenaline holds promise as a preventative approach for trauma-related anxiety. The glutamatergic system has been largely overlooked as a potential pharmacological target, although convergent preclinical, neuroimaging, and early clinical findings suggest that glutamate receptor antagonists may have potent anxiolytic effects. Glutamatergic receptor agonists (e.g., D-cycloserine) also have an emerging role in the treatment of anxiety as facilitators of fear extinction during concurrent behavioral interventions. The neuropeptides substance P, neuropeptide Y, oxytocin, orexin, and galanin are each implicated in anxiety pathways, and neuropeptide analogs or antagonists show early promise as anxiolytics in preclinical and/or clinical research. Each of these active areas of research holds promise for expanding and improving evidence-based treatment options for individuals suffering with clinical anxiety.

18172433
Novel drugs and therapeutic targets for severe mood disorders.
Monoaminergic-based drugs remain the primary focus of pharmaceutical industry drug discovery efforts for mood disorders, despite serious limitations regarding their ability to achieve remission. The quest for novel therapies for unipolar depression and bipolar disorder has generally centered on two complementary approaches: (1) understanding the presumed therapeutically relevant biochemical targets of currently available medications, and using that knowledge to design new drugs directed at both direct biochemical targets and downstream targets that are regulated by chronic drug administration; and (2) developing pathophysiological models of the illness to design therapeutics to attenuate or prevent those pathological processes. This review describes several promising drugs and drug targets for mood disorders using one or both of these approaches. Agents interacting with non-catecholamine neurotransmitter systems with particular promise for unipolar and bipolar depression include excitatory amino acid neurotransmitter modulators (eg, riluzole, N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonists, and AMPA receptor potentiators) and neuropeptide antagonists (targeting corticotropin releasing factor-1 and neurokinin receptors). Potential antidepressant and mood-stabilizing agents targeting common intracellular pathways of known monoaminergic agents and lithium/mood stabilizers are also reviewed, such as neurotrophic factors, extracellular receptor-coupled kinase (ERK) mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase and the bcl-2 family of proteins, and inhibitors of phosphodiesterase, glycogen synthase kinase-3, and protein kinase C. A major thrust of drug discovery in mood disorders will continue efforts to identify agents with rapid and sustained onsets of action (such as intravenous administration of ketamine), as well as identify drugs used routinely in non-psychiatric diseases for their antidepressant and mood-stabilizing properties.

18028881
Hippocampal N-acetylaspartate concentration and response to riluzole in generalized anxiety disorder.
Previous research has suggested the therapeutic potential of glutamate-modulating agents for severe mood and anxiety disorders, potentially resulting from enhancement of neuroplasticity. We used proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging ((1)H MRSI) to examine the acute and chronic effects of the glutamate-release inhibitor riluzole on hippocampal N-acetylaspartate (NAA), a neuronal marker, in patients with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and examined the relationship between changes in NAA and clinical outcome. Fourteen medication-free GAD patients were administered open-label riluzole and then evaluated by (1)H MRSI before drug administration, and 24 hours and 8 weeks following treatment. Patients were identified as responders (n = 9) or nonresponders (n = 5). Seven untreated, medically healthy volunteers, comparable in age, sex, IQ, and body mass index to the patients, received scans at the same time intervals. Molar NAA concentrations in bilateral hippocampus, and change in anxiety ratings were the primary outcome measures. A group-by-time interaction was found, with riluzole responders showing mean increases in hippocampal NAA across the three time points, whereas nonresponders had decreases over time. In GAD patients at Week 8, hippocampal NAA concentration and proportional increase in NAA from baseline both were positively associated with improvements in worry and clinician-rated anxiety. These preliminary data support a specific association between hippocampal NAA and symptom alleviation following riluzole treatment in GAD. Placebo-controlled investigations that examine hippocampal NAA as a viable surrogate endpoint for clinical trials of neuroprotective and plasticity-enhancing agents are warranted.

17705907
Psychobiological mechanisms of resilience: relevance to prevention and treatment of stress-related psychopathology.
Resilience refers to the ability to successfully adapt to stressors, maintaining psychological well-being in the face of adversity. Recent years have seen a great deal of research into the neurobiological and psychological factors and mechanisms that characterize resilient individuals. This article draws from that research to outline some of the most important contributors to resilience. The authors hope that by contributing to a growing understanding of the genetic, developmental, neurobiological, and psychological underpinnings of resilience, researchers and clinicians in the field will move closer toward the goal of identifying and treating individuals at risk for developing posttraumatic psychopathology.

