20975020
Physicians' opinions about reforming reimbursement: results of a national survey.
Several strategies have been proposed to reform physician reimbursement while improving quality of care. Despite much debate, physicians' opinions regarding reimbursement reform proposals have not been objectively assessed. We conducted a national survey of randomly selected physicians between June 25 and October 31, 2009. Physicians rated their support for several reimbursement reform proposals: rewarding quality with financial incentives, bundling payments for episodes of care, shifting payments from procedures to management and counseling services, increasing pay to generalists, and offsetting increased pay to generalists with a reduction in pay for other specialties. Support for the different reform options was compared with physician practice characteristics. The response rate was 48.5% (n = 1222). Four of 5 physicians (78.4%) indicated that under Medicare, some procedures are compensated too highly and others are compensated at rates insufficient to cover costs. Incentives were the most frequently supported reform option (49.1%), followed by shifting payments (41.6%) and bundling (17.2%). Shifting payments and bundling were more commonly supported by generalists than by other specialists. There was broad support for increasing pay for generalists (79.8%), but a proposal to offset the increase with a 3% reduction in specialist reimbursement was supported by only 39.1% of physicians. Physicians are dissatisfied with Medicare reimbursement and show little consensus for major proposals to reform reimbursement. The successful adoption of payment reform proposals may require a better understanding of physicians' concerns and their willingness to make tradeoffs.

20660637
Development of and recovery from difficulty with activities of daily living: an analysis of national data.
Background: National-level data are needed on predictors of mild physical impairment among older adults to assist policy makers with resource allocation. We analyzed data on adults above age 64 from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS) with no activity of daily living (ADL) difficulties at baseline ( n = 14,226). Five ADLs were measured annually and recovery was defined as regaining complete ADL function at follow-up. The strongest correlates of ADL difficulty were use of antipsychotic medications (adjusted odds ratio [AOR] = 1.93, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.44 to 2.58), instrumental ADL difficulty (AOR = 1.90, 95% CI = 1.74 to 2.07), and fair-poor general health (AOR = 1.59, 95% CI = 1.42 to 1.78). Only the number of incident ADL difficulties was associated with recovery (AOR = 0.02, 95% CI = 0.01 to 0.02). Identifying factors associated with development of mild physical impairment could help direct patients toward preventive care programs to preempt decline in physical function.

20636188
Inadequate health literacy is associated with suboptimal health beliefs in older asthmatics.
To examine the relationship between suboptimal asthma beliefs and inadequate health literacy among older adults with asthma. The authors interviewed 100 English- and Spanish-speaking asthmatics (ages >or=50 years) in a New York City primary care clinic (response, 83%). Outcomes included the belief that one does not have asthma when symptoms are absent (no symptoms-no asthma), that asthma is temporary, is curable, and that medications work better if not used all the time. Health literacy was measured using the Short Test of Functional Health Literacy in Adults. Belief and health literacy associations were measured with multivariable logistic regression adjusting for age, sex, and race. The mean age was 61 years; 35% had inadequate health literacy. Those with inadequate literacy were more likely than those with adequate or marginal literacy to have suboptimal beliefs: no symptoms-no asthma, 60% versus 34%, p = .01; temporary, 23% versus 9%, p = .07; curable, 54% versus 25%, p = .004; medication use, 44% versus 21%, p = .03. These relationships remained statistically significant in multivariable analyses that adjusted for age, sex, and race. Suboptimal asthma beliefs were more common among older asthmatics with inadequate health literacy. Interventions to improve asthma self-management in older adults should address both belief and health literacy barriers.

20532656
Laboratory test ordering at physician offices with and without on-site laboratories.
Physician self-referral, ordering a test or procedure or referring to a facility in which a physician has a financial interest, has been associated with increased utilization of health care services. To examine the association between on-site laboratories and laboratory test ordering among visits to group-practice physicians. Cross-sectional study using data from the 2005 and 2006 National Ambulatory Medical Care Surveys. Visits by adults to non-federally-funded, non-hospital-based group practices. Primary analyses focused on visits to physician owners; secondary analyses focused on visits to non-owners. Ordering of five laboratory tests: complete blood count (CBC), electrolytes, glycoslyated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), cholesterol, and prostate-specific antigen (PSA). There were 19,163 visits to group-practice owners with 51.9% to a practice with an on-site laboratory. Visits to primary care physicians were more likely to be to a practice with an on-site laboratory when compared with visits to specialists (64.4% vs. 34.0%, p?<?0.001). Among visits to specialist group owners, all five tests were ordered more often if there was an on-site laboratory, even after accounting for patient and practice characteristics: CBC: adjusted odds ratio[OR]?=?8.01, 95% Confidence Interval [CI], 5.00-12.82, p?<?0.001; electrolytes: aOR?=?3.51, 95% CI, 1.93-6.40, p?<?0.001; HbA1c: aOR?=?4.91, 95% CI, 1.75-13.78, p?=?0.003; cholesterol: aOR?=?3.32, 95% CI, 1.85-5.93, p?<?0.001; and PSA: aOR?=?3.84, 95% CI, 1.93-7.65, p?<?0.001. This association was not found among visits to primary care physician owners and all practice non-owners (both primary care and specialists). The estimated excess spending on these five tests by specialist owners with on-site laboratories was $75 million per 100 million visits. In a nationally representative sample of visits to physician-owned group practices, specialist owners with on-site laboratories were more likely to order five common laboratory tests, potentially resulting in millions in excess healthcare spending.

20092126
Restrictiveness of eligibility determination and Medicaid enrollment by low-income seniors.
Medicaid is an important source of supplemental health care coverage for low-income seniors, yet little is known about the effect of state policy on Medicaid enrollment by eligible elderly. Data from a nationally representative survey were used to examine Medicaid enrollment by elderly, low-income Medicare beneficiaries living in states that liberalize or restrict Medicaid eligibility criteria using the 1986 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act or provision 209(b) of the 1972 Social Security Act Amendment, respectively. Controlling for demographics and health status, residence in states applying these laws was significantly, though modestly, associated with Medicaid enrollment. Additionally, 73% of eligible elderly Medicare beneficiaries were not enrolled in Medicaid, and most have serious chronic health problems. These findings suggest that a significant number of eligible elderly are not enrolled in Medicaid and that liberalizing or tightening Medicaid eligibility criteria can have an impact on Medicaid enrollment by low-income elderly patients.

19651699
Cognitive performance in community-dwelling English- and Spanish-speaking seniors.
to examine the association of language (English vs Spanish), and commonly used measures of memory and word fluency among older adults. cross-sectional. community-based settings in New York City, including senior centres and residential complexes. four hundred and twenty independently living adults aged 60 or older (mean 73.8 years). participants completed the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE), animal naming test (ANT) and Wechsler Memory Scale III (WMS) Story A immediate and delayed subtests. Scores were examined by strata of language, age or education and for different thresholds of the MMSE. We tested the association of language and cognitive test performance using multivariable linear regression. twenty-one per cent of subjects were interviewed in Spanish and 16.2% reported poor-fair English proficiency. The mean WMS scores were not statistically different between English and Spanish groups (immediate recall, 9.9 vs 9.5, P = 0.44; delayed recall, 8.0 vs 7.6, P = 0.36, respectively), whereas ANT scores did differ (16.6 vs 14.3, P < 0.0001). These associations were consistent across MMSE thresholds. The association of language and ANT score was not significant after accounting for education. we found little difference in performance on the Story A subtests from the WMS suggesting that this test may be used for both English- and Spanish-speaking populations. Results suggest that variations in ANT performance may be accounted for by adjusting for the level of education. These results have important implications for the generalisability of test scores among diverse older populations.

19515101
Health literacy and cognitive performance in older adults.
To study the relationship between health literacy and memory and verbal fluency in older adults. Cross-sectional cohort. Twenty senior centers and apartment buildings in New York, New York. Independently living, English- and Spanish-speaking adults aged 60 and older (N=414). Health literacy was measured using the Short Test of Functional Health Literacy in Adults (S-TOFHLA). The associations between S-TOFHLA scores and immediate and delayed recall (Wechsler Memory Scale II), verbal fluency (Animal Naming), and global cognitive function (Mini-Mental State Examination, MMSE) were modeled using multivariable logistic and linear regression. Health literacy was inadequate in 24.3% of participants. Impairment of immediate recall occurred in 20.4%; delayed recall, 15.0%; verbal fluency, 9.9%; and MMSE, 17.4%. Abnormal cognitive function was strongly associated with inadequate health literacy: immediate recall (adjusted odds ratio (AOR)=3.44, 95% confidence interval (CI)=1.71-6.94, P<.001), delayed recall (AOR=3.48, 95% CI=1.58-7.67, P=.002), and verbal fluency (AOR=3.47, 95% CI=1.44-8.38, P=.006). These associations persisted in subgroups that excluded individuals with normal age-adjusted MMSE scores. Memory and verbal fluency are strongly associated with health literacy, independently of education and health status, even in those with subtle cognitive dysfunction. Reducing the cognitive burden of health information might mitigate the detrimental effects of limited health literacy in older adults. Research that examines the effect of materials modified to older adults' cognitive limitations on health literacy and health outcomes is needed.

19486197
Comparisons of self-reported and chart-identified chronic diseases in inner-city seniors.
To examine agreement between self-report of chronic disease and medical record data for inner-city seniors, their sensitivity and specificity, and the association between patient characteristics and accuracy of self-reports. Cross-sectional analysis. Two hospital-based primary care practices serving a low-income inner-city population. Adults aged 65 and older (n=323). Data on self-reported asthma, depression, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension were collected through interviewer-administered surveys (in English and Spanish) and chart abstraction. Chart-based disease was defined in two ways: physician documentation and physician documentation plus use of a medication to treat that condition. Sensitivity, specificity, and agreement were calculated. Univariate and multivariable regression analyses were used to determine the associations between patient characteristics and patient-chart agreement. Agreement between self-report and chart data was high for diabetes mellitus (kappa=0.94) intermediate for asthma (kappa=0.66), and hypertension (kappa=0.54) and low for depression (kappa=0.4). Sensitivity and specificity were high for diabetes mellitus (0.99 and 0.96, respectively) and low for depression (0.74 and 0.72, respectively). Specificity for hypertension was lowest (0.67). Age, education, health literacy, and other patient characteristics did not have clear associations across conditions. Self-reports may be most reliable for diabetes mellitus and least reliable for depression for surveys involving older, inner-city adults. Survey research with older adults should include confirmatory data when assessing presence of depression, hypertension, and asthma.

19447364
Awareness of pharmaceutical cost-assistance programs among inner-city seniors.
Lack of awareness may be a significant barrier to participation by low- and middle-income seniors in pharmaceutical cost-assistance programs. The goal of this study was to determine whether older adults' awareness of 2 major state and federal pharmaceutical cost-assistance programs was associated with the seniors' ability to access and process information about assistance programs. Data were gathered from a cross-sectional study of independently living, English- or Spanish-speaking adults aged > or =60 years. Participants were interviewed in 30 community-based settings (19 apartment complexes and 11 senior centers) in New York, New York. The analysis focused on adults aged > or =65 years who lacked Medicaid coverage. Multivariable logistic regression was used to model program awareness as a function of information access (family/social support, attendance at senior or community centers and places of worship, viewing of live health insurance presentations, instrumental activities of daily living, site of medical care, computer use, and having a proxy decision maker for health insurance matters) and information-processing ability (education level, English proficiency, health literacy, and cognitive function). The main outcome measure was awareness of New York's state pharmaceutical assistance program (Elderly Pharmaceutical Insurance Coverage [EPIC]]) and the federal Medicare Part D low-income subsidy program (Extra Help). A total of 269 patients were enrolled (mean [SD] age, 76.9 [7.5] years; 32.0% male; 39.9% white). Awareness of the programs differed widely: 77.3%) knew of EPIC! and 22.3% knew of Extra Help. In multivariable analysis, study participants were more likely to have heard of the EPIC program if they had attended a live presentation about health insurance issues (adjusted odds ratio [AOR], 3.40; 95% CI, 1.20-9.61) and less likely if they received care in a clinic (AOR, 0.45; 95% CI, 0.23-0.92). Awareness of Extra Help in the multivariable models was more likely among study participants who had viewed a live health insurance presentation (AOR, 3.35; 95% CI, 1.55-7.24) and less likely for those with inadequate health literacy (AOR, 0.15; 95% CI, 0.03-0.74). Viewing of live health insurance presentations and adequate health literacy were associated with greater awareness of important pharmaceutical cost-assistance programs in this study in low-income, elderly individuals. The findings suggest that use of live presentations, in addition to health literacy materials and messages, may be important strategies in promoting knowledge of and enrollment in state and federal pharmaceutical cost-assistance programs for low-income seniors.

18706784
Beliefs about generic drugs among elderly adults in hospital-based primary care practices.
This study aimed to characterize seniors' beliefs about generic drugs, and examine potential correlates of these beliefs, including socioeconomic and health status variables, health literacy, and physician communication skills. Older adults (> or = 65 years) were interviewed in two primary care practices of an inner-city, tertiary care hospital (n = 311). Beliefs about generics were measured using a scale that compared generic and brand name drugs across four domains. Beliefs were modeled with multivariable linear regression. Negative beliefs about generics were associated with non-white race (p < 0.0001), lower education (p = 0.008) and income (p = 0.001), and having Medicaid coverage (p = 0.001). Individuals with low health literacy and who reported that their physicians had poor communication skills were more likely to hold negative views (p < 0.0001 and p = 0.003, respectively). In multivariable analysis, black race (beta = -2.30, p = 0.006) and inadequate health literacy (beta = -2.17, p = 0.0004) remained strongly associated with negative views about generic drugs. Poor physician communication skills also predicted negative beliefs about generics but the association was not significant for all levels of communication skill. Many low-income seniors mistrust generic medications, especially African-Americans and seniors with low health literacy. Educational efforts to promote generic medications should account for patients' health literacy and cultural backgrounds.

17296536
Association of age with analgesic use for back and joint disorders in outpatient settings.
Pain is a common, troubling symptom of various disorders, chronically affecting up to 11% of adults in the general public. Despite a growing emphasis on improving the quality of pain management and the increasing use of analgesics over the past 20 years, pain remains undertreated for patients in a variety of clinical settings. Elderly patients, in particular, have disproportionately low rates of adequate pain control compared with younger patients. The goal of this article was to determine the association of age with analgesic use in outpatient settings. Cross-sectional analyses of data from the 1999-2002 National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey and the National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey were conducted. We modeled use of NSAIDs or opioids as a function of age using multivariable logistic regression. Adults (aged > or =18 years) with pain and an inflammatory or mechanical disorder of the back or joint seen in outpatient settings in the United States were included in the study. From 1999 to 2002, 7273 outpatient hospital and community-based visits to physicians were recorded for adults with pain and a diagnosis of a back or joint disorder, representing approximately 34 million visits per year. Acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and opioids were reported for 3.7%, 28.8%, and 17.3% of visits, respectively. Individuals aged > or =75 years were more likely than those aged 18 to 54 years to use NSAIDs (adjusted odds ratio, 1.50; 95% CI, 1.15-1.97), an effect of the increasing use of cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors among older patients. Older patients were less likely to use opioids (adjusted odds ratio, 0.49; 95% CI, 0.32-0.75). In outpatient settings, elderly patients with pain and back or joint disorders tend to use NSAIDs more often and opioids less often than younger patients, suggesting that older patients may be receiving a poorer quality of pain management in outpatient settings.

17224772
Use of generic cardiovascular medications by elderly Medicare beneficiaries receiving generalist or cardiologist care.
Elderly Medicare beneficiaries can reduce out-of-pocket spending and increase their options for low-cost Medicare Part D plans by using generic drugs. Physicians play a key role in determining use of generics and specialty may be a particularly influential factor. We sought to compare generic cardiovascular drug use by older adults receiving cardiologist and generalist care. We undertook a cross-sectional analysis of data from the nationally representative Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey. Included were community-dwelling adults 66 years of age or older with hypertension, coronary disease, or congestive heart failure, one or more Medicare Part B claims for outpatient visits with generalists (internist or family practitioner) or cardiologists, using one or more cardiovascular drug available in both brand-name and generic formulations (n = 1828). The primary outcome was use of one or more generic medication aggregated across 5 drug classes: beta-blockers, thiazides, calcium channel blockers (CCB), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, and alpha1-adrenergic receptor antagonists. Within-class generic use also was examined. The main independent variable was cardiologist (20.7%) versus generalist-only care (79.3%). In the aggregate, fewer individuals under cardiologist care used generics compared with generalist-only care (75% vs. 81%, P = 0.03; adjusted relative risk 0.89, 95% confidence interval = 0.79-0.99). Overall use of generic beta-blockers was 86.6%; thiazides, 92.0%; ACE inhibitors, 59.0%; CCB, 55.5%; alpha-blockers 47.7%. In adjusted analysis, generic CCB use occurred 34% less often among cardiologist versus generalist-only patients. Older patients of generalists and, to a greater extent, cardiologists, often use brand-name drugs when generic equivalents are available. Promoting generic prescribing among specialists and generalists may increase opportunities for patients and third-party payers to reduce spending on prescription drugs.

20950406
HIV and HCV health beliefs in an inner-city community.
Summary.? Chronic infection with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) is more prevalent than human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, but more public health resources are allocated to HIV than to HCV. Given shared risk factors and epidemiology, we compared accuracy of health beliefs about HIV and HCV in an at-risk community. Between 2002 and 2003, we surveyed a random patient sample at a primary care clinic in New York. The survey was organized as domains of Common Sense Model of Self-Regulation: causes ('sharing needles'), timeline/consequences ('remains in body for life', 'causes cancer') and controllability ('I can avoid this illness', 'medications may cure this illness'). We compared differences in accuracy of beliefs about HIV and HCV and used multivariable linear regression to identify factors associated with relative accuracy of beliefs. One hundred and twenty-two subjects completed the survey (response rate 42%). Mean overall health belief accuracy was 12/15 questions (80%) for HIV vs 9/15 (60%) for HCV (P?<?0.001). Belief accuracy was significantly different across all domains. Within the causes domain, 60% accurately believed sharing needles a risk factor for HCV compared to 92% for HIV (P?<?0.001). Within the timeline/consequences domain, 42% accurately believed HCV results in lifelong infection compared to 89% for HIV (P?<?0.001). Within the controllability domain, 25% accurately believed that there is a potential cure for HCV. Multivariable linear regression revealed female gender as significantly associated with greater health belief accuracy for HIV. Thus, study participants had significantly less accurate health beliefs about HCV than about HIV. Targeting inaccuracies might improve public health interventions to foster healthier behaviours and better hepatitis C outcomes.

