21354022
Detection of immunological biomarkers correlated with asthma control and quality of life measurements in sera from chronic asthmatic patients.
Clinical outcomes of patients with asthma are highly variable. Immunological biomarkers associated with asthma control have not been elucidated. To identify the association between clinical control of asthma and serum immunological profiles of asthmatics and compare these profiles with those of healthy controls by using a multiplex assay. Sera were obtained from 28 nonsmokers 18 to 55 years of age with moderate and severe persistent asthma. Patients were classified as having well-controlled (WC, n = 14) or poorly controlled (PC, n = 14) asthma based on their responses to the Asthma Control Questionnaire and Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire. Sera from nonasthmatic control individuals (NAC, n = 14) were used for comparison. Levels of 50 analytes, including cytokines, chemokines, angiogenic, and growth factors, were determined, using a multiplex assay. Twelve of the 29 cytokines levels were significantly higher in patients with asthma than in NACs, but only interferon gamma levels were significantly lower in patients with asthma than in the NAC group. Among these, interleukin (IL)-3 and IL-18 levels were significantly higher in the PC group than the WC group. Five of the 12 tested chemokine levels were significantly higher in patients with asthma than in NACs. Five of six growth factor levels were significantly higher in patients with asthma than in NACs, and 3 were higher in PC than WC. Interleukin-18, fibroblast growth factor, hepatocyte growth factor, and stem cell growth factor-beta were positively correlated with poor asthma control and negatively with quality of life scores. Increased serum levels of fibroblast growth factor, hepatocyte growth factor, and stem cell growth factor-beta might be useful biomarkers of asthma control status and targets of future asthma therapy.

20920759
Age-related changes in immune function: effect on airway inflammation.
Immunosenescence is defined as changes in the innate and adaptive immune response associated with increased age. The clinical consequences of immunosenescence include increased susceptibility to infection, malignancy and autoimmunity, decreased response to vaccination, and impaired wound healing. However, there are several immune alterations that might facilitate persistence of asthma into late adulthood or development of asthma after the age of 50 to 60 years. Asthma in older patients is not uncommon, and this is a growing population as the average lifespan increases. Specific innate changes that might affect severity of asthma in older patients or be involved in the development of late-onset asthma include impaired mucociliary clearance and changes in airway neutrophil, eosinophil, and mast cell numbers and function. Additionally, age-related altered antigen presentation and decreased specific antibody responses might increase the risk of respiratory tract infections. Respiratory tract infections exacerbate asthma in older patients and possibly play a role in the pathogenesis of late-onset asthma. Furthermore, cytokine profiles might be modified with aging, with some investigators suggesting a trend toward T(H)2 cytokine expression. This review examines specific innate and adaptive immune responses affected by aging that might affect the inflammatory response in older adults with asthma.

20662744
Perennial allergen-specific immunoglobulin E levels among inner-city elderly asthmatics.
The role of allergen sensitization has been well established among children and young adults with asthma. Some studies have suggested that allergens play a less important role among older patients with asthma. However, whether older asthmatics have a lower prevalence of allergen sensitization than younger adults remains controversial. The aim of this study was to access the prevalence of sensitization to indoor allergens in older compared to younger inner-city adults with persistent asthma. The authors used data collected as part of a cohort study of inner-city adults with persistent asthma. Sensitization to indoor allergens (specifically Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, D. farinae, cat, mouse, Aspergillus fumigates, Alternaria, German and American cockroaches) was evaluated by specific immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies measured from peripheral blood. Univariate and multiple regression analyses were used to compare ratios of sensitization according to age (? 35, 36-59, ? 60 years of age). Of the 245 patients in the study, 19% were over the age of 60 years. Overall 73%, 61%, and 41% of patients ? 35, 36-59, and ? 60 years old, respectively were sensitized to at least one indoor allergen (p = .01). Multivariate analysis showed that patients ? 60 years of age were significantly less likely to be sensitized (odds ratio 0.32, 95% confidence interval 0.11 to 0.89) compared to younger adults after controlling for potential confounders. Allergen sensitization is less common in older patients with persistent asthma. However, sensitization to any indoor allergen is relatively frequent in the elderly. Physicians should consider routinely accessing exposure and sensitization to these allergens as part of the evaluation of older inner-city patients with persistent asthma.

20377113
The traditional Chinese herbal formula ASHMI inhibits allergic lung inflammation in antigen-sensitized and antigen-challenged aged mice.
Although asthma is typically characterized as a childhood disease, it can develop later in life. Older asthmatic patients may be at increased risk for corticosteroid adverse effects. We developed a novel traditional Chinese medicine to treat asthma called antiasthma simplified herbal medicine intervention (ASHMI). Herbal products may offer safer adjunctive treatment for older asthmatic patients. To investigate the effects of ASHMI on characteristics of allergic asthma in an aged mouse model of asthma. BALB/c mice (6 weeks old [young] and 6, 12, and 18 months old [aged]) received ASHMI treatment before and during intraperitoneal ovalbumin sensitization and intratracheal challenges. The control groups were untreated, age-matched, ovalbumin-sensitized and ovalbumin-challenged mice (ovalbumin mice) and naive mice. After the final antigen challenge, airway pressure (defined as the time-integrated change in peak airway pressure) after acetylcholine provocation was measured, representing airway hyperresponsiveness, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, sera, lung tissues for histologic analysis, messenger RNA, and collagen were collected. Mean time-integrated change in peak airway pressure values in 6-week-old and 6-, 12-, and 18-month-old ASHMI ovalbumin mice were significantly reduced compared with those of age-matched, nontreated ovalbumin mice. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid eosinophil numbers were significantly lower in all ASHMI ovalbumin mice. Treatment with ASHMI of young and aged ovalbumin mice resulted in significantly decreased lung inflammation, detected via hematoxylin-eosin staining; airway mucous cell metaplasia, determined by means of periodic acid-Schiff staining; and messenger RNA copy numbers of the mucin gene MUC5AC. Levels of ovalbumin specific IgE and the T(H)2 cytokines interleukin 4 (IL-4), IL-5, and IL-13 in lung and splenocyte cultures were reduced. Interferon gamma secretion was increased. Treatment with ASHMI reduced collagen production. Treatment with ASHMI reduces several features of asthma in aged antigen-sensitized and antigen-challenged mice.

20377107
Innate and adaptive immunosenescence.
To review the effect of increasing age on the immune system and some of its clinical implications. MEDLINE and PubMed searches were performed cross-referencing the keywords immunosenescence, aging, and immunity. Articles were reviewed for additional citations. Articles were reviewed and selected based on relevance to subject matter. The study of immunosenescence is complex and not completely understood. Aging affects both the innate and adaptive arms of the immune response. With increased age, there may be a decrease in phagocytosis, alteration of cellular migration, changes in cell populations and numbers, and a decreased ability to produce specific antibodies. Clinically, these changes potentially increase morbidity and mortality in elderly individuals through an increased rate of infections, malignancy, and autoimmunity. The process of aging is accompanied by diverse changes in immunity. Several therapeutic approaches are under investigation, including cytokine therapy, hormonal replacement, antioxidant supplementation, and caloric restriction, to attenuate or potentially reverse immunosenescence.

19852193
Decrease in airway mucous gene expression caused by treatment with anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha in a murine model of allergic asthma.
Mucous hypersecretion increases asthma morbidity and mortality. Tumor necrosis factor a (TNF-a) levels are elevated in bronchoalveolar fluid, sputum, and monocyte membranes in some patients with asthma. Anti-TNF-a decreased asthma exacerbations and improved forced expiratory volume in 1 second in these patients. Whether anti-TNF-a reduces mucous cell metaplasia or hyperplasia has not been evaluated. To investigate the role of anti-TNF-alpha in mucous hypersecretion. BALB/c mice sensitized intraperitoneally and challenged intratracheally with ovalbumin were treated with 250 microg of anti-TNF-alpha before ovalbumin sensitization and challenge or before only ovalbumin challenge. Control groups were sham treated. The tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) mice (TNFR-/- and TNFR+/+) were identically sensitized and challenged. Seventy-two hours after the final challenge, the airway pressure time index (APTI), which measures airway hyperresponsiveness, was recorded. Mucous cell metaplasia was accessed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction for MUC-5AC (the epithelial cell mucous-inducing gene) and the percentage of periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining of bronchial epithelial cells. A human airway cell line (constitutively expressing MUC-5AC) was pretreated with a NF-kappaB inhibitor before TNF-alpha culture. The mean (SE) fold change of MUC-5AC expression (compared with naive controls), the percentage of PAS-positive bronchiole epithelial cells, and the APTI decreased in BALB/c mice treated with anti-TNF-alpha before sensitization and challenge (4.9 [1.14], P = .007; 28.9% [6.8%], P < .001; and 545.8 [104.5] cm H2O/s, P < .001, respectively) and before challenge alone (9.3 [1.8], P = .03; 43.6% [10.7%], P = .009; and 896.8 [81.23] cm H2O/s, P = .06, respectively) compared with sham-treated mice (20.9 [3.9], 82.4% [1.8%], and 1,055 [30.6] cm H20/s, respectively). MUC-5AC expression decreased in ovalbumin sensitized or challenged TNFR-/- (2.41 [0.4]) compared with ovalbumin sensitized or challenged TNFR+/+ mice (18.4 [2.5], P < .001). TNF-alpha-induced MUC-5AC expression in human airway culture significantly decreased with pretreatment of a NF-kappaB inhibitor. Anti-TNF-alpha treatment reduces airway mucous cell metaplasia in a mouse model of asthma, which may in part underlie its beneficial effect as asthma therapy.

19102511
Complexities of diagnosis and treatment of allergic respiratory disease in the elderly.
Atopic diseases such as rhinitis and asthma are relatively common in children and young adults. However, many patients aged >65 years are also affected by these disorders. Indeed, the literature suggests that between 3-12% and 4-13% of individuals in this age range have allergic rhinitis and asthma, respectively. However, these numbers are most likely underestimates because atopic diseases are frequently not considered in older patients. The diagnosis of both allergic rhinitis and asthma in older patients is more difficult than in younger patients because of a wide differential diagnosis of other diseases that can produce similar symptoms and must be excluded. Furthermore, treatment of these disorders is complicated by the potential for drug interactions, concern about the adverse effects of medications, in particular corticosteroids, and the lack of drug trials specifically targeting treatment of older patients with allergic rhinitis and asthma.

17845421
Effect of ageing on pulmonary inflammation, airway hyperresponsiveness and T and B cell responses in antigen-sensitized and -challenged mice.
The effect of ageing on several pathologic features of allergic asthma (pulmonary inflammation, eosinophilia, mucus hypersecretion), and their relationship with airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) is not well characterized. To evaluate lung inflammation, mucus metaplasia and AHR in relationship with age in murine models of allergic asthma comparing young and older mice. Young (6 weeks) and older (6, 12, 18 months) BALB/c mice were sensitized and challenged with ovalbumin (OVA). AHR and bronchoalveolar fluid (BALF), total inflammatory cell count and differential were measured. To evaluate mucus metaplasia, quantitative PCR for the major airway mucin-associated gene, MUC-5AC, from lung tissue was measured, and lung tissue sections stained with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) for goblet-cell enumeration. Lung tissue cytokine gene expression was determined by quantitative PCR, and systemic cytokine protein levels by ELISA from spleen-cell cultures. Antigen-specific serum IgE was determined by ELISA. AHR developed in both aged and young OVA-sensitized/challenged mice (OVA mice), and was more significantly increased in young OVA mice than in aged OVA mice. However, BALF eosinophil numbers were significantly higher, and lung histology showed greater inflammation in aged OVA mice than in young OVA mice. MUC-5AC expression and numbers of PAS+ staining bronchial epithelial cells were significantly increased in the aged OVA mice. All aged OVA mice had increased IL-5 and IFN-gamma mRNA expression in the lung and IL-5 and IFN-gamma protein levels from spleen cell cultures compared with young OVA mice. OVA-IgE was elevated to a greater extent in aged OVA mice. Although pulmonary inflammation and mucus metaplasia after antigen sensitization/challenge occurred to a greater degree in older mice, the increase in AHR was significantly less compared with younger OVA mice. Antigen treatment produced a unique cytokine profile in older mice (elevated IFN-gamma and IL-5) compared with young mice (elevated IL-4 and IL-13). Thus, the airway response to inflammation is lessened in ageing animals, and may represent age-associated events leading to different phenotypes in response to antigen provocation.

17613633
Food allergy as a risk factor for asthma morbidity in adults.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the relationship between food allergy and asthma morbidity in adults. We interviewed a cohort of persistent asthmatics from an inner-city clinic. Allergies to food were assessed by patient report of convincing symptoms of acute allergic reactions. Outcome variables included health resource utilization and medication use. The prevalence of allergy to fish, peanut, tree-nut, shellfish, and seed allergies were 3%, 3%, 3%, 13%, and 1%. Patients with allergies to > 1 food had increased asthma hospitalizations, ED visits, and use of oral steroids (p < 0.05 for all comparisons). Specifically, allergy to fish was associated with a greater risk of health resource utilization and increased frequency of oral steroid use (p < or = 0.03 for all comparisons). Self-reported allergy to foods was associated with worse outcomes, suggesting that food allergy may be a risk factor for increased asthma morbidity in adults.

17524748
Allergic respiratory disease in the elderly.
Allergic asthma and allergic rhinosinusitis are typically considered disorders of children and young adults. As a result, these diseases are frequently not considered in the differential diagnosis of nasal obstruction, cough, wheeze, and dyspnea in older individuals. However, many older adults have long-standing allergic disorders or develop them later in life. This article addresses the complexities of diagnosis and treatment of allergic respiratory diseases in seniors.

18186809
Identification of amino acids critical for IgE-binding to sequential epitopes of bovine kappa-casein and the similarity of these epitopes to the corresponding human kappa-casein sequence.
The delineation of allergenic (i.e. IgE-binding) epitopes in cow's milk proteins and the amino acids (AAs) critical for IgE-binding is necessary to understand better the structural properties of an allergen and to develop more efficacious immunotherapeutic reagents. Furthermore, this information may enable us to understand better cross-sensitivity between different allergens. Eleven peptides, 10-14 AAs in length, representing the IgE-binding epitopes of kappa-casein were synthesized on a derivatized cellulose membrane with single AA substitutions at each position. Membranes were incubated with pooled sera from 15 milk-allergic patients and individual sera from 10 of the patients included in the pool. For 10/11 allergenic peptides, one to five different single AA substitutions resulted in elimination of IgE-binding of pooled patient sera. Overall at least one mutated peptide could be found for these 10 IgE-binding sites that resulted in a reduction of IgE-binding in at least 80% of the patients who recognized the native protein. Furthermore, the IgE-binding region at AA104-112 on bovine kappa-casein showed a high degree of similarity with the human kappa-casein, respectively, including the AAs critical for IgE-binding. This finding suggests that critical AAs should be assessed with both pooled and individual patient sera to account for the B-cell epitope heterogeneity between patients, with cow's milk allergy. In addition, we identified two potentially cross-reactive peptides between bovine and human caseins of unknown clinical relevance.

