18666395
A single-center, double-blind, randomized trial of the atrophogenic effects of fluocinonide cream 0.1% versus clobetasol propionate cream 0.05% in participants with corticosteroid-responsive dermatoses.
To compare the atrophogenic effects of fluocinonide cream 0.1% versus clobetasol propionate cream 0.05%, 20 participants with corticosteroid-responsive dermatoses were randomly assigned to receive fluocinonide cream 0.1% on one arm and clobetasol propionate cream 0.05% on the other arm. Study medications were applied to disease-free target areas on the inner arms twice daily for 2 weeks. The epidermal thickness of pretreatment and posttreatment punch biopsy specimens was measured. Skin examinations were performed evaluating clinical signs of atrophy. No significant reduction in epidermal thickness was observed in the fluocinonide-treated sites (mean, -0.0318 mm; standard deviation, 0.0239; P=.1991). A significant reduction in epidermal thickness was seen in the clobetasol-treated sites (mean, -0.1825 mm; standard deviation, 0.0239; P<.0001). This reduction was significantly greater than results from sites treated with fluocinonide cream 0.1% (difference, -0.1507; standard deviation, 0.0131; P<.0001). Although topical corticosteroids often are the first-line treatment for patients with various dermatoses, a side effect of continuous use is cutaneous atrophy. Our study demonstrated that clobetasol propionate cream 0.05% caused a significantly greater reduction in epidermal thickness compared with fluocinonide cream 0.1% when used twice daily for 2 weeks (P<.001). However, neither drug caused significant clinical signs of atrophy.

17241599
Lack of significant skeletal changes after long-term, low-dose retinoid therapy: case report and review of the literature.
Long-term systemic retinoid therapy has been associated with skeletal side effects. There have been reports of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) syndrome, calcification of ligaments, and osteoporosis, as well as premature fusion of epiphyses and modeling abnormalities of long bones, occurring in patients on chronic high-dose isotretinoin, etretinate, and acitretin therapy. Low-dose acitretin has been used for many years as monotherapy or in combination with other systemic therapies for psoriasis. Evidence to date suggests that the frequency of symptomatic bony effects is quite low in these patients. To present the radiologic findings of a patient on long-term, low-dose acitretin and etretinate and to review the literature on the radiologic evidence of skeletal side effects during retinoid therapy. Case report and literature search. A patient on low-dose acitretin had no significant radiologic abnormalities associated with retinoid use after 9 years of treatment. A review of the literature revealed conflicting reports on the incidence of radiologic abnormalities in patients on retinoid treatment. The evidence to date does not substantiate a clear link between radiologic skeletal abnormalities and long-term, low-dose acitretin or etretinate therapy.

