21344347
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) type 1, 2, and 3: a review of the liver pathology findings.
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestatic diseases encompass a group of autosomal recessive hereditary diseases, which usually present in infancy or childhood, with cholestasis of hepatocellular origin. The currently preferred nomenclature for the three PFIC disorders that have been characterized to date is FIC1 deficiency, BSEP deficiency, and MDR3 deficiency, relating to mutations in the specific genes involved in bile acid formation and transport. Since the first description of these diseases, extensive clinical, biochemical, and molecular studies have increased our understanding of the features specific to each one of them. This review focuses mainly on the liver histology, summarizing their characteristic pathologic features, the correlation to specific genotypes, and complications arising with disease progression.

20070559
The changing face of post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease in the era of molecular EBV monitoring.
Pediatric PTLD is often associated with primary EBV infection and immunosuppression. The aim was to retrospectively review the spectrum of histologically documented PTLD for two time intervals differentiated by changes in use of molecular EBV monitoring. Eleven of 146 patients (7.5%) in 2001-2005 (Era A) and 10 of 92 (10.9%) in 1993-1997 (Era B) were diagnosed with PTLD. The median age at liver transplantation (0.8 and 0.9 yr, respectively) and the median duration between liver transplant and diagnosis of PTLD (0.6 and 0.7 yr, respectively) were similar in both eras. However, patients in Era A presented with significantly less advanced histological disease compared to patients in Era B (p=0.03). Specifically, nine patients (82%) in Era A had Pl hyperplasia/polymorphic PTLD, whereas in Era B, six had advanced histological disease (five monomorphic and one unclassified). Three transplant recipients in Era B died secondary to PTLD, whereas there were no PTLD-related deaths in Era A (p=0.03). Heightened awareness of risk for PTLD, alterations in baseline immunosuppression regimens, implementation of molecular EBV monitoring, pre-emptive reduction in immunosuppression and improved therapeutic options may have all contributed to a milder PTLD phenotype and improved clinical outcomes.

19235665
Chronic rejection preceded by central perivenulitis, rapidly ensuing after liver transplantation in a pediatric patient.
A 15-year-old boy who underwent liver transplantation for fulminant Wilson's disease, presented with elevated transaminases 2 months post-transplant. He had recently seroconverted from previous Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) naive status and by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) had increasing viral load copies of EBV in blood. A liver biopsy was obtained 6 weeks post-transplant, which showed isolated central perivenulitis (CP). His immunosuppresion was reduced and antiviral therapy was added with subsequent increase in liver transaminases. A second liver biopsy 6 weeks later again showed isolated CP. Subsequent further reduction in immunosuppression was followed by the appearance of portal-based moderate acute cellular rejection that was resistant to immunosuppressive treatment and rapidly evolved into ductopenic chronic rejection. This case report underlines the difficulties in interpreting isolated perivenulitis, especially in the setting of EBV seroconversion, and suggests that it may not only represent a form of acute rejection but also a predictor of rapidly progressing chronic rejection.

18486893
Renal benign epithelial nodal inclusions.
There are 3 case series reports describing benign epithelial inclusions in nodal sinuses of perinephric lymph nodes of pediatric patients. The majority of these inclusions were observed in perinephric lymph nodes removed during nephrectomies from pediatric patients with Wilms' tumors. We report 2 cases of benign renal tubular epithelial inclusions located in the perinephric hilar lymph nodes. One of our cases is, to our knowledge, the first case of benign renal epithelial inclusions reported in an adult patient.

18237237
Hepatic involvement in congenital acute megakaryoblastic leukemia: a case report with emphasis on the liver pathology findings.
We report the case of a 4-week-old infant diagnosed with acute megakaryoblastic leukemia with the t (1;22) (p13, q13) who presented with ascites caused by massive infiltration of hepatic sinusoids by leukemic cells. The bone marrow by microscopy and flow cytometry and the peripheral blood smear did not initially show the presence of blasts. Marrow fibrosis appeared after infiltrative disease in the liver and liver fibrosis. We describe the microscopic liver findings and associated clinical presentation that, in the absence of bone marrow involvement, can be difficult to diagnose as leukemia. Few cases have been reported in the medical literature with the liver as the primary site of involvement in congenital leukemia. Awareness of this unusual clinical presentation and of the characteristic liver pathology may facilitate the pathologic diagnosis.

18044784
Resolution of hepatopulmonary syndrome after auxiliary partial orthotopic liver transplantation in Abernethy malformation. A case report.
Congenital absence of portal vein and extrahepatic portocaval shunt, also referred to as an Abernethy type 1, is a rare malformation of the mesenteric vasculature. A 9-year-old girl presented with dyspnea on exertion and orthodeoxia. A diagnosis of an Abernethy malformation type 1b and hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) was made, and she underwent auxiliary partial orthotopic liver transplantation (APOLT). Symptoms and signs of HPS resolved 2 months after the operation. HPS in Abernethy syndrome is a manifestation of normal portal blood flow bypassing the liver and can be ameliorated by redirecting blood flow to a segment of liver with normal portal anatomy. APOLT is a feasible and successful surgical procedure for patients with Abernethy malformation and HPS.

17990940
Farber's disease type IV presenting with cholestasis and neonatal liver failure: report of two cases.
We report 2 siblings diagnosed with Farber's disease type IV. Type IV is a subtype of Farber's disease that presents in the neonatal period and usually initially lacks the triad of symptoms, including painful and deformed joints, subcutaneous nodules, and hoarse cry, classically seen in the other subtypes. While it is well known that all neonates with type IV present with hepatomegaly, a previously unrecognized presentation is that of cholestatic jaundice and rapidly evolving liver failure. We describe 2 siblings who presented with jaundice in the neonatal period and discuss the clinical data and variation in pathologic findings that should be considered for the diagnosis.

17979078
Hepatocellular carcinoma and congenital absence of the portal vein in a child receiving growth hormone therapy for turner syndrome.
Turner syndrome patients are reported to have no increase in the relative risk of cancer, and hepatocellular carcinoma in particular has never been reported in this syndrome. However, Turner syndrome patients are known to have an increased prevalence of liver lesions, some of which, like focal nodular hyperplasia, are related to vascular anomalies. We report the case of a young patient with Turner syndrome, treated with recombinant human growth hormone, who was found to have absence of the portal vein, focal nodular hyperplasia, and hepatic adenoma and who developed a large hepatocellular carcinoma requiring liver transplant.

17873749
Multiple exudative ulcers and pseudopolyps in allergic eosinophilic gastroenteritis that responded to dietary therapy.


17873744
Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis in children with eosinophilic esophagitis.
Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis has been reported in adults with eosinophilic esophagitis (EE). Our goal was to determine the prevalence of esophageal fibrosis in children with EE, to determine whether it is specific for EE, and to correlate it with clinical and pathological features. Twenty-one children with EE, 7 with eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 6 with gastroesophageal reflux disease, and 17 control children were studied. Distal esophageal biopsy specimens containing lamina propria were evaluated for extent of subepithelial collagen deposition by use of trichrome staining. Fibrosis was defined as abnormally increased collagen deposition, determined after the establishment of normal patterns on sections of esophagus from pediatric autopsies. Maximum numbers of intraepithelial and lamina propria eosinophils per high-power field by hematoxylin and eosin staining and mast cells per high-power field by immunohistochemical staining for tryptase were determined. Eosinophil and mast cell degranulation in epithelium and lamina propria was determined by use of immunohistochemical staining for major basic protein and tryptase, respectively. The patients' records were reviewed. Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis was present in 12 (57%) patients with EE, 1 with eosinophilic gastroenteritis, 0 with gastroesophageal reflux disease, and 1 control patient. Forty-two percent of those with fibrosis had dysphagia, 80% of whom had food impactions; these symptoms were present only in patients with fibrosis. Within the EE group, fibrosis was not associated with duration of symptoms or with increasing numbers of infiltrating eosinophils/mast cells, but it was associated with eosinophil degranulation. Esophageal subepithelial fibrosis is prevalent in EE and is specific for the disease in children. It is associated with dysphagia, and it may explain and predict future esophageal dysmotility. Fibrosis is related to the extent of esophageal eosinophil activation, as evidenced by eosinophil degranulation.

