21056041
Notch-1 signaling regulates intestinal epithelial barrier function, through interaction with CD4+ T cells, in mice and humans.
Interactions between lymphocytes and intestinal epithelial cells occur in the subepithelial space of the gastrointestinal tract. Normal human lamina propria lymphocytes (LPLs) induce differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells. The absence of LPLs in mice, such as in RAG1(-/-) mice, results in defects in epithelial cell differentiation. We investigated the role of lymphoepithelial interactions in epithelial differentiation and barrier function. We used adoptive transfer to determine if CD4(+) T cells (CD4(+)CD62L(+)CD45Rb(Hi) and/or CD4(+)CD62L(+)CD45Rb(Lo)) could overcome permeability defect (quantified in Ussing chambers). Immunofluorescence staining was performed to determine expression of cleaved Notch-1, villin, and claudin 5 in colon samples from mice and humans. Caco-2 cells were infected with a lentivirus containing a specific Notch-1 or scrambled short hairpin RNA sequence. Tight junction assembly was analyzed by immunoblot and immunofluorescence analyses, and transepithelial resistance was monitored. Expression of cleaved Notch-1, villin, or claudin 5 was not detected in RAG1(-/-) colonocytes; their loss correlated with increased intestinal permeability. Transfer of CD45Rb(Hi) and/or CD45Rb(Lo) cells into RAG1(-/-) mice induced expression of cleaved Notch, villin, and claudin 5 in colonocytes and significantly reduced the permeability of the distal colon. Loss of Notch-1 expression in Caco-2 cells correlated with decreased transepithelial resistance and dysregulated expression and localization of tight junction proteins. Levels of cleaved Notch-1 were increased in colonic epithelium of patients with Crohn's disease. LPLs promote mucosal barrier function, which is associated with activation of the Notch-1 signaling pathway. LPLs maintain intestinal homeostasis by inducing intestinal epithelial cell differentiation, polarization, and barrier function.

19675158
CCR7 deficiency in NOD mice leads to thyroiditis and primary hypothyroidism.
CCR7 is involved in the initiation of immune responses and has been recently implicated in the control of tolerance. To analyze the role of CCR7 in autoimmunity, we backcrossed CCR7(ko/ko) mice (in which ko signifies deficient) onto the autoimmune-prone NOD background. Surprisingly, NODCCR7(ko/ko) mice never developed diabetes, but showed severe inflammation in multiple tissues including thyroid, lung, stomach, intestine, uterus, and testis. NODCCR7(ko/ko) mice had a marked enlargement of the thyroid gland (goiter) that was associated with circulating autoantibodies against thyroglobulin, and development of primary hypothyroidism (decreased levels of serum thyroxin, and augmented levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone in the pituitary gland), features found in Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Cells isolated from diseased thyroids and activated splenocytes from NODCCR7(ko/ko) animals induced goiter in NOD.SCID recipients, demonstrating that autoreactive cells were generated in the absence of CCR7. Moreover, thyroid disease could be accelerated in young NODCCR7(ko/ko) mice by immunization with thyroglobulin. These results demonstrate the complexity in the generation of multiple autoimmune phenotypes in NOD mice and indicate that CCR7 is a key molecule in their development.

19592489
AP-1 activated by toll-like receptors regulates expression of IL-23 p19.
Interleukin (IL)-23, a new member of the IL-12 family, plays a central role in the Th17 immune response and in autoimmune diseases. It is clear that activated macrophages and dendritic cells produce IL-23, but the molecular mechanisms whereby inflammatory signals stimulate IL-23 expression are not fully understood. We demonstrate that induction of IL-23 p19 gene expression by LPS depends on the TLR4 and MyD88 pathways. All three MAPK pathways (ERK, JNK, and p38) that are activated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation were shown to exert a positive effect on p19 expression. We cloned a 1.3-kb putative p19 promoter and defined its transcription initiation sites by the 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends method. By analyzing IL-23 p19 promoter mutants, we have identified a promoter region (-413 to +10) that contains several important elements, including NF-kappaB and AP-1. In addition to NF-kappaB, we have demonstrated that the proximal AP-1 site is important for p19 promoter activation. Mutation of the AP-1 site resulted in the loss of p19 promoter activation. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) analysis showed that c-Jun and c-Fos bind to the AP-1 site, which was confirmed by a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Furthermore, co-transfection of c-Jun and ATF2 synergistically induced p19 promoter activation, and c-Jun and ATF2 formed a protein complex, demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation. Finally, LPS-stimulated peritoneal macrophages from IL-10-deficient mice expressed significantly higher IL-23 p19 than macrophages from wild type mice, and the addition of recombinant IL-10 strongly inhibited LPS-induced p19 expression. Thus, this study suggests that MyD88-dependent Toll-like receptor signaling induces IL-23 p19 gene expression through both MAPKs and NF-kappaB.

19501588
Expression of the chemokine binding protein M3 promotes marked changes in the accumulation of specific leukocytes subsets within the intestine.
Chemokines are small proteins that direct leukocyte trafficking under homeostatic and inflammatory conditions. We analyzed the differential expression of chemokines in distinct segments of the intestine and investigated the importance of chemokines for the distribution of leukocytes in the intestine during homeostatic and inflammatory conditions. We analyzed messenger RNA for all known chemokines in different segments of the gut by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. To study the effect of multiple-chemokine blockade in the gut, we generated transgenic mice that expressed the chemokine binding protein M3 in the intestine (V-M3 mice). We used flow cytometry to evaluate the changes in the numbers of leukocytes. We observed distinct chemokine expression profiles in the 6 segments of the gut. Some chemokines were expressed throughout the intestine (CCL28, CCL6, CXCL16, and CX3CL1), whereas others were expressed preferentially in the small (CCL25 and CCL5) or large intestine (CCL19, CCL21, and CXCL5). Expression of the chemokine blocker M3 in intestinal epithelial cells resulted in reduced numbers of B and T cells in Peyer's patches, reduced numbers of intraepithelial CD8alphabeta(+)/TCRalphabeta(+) and CD8alphaalpha(+)/TCRalphabeta(+) T cells, and reduced numbers of lamina propria CD8(+) T cells. Strikingly, M3 expression markedly reduced the number of eosinophils and macrophages in the small and large intestines. Dextran sulfate sodium treatment of control mice led to marked changes in the expression of chemokines and in the number of myeloid cells in the colon. These cellular changes were significantly attenuated in the presence of M3. Our study reveals a complex pattern of chemokine expression in the intestine and indicates that chemokines are critical for leukocyte accumulation in the intestine during homeostasis and inflammation.

18522803
Toll-like receptor signaling in small intestinal epithelium promotes B-cell recruitment and IgA production in lamina propria.
Several lines of evidence support a role for Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling to protect the intestine from pathogenic infection. We hypothesized that TLR signaling at the level of the intestinal epithelium is critical for mucosal immune responses. We generated transgenic mice that express a constitutively active form of TLR4 in the intestinal epithelium (V-TLR4 mice). Lamina propria cellularity was evaluated by immunostaining and flow cytometry. Immunoglobulin (Ig) A levels in the stool and serum were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Chemokine and cytokine expression were analyzed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. V-TLR4 transgenic mice reproduced normally and had a normal life span. Constitutive activity of TLR4 in the intestinal epithelium promoted recruitment of B cells and an increase in fecal IgA levels. Intestinal epithelial cells of V-TLR4 mice expressed higher levels of CCL20 and CCL28, chemokines known to be involved in B-cell recruitment, and of a proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL), a cytokine that promotes T-cell-independent class switching of B cells to IgA. The changes in B-cell numbers and IgA levels were blocked by simultaneous expression in intestinal epithelial cells of M3, a herpes virus protein that binds and inhibits multiple chemokines. TLR signaling in the intestinal epithelial cells significantly elevated the production of IgA in the intestine. This effect was mediated by TLR-induced expression of a specific set of chemokines and cytokines that promoted both recruitment of B cells into the lamina propria and IgA class switching of B cells.

18506885
Interleukin 10 suppresses Th17 cytokines secreted by macrophages and T cells.
IL-17 and IL-22 are typical cytokines produced by the Th17 T cell subset, but it is unclear if Th17 cytokines can be produced by other cell types. We demonstrate that IL-10-deficient and IL-10R-deficient macrophages stimulated with lipopolysaccharide produce high levels of IL-17 and IL-22. Addition of exogenous IL-10 to IL-10-deficient macrophages abolished IL-17 production. When IL-10-deficient and IL-10R-deficient splenocytes were cultured under Th17 polarizing conditions, the population of IL-17-producing cells was increased and the cultures produced significantly higher levels of IL-17 and IL-22. The addition of recombinant IL-10 to IL-10-deficient splenocytes significantly decreased the percentage of IL-17-producing CD4(+) T cells. Finally, the mRNA for the Th17 transcription factor retinoic acid-related orphan receptor (ROR)gammat was significantly elevated in IL-10-deficient spleen cells and macrophages. These data demonstrate that Th17 cytokines and RORgammat are also expressed in macrophages and that IL-10 negatively regulates the expression of Th17 cytokines and RORgammat by both macrophages and T cells.

